--- PAGE 080 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

State Development schemes. The Government
aims to improve green cover outside Reserve
Forests through the Vanam-Manam program,
involving all departments and the public. Main
species planted include Teak, Red Sandal,
Bamboo, Amla, Seethaphal, Casuarina,
Eucalyptus, Tamarind, and Jamun. 5.29 crore
seedlings have been planted in 2024-25 (up to
December 2024).

Mixed Plantation Scheme To improve green
cover under the 09-Mixed Plantation Scheme in
2024-25, 87 km of avenue plantations will be
taken up, and Vana Mahotsavam will be
celebrated at District and Mandal levels. Avenue
plantations from previous years will be
maintained with a financial outlay of Rs.450.86
lakh, with Rs.41.479 lakh spent during the year.

Forest Revenue The income from the forestry
sector in the state during 2024-25 (up to Dec
2024) is Rs.19.63 Crores. Details of forest
production extraction during 2024-25 (up to
December 2024) are provided in Table 5.13.

Table 5.13 Forest Production extraction during
2024-25 (up to December 2024)

From April, 2024 to
; December, 2024
Species -
Target Achievement
Timber (Cmt) 24925.69 1562.886
Fuel (Cmt) 7600.88 7102.12
Poles (No’s) 48781 46.471
Bamboo
(No’s in 21.60109 0
lakhs)

5.7.2 Wildlife in Andhra Pradesh

Andhra Pradesh, located in East Central
Peninsular India, is part of the Deccan Bio-
Geographic Zone. The state has a notified forest
area of 37,221.11 sq.km, which is 22.84% of its
geographical area. Protected forests cover
8139.88 sq.km, 21.87% of the notified forest
area. The state boasts one Tiger Reserve (FDPT
Srisailam Circle), one Elephant Reserve
(Koundinya Sanctuary and Rayala Elephant

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Reserve, Anantapuramu Circle), one Biosphere
Reserve (Seshachalam in Tirupati and Kurnool
Circles), three National Parks, and thirteen
Wildlife Sanctuaries.

Andhra Pradesh is rich in biodiversity, with
unique flora like Red Sanders and fauna
including tigers, Indian Bison, Great Indian
Bustard, and Golden Gecko. It has the second-
largest mangrove ecosystem in India (Godavari
and Krishna Estuaries). Details of protected
areas are shown in Annexure 5.26

Zoological Parks

The state has two renowned zoos: Indira
Gandhi Zoological Park in Visakhapatnam and
Sri Venkateswara Zoological Park in Tirupati.
Managed by the Zoo Authority of Andhra
Pradesh (ZAAP), these zoos excel in animal
display, conservation breeding, and visitor
amenities. Revenue from the zoos supports
their management.

Deer Park: Kandaleru Deer Park in Nellore
district spans 25 hectares.

Nagarjunasagar Srisailam Tiger Reserve
(NSTR)

NSTR, covering 3727.50 sq.km, is one of India's
largest conservation landscapes. It involves the
Chenchu tribal group in its management, with
600 members working as protection watchers
and guides. The reserve has received awards for
human resource management and shows an
increasing tiger population, currently estimated
at 63 (excluding 7 cubs).

Seshachalam Biosphere Reserve covers an
area of 4755.997 sq.km, is home to 1756
species of flowering plants and over 220 bird
species.

Sea Turtle Conservation

Olive Ridley Turtles have been nesting along
Andhra Pradesh's coast for the past decade.
Special camps involving local communities and


--- PAGE 081 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25

SPR PSPS OSS AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES nna

NGOs protect nests, eggs, and hatchlings, which 5.7.3 Eco-Tourism

are successfully released into the sea.
Government has started Eco-Tourism initiatives

Man-Animal Conflict by taking up creation of new community based
Eco-Tourism Centres and strengthening the
existing Eco-Tourism centres. The Forest
Department is involving local tribes in
implementation and management by CBETs /
EDCs duly empowering their economic status.

A herd of 32 elephants in Chittoor District
frequently damages crops. Other animals like
sloth bears and black bucks also cause crop
damage and attacks on humans. The
government compensates for crop damage,

human deaths, and injuries, with Rs.73.405 lakh 5.7.4 Vigilance

paid in 2024-25 (up to December 2024).

Wildlife protection and rescue teams operate in The Forest Fire Prevention & Management
all forest divisions. Scheme (CSS) erstwhile intensification of

Forest Management Scheme. The main
objectives of the scheme are:

To minimize forest fire incidences and assist in restoring
productivity of forests.

To institutionalize the partnership with forest fringe
communities for forest protection

To contribute the larger goal of maintaining environmental
stability.

To prepare fire danger rating system and devise forest fire
forecasting system.

To encourage the optimal use of modern technology (such as
Remote Sensing, GPS and GIS) in planning, developing and
operationalizing Fire Prevention and Management System.

To develop knowledge on impacts and dynamics of forest fire.

Figure 5.1 Forest Management Scheme objectives

5.7.5 Annual Plan for Year 2024-25 have been submitted to the Gol with an outlay
of Rs.1650.00 lakh ( Central Share: Rs.990.00
Annual Plan of Operations for the F.Y 2024-25 lakh + State share: Rs.660.00 lakh). The

nn


--- PAGE 082 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

MoEF&CC, Gol has approved the APO 2024-25
for an amount of Rs.482.39 lakh, as 1st
instalment, an amount of Rs.98.88 lakh
(Central Share Rs.59.33 lakh + State share
Rs.39.55 lakh) was allotted of which an
amount of Rs.78.00 lakh (Central Share
Rs.46.80 lakh + State Share Rs.31.20 lakh) was
incurred as expenditure.

5.7.6 Red Sanders Protection Scheme

The Scheme is meant of protection of Red
Sanders trees in Seshachalam, Veligonda,
Lankamala, Nallamala and Talakona Hill
Ranges of Andhra Pradesh, distributed in the
districts of Annamayya, Kadapa, Nandyal,
Chittoor, Nellore, Tirupati and Prakasam over
an area of 5300.97 Sq.Km.

During the year 2023-24, under this scheme,
Government allotted an amount of Rs. 2500.00

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

lakh, out of which Rs.1529.00 lakh was spent
towards Red Sanders protection activities.
During the F.Y 2024-25, Vote on account
budget of Rs. 822.79 lakh was allotted for the
period from 1st April, 2024 to 31st July, 2024,
and Rs.934.53 lakhs was allotted for the
periodfrom1st August,2024 to 30thNovember,
2024.As of 31.12.2024, bills totalling Rs.
1232.55 lakh have been uploaded in CFMS.

5.7.7. FCA (Forest Conservation Act)

Van (Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan)
Adhiniyam, 1980 (with effect from 29.12.2023)
(earlier called as Forest (Conversation) Act,
1980): Forest area diverted for non-forest
purpose under Van _ (Sanrakshan Evam
Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 1980 so far upto
31stDecember, 2024 is shown in the Table 5.14

Table 5.14 Forest area diverted for non-forest purpose

Sl. Item Upto Upto Upto Upto Upto Upto Upto

No 2017-18 | 2018-19 | 2019-20 | 2020-21

2021-22 | 2022-23 | 31.12.2024

1 | Forest area
diverted in ha

Adhiniyam,
1980 (In Ha)

under 26924.34 | 26948.57 | 27147.47

27152.39 | 27303.18 | 27315.93 27641.252

5.7.8. Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Management &Planning Authority
(CAMPA)

Government of India, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change has constituted an
authority known as Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority (CAMPA) for conservation,
protection, regeneration and management of
existing natural forests and wildlife its habitat
including environmental services, research,
training and capacity building.

The Annual Plan of Operation (APO) is being
prepared every year under CAMPA for

nn

protection of forests and wildlife. The two main
components have been taken up’ under
CAMPA.Compensatory Afforestation (CA)
Plantation works are taken up in CA lands taken
in lieu of forest areas diverted. It also envisages
proper demarcation of the Compensatory
Afforestation areas by erecting boundary
pillars, implementation of soil and moisture
conservation works as per site requirements,
raising required planning stock, maintenance of
previously raised CA plantations etc.plantations
raised and expenditure incurred under CAMPA
shown in Table 5.15



--- PAGE 083 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Table 5.15 Plantations raised and expenditure incurred under CAMPA

5.8 ANDHRA PRADESH STATE
BIODIVERSITY BOARD
(APSBB)

Biodiversity includes the variability among
living organisms from all sources and the
ecological complexes of which they are part and
includes diversity within species or between
species and of ecosystem. The A.P. state
represents one of the richest repositories of
biodiversity in the whole of south and south
East Asia due to its varied topography from the
hilly ranges of Eastern Ghats, the Nallamala is to
the shores of Bay of Bengal. Endowed with
varied ecosystem, habitats and rich heritage of
Biodiversity, the state becomes the store house
of rich flora and fauna. It has the Second largest
Mangrove eco-system in the East coast of India.
Besides, A.P. is rich in Agriculture Biodiversity
and is home to several varieties of crop plants -
Landraces, Food crops, Cultivars, Horticulture
crops, Livestock, Fisheries etc.

The State Biodiversity Board (APSBB) is
mandated towards conserving and restoring
biodiversity and ecosystem to deliver benefits
essential for all sectors of the society in a
sustainable manner also aims to achieve zero
loss of biodiversity and ecosystems services by
the year 2050.

The main objectives are:

* Conservation of Biological Diversity

* Sustainable utilization of the Biological
resources

* Fair and equitable sharing of biological
resources among all stake holders.

nn

Approved | Releases by Adhoc Total Plantations
SI.No. Year APO (Rs. CAMPA (by State) Expenditure raised during
in Crore) (Rs.in Crore) (Rs. in Crore) the year in ha.,
1 2 3 4 5 6
1 2024-25 (from April to
31.12.2024) 250.10 61.10 61.10 2682
Activities

* Constitution of Biodiversity Management
Committees (BMCs)

* Preparation of People’s Biodiversity
Registers (PBRs)

¢ Establishment of Local Biodiversity Fund
(LBF)

¢ Identification of Biological Heritage Sites
(BHS)

¢ Identification of Endangered & Threatened
Species

* Preparation of A.P. State biodiversity
strategies and action plan (SBSAP)

* Documentation of Tradable Bio-Resources
(TBRs)

¢ Publications and Knowledge materials

* Processing of ABS applications &
agreements with users

* Awareness and
Programmes.

Capacity Building
Achievements during 2024-25 (up to
31.12.2024)

Meetings and awareness programs

¢ Six Training of Trainers (ToTs) programmes
were conducted by the APSBB to the BMC
Members and other stake holders at AP
forest Academy, Rajamahendravaram to
create awareness on BD Act., and rules, ABS
mechanism, Biodiversity conservation etc.,
from June, 2024 to October, 2024.

* Conducted IDB-2024
programme in collaboration with MoEF&CC,
New Delhi and NBA, Chennai on 22.05.2024
based on the theme “Be part of the Plan” to
create massive awareness on biodiversity

National level


--- PAGE 084 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

and its importance at Andhra University,
Visakhapatnam.

Conducted National seminar on the impact
of climate change and ecotourism on
biodiversity at Andhra University.

Organized competition programs for school
children on biodiversity at four regional
levels in Andhra Pradesh.

Celebrated World Environment Day in 500
BMCs across the state with activities like
plantation, leaning, and
programs.

awareness

Held district wise awareness programs on
youth in __ biodiversity
conservation on Independence Day.

the role of

Organized an exposure visit to the Goa for
APSBB officials and BMC members to learn
best practices for implementation in Andhra
Pradesh.

A workshop and awareness program on the
conservation of marine protected species
was conducted in Andhra Pradesh by ICAR-
CMFRI and APSBB. The event took place in
Visakhapatnam. About 95 members of the
Fishermen BMCs and stakeholders were
educated on the topic under the CMFRI
project.

The APSBB is currently uploading BMCs
details and PBRs information into the
BIOMIS portal as per NBA orders. BIOMIS is
a web-based application that
LSG/citizens to collect and
biodiversity data. This work began in April
2024 and is still in progress.

allows
share

Way Forward:

1.

Operationalization of Biodiversity
Management Committees (BMCs)

Regular updation of People’s Biodiversity
Registers(PBRs)

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

3. Strengthening Access Benefit Sharing (ABS)
mechanisms

4. Establishment of Biodiversity Parks and
Museums in all Districts of A.P. and also on
the Flood plains of 5 Polluted Rivers of
Andhra Pradesh.

5. Establishment of conservation
titled “Center for Conservation of Biological
Resources and Sustainable Utilization”.

6. Identification of more Biological Heritage
Sites

7. Creating awareness and building capacity
for students, BMC members, and SHGs at

institute

various levels on Biodiversity, climate
change, plantation etc and also conducting
national and state level
seminars/workshops with key

stakeholders, policy makers, scientists, and
academicians and mass campaigns through
media, short films, and news magazines.

8. Establishment of Regional / Subbranches
to APSBB for effective implementation of
the BD Act.

5.9 ANDHRA PRADESH FOREST
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION

Objectives of the Corporation are to raise large
scale plantations to meet the demands of forest-
based with species
Eucalyptus, Bamboo, Coffee, Cashew, Casuarina
etc, to generate gainful employment to the
landless poor, particularly in remote and
agency areas and also to undertake consultancy
services to the industries to raise and maintain
plantations in their vicinity. Details of
plantations raised by APFDC upto 2024-25 are
shown in Table 5.16 and achievements in Table
5.17

industries such as


--- PAGE 085 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Table 5.16 Plantations raised by APFDC upto 2024-25

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

SI. no Species Area (ha.)
1 Eucalyptus (Seed origin) 2,610
2 Eucalyptus (Clonal) 33,584
3 Bamboo 2,359
4 Cashew 5,664
5 Coffee 4,010
6 Teak 956
7 Medicinal plants 334
8 Casuarina, Pines and other Misc. species 225
Total 49,742
Table 5.17 Achievements under APFDC
SI. no. Activity Target Achievements
1 Raising plantations-ha 653.00 574.00
2 Harvesting of Long Bamboo ~ no. 19,88,000 492,305
3 Harvesting of Bamboo Industrial Cuts -mt. 453.00 35.00
4 ‘Harvesting of Raw Coffee - mt. 300.00 120.00
5 Harvesting of Pepper- mt. 10.70 11.29

Plantation Activities

Eucalyptus Plantations The APFDC has raised
Eucalyptus Clonal plantations over 33,584
hectares, making it the largest grower among
PSUs in India. Plans are in place to expand by
another 1000-2000 hectares in the next 2-3
years. Improved site preparation, quality
planting material, and management practices
ensure optimum yields.

Bamboo Plantations Bamboo plantations
cover 2,359 hectares, with plans to expand by
50 hectares in the next 2-3 years. This
expansion aims to increase the supply of raw
materials to paper industries and artisans.

nn

Coffee Plantations The Corporation maintains
4,010 hectares of coffee plantations in
Visakhapatnam and East Godavari Districts,
using intensive cultivation practices and
scientific methods. These plantations generate
about 3.50 lakh mandays of employment for
tribal communities annually.

Pepper Cultivation APFDC has 2.20 lakh
pepper standards in its coffee estates in
Visakhapatnam and East Godavari Districts,
featuring high-yielding varieties like Panniyur-lI,
Purnima, Sreekara, Subhakara, Panchami, and
Panniyur-5. An additional 1.20 lakh standards
are planned for the next 5 years.



--- PAGE 086 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Cashew Plantations Cashew plantations span
5,664 hectares along the coastal belt in Guntur,
Prakasam, and Nellore districts, and inland
areas of East Godavari, West Godavari, and
Chittoor districts. Older plantations are being
replanted with high-yielding varieties.

Eco-Tourism AP. Forest Development
Corporation Ltd. has developed Eco-Tourism
Centers at Muthayapalem near Suryalanka
Beach and Ananthagiri near Araku, featuring
nature education camps and other amenities.

Other Activities The Corporation provides
consultancy services in afforestation to
industries like NTPC and HPCL, supplies high-
quality Eucalyptus clones to the public and
institutions, and acts as an agent for the
government in exporting red sanders wood and
beedi leaf trade.

Employment Generation The Corporation
provides year-round employment to tribal
communities and Sri Lanka _repatriates.
Employment is also provided to the landless
and poor during regeneration and harvesting
activities. Annually, about 9 lakh man-days of
employment are generated, including 3.00 lakh
mandays in raising and maintaining plantations,
3.50 lakh mandays in coffee plantations, and
2.50 lakh mandays in harvesting plantations.

5.10 ANDHRA PRADESH NATIONAL
GREEN CORPS

The National Green Corps, launched by the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change in 2001-02, aims to _ create
environmental awareness among _ school
children. The Andhra Pradesh National Green
Corps, formed in 2002-03, builds a cadre of
young children working towards environmental
conservation and_ sustainable development
through Eco-Clubs in schools. For 2024-25, Rs.
1.60 Crores is proposed, with Rs. 73.00 lakh for
nature camps and capacity-building activities in
all 26 districts.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Major Programmes& Schemes:

e Environmental Awareness: Programs on
environmentally important days involving
Eco-Club students and local communities to
raise awareness.

e Green Army: Building a Green Army to
protect the environment and_= sustain
natural resources.

e Environment Education Programme
(EEP): Sensitizing children/youth on
environmental issues and_ promoting
sustainable lifestyles through workshops,
projects, exhibitions,
competitions, nature camps, and summer
programs. Approved for continuation till
2025-26.

e Life Hackathon Programme: Registering
Eco-Club students to innovate ideas for
environmental Andhra
Pradesh ranks among the top three states in
Eco Creativity and Innovation Hackathon,
with Kakinada as a top-performing district.

e Plant4Mother Programme: Tree
plantation drive in schools and_ public
places, focusing on deforested areas. A total
of 1,31,76,195 saplings were planted with
Eco-Club students in coordination with the
School Education Department.

campaigns,

conservation.

5.11 ANDHRA PRADESH
POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD
(APPCB)

The Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board
(APPCB) was established in the year 1976 by
the Government of Andhra Pradesh under the
provisions of Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974. APPCB being the regulator
for implementation of — Environmental
Protection and Pollution Control in the State
plays an important role in securing sustainable
development by enforcing Environmental Laws,
Rules, Regulations and Notifications etc. Siting
guidelines for establishment of certain category


--- PAGE 087 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

industries were developed in view of
habitation, water bodies, roads, sensitive zones.

The APPCB has developed and formulated
‘Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs)' for the
following activities for effective monitoring of
industrial pollution and waste management:

1. Ease of Doing Business

APPCB has implemented all the environmental
reforms in the Ease of Doing Business
(EoDB).The Board introduced computerized
allocation of inspectors to inspect high Risk /
highly polluting industries in the state once in
every 6 months. Green and white categories of
industries are exempted for compliance
inspections.

2. Monitoring of marine outfall Industries

e 10 marine outfall industries were permitted
to discharge their treated effluents into sea
under the supervision of APPCB officials
with online monitoring system.

e Developed Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) for treatment, storage, monitoring
and discharge of treated effluents into the
sea through marine  outfalls. These
industries are made to store the treated
effluents in secured guard ponds which is
assessed by APPCB officials for its
compliance with the standards and allowed
discharge in the presence of the officials
through a pipeline system.

e During the discharge of the treated effluent,
the quality of the effluent is also monitored
through Real time system connected to
websites of APPCB & CPCB.

e 9 Common Effluent Treatment Plants
(CETPs) are operated in the state to cater
the needs of the industries, so that the
liquid waste is treated and disposed safely.

e Not permitting non-biodegradable effluents
generated from the industries to discharge
into on land / water bodies and directing
the industries to adopt Zero Liquid
Discharge (ZLD)system.

Sn Ee

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

3. Real time Pollution Monitoring Systems at
public places

e Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board
(APPCB) is operating 12 nos. of
Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring
(CAAQM) stations in the State for
monitoring real-time ambient air quality
Installation of CAAQM stations (9 nos.) is in
progress across the State.

e 19 nos LED Display boards are erected at
different locations for dissemination of
ambient air quality data to the public.

e 25 nos. Real Time Noise Monitoring Stations
(RTNMS) are in operation by APPCB and the
data is communicated to stake holders
departments for taking necessary measures
and implementation of Noise Action Plan.

e 9 nos. Real Time Wastewater Quality
Monitoring Systems (RTWQMS) are in
operation by the Municipal Corporations /
Municipalities to monitor the quality of
treated sewage.

4. Air Quality Index (AQI)

APPCB has developed “PARYAVARAN” app for
dissemination of Air Quality Index (AQI) data
to the public. Data generated from CAAQMS is
linked to the web portals of APPCB and CPCB
for availability on public domain. APPCB is
regularly disseminating the air quality data to
the concerned stakeholder departments for
taking necessary measures for control of air
pollution in the cities / towns.

5. Real time Pollution Monitoring Systems in
industries

The Board is using Real Time Pollution
Monitoring System to track pollution levels in
industries. There are 682 industries with a
total of 869 emission monitoring stations,
1339 effluent monitoring stations, and 735
Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring
Systems (CAAQMS).


--- PAGE 088 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6. Hazardous Waste Management

¢ Disposing hazardous solid waste in landfills
is a last resort. The Board encourages co-
processing hazardous wastes as fuel in
cement plants, reducing fossil fuel use and
environmental impact.

* The Board promotes waste exchange, where
waste from one industry is used by another,
based on process compatibility.

* APPCB has permitted 12 cement industries
to co-process incinerable, plastic, and
municipal waste into energy.

* Two Common Hazardous Waste Treatment
Storage Disposal Facilities (CHWTSDFs)
exist in Anakapalli and SPSR Nellore
Districts for secure hazardous waste
landfilling.

* Six pre-processing facilities handle
hazardous waste before sending it to
cement industries.

* A portal developed by APEMC monitors and
tracks hazardous waste, with GPS-fitted
transport vehicles.

7. Bio Medical Waste (BMW) Management
The Bio Medical waste is transported to
Common Bio Medical Waste Treatment Facility
(CBMWTF) for incineration. There are 12
common facilities operating in the state of
Andhra Pradesh catering the needs of all the
Health Care Establishments.

8. Municipal Solid Waste (MSW)
Management

Two Wastes to Energy (WtE) plants were
established at Visakhapatnam - 15 MWH and
Guntur - 20 MWH catering the needs of ULBs
for effective disposal of Municipal Solid Waste
generated from ULBs in the State togenerate
electricity. About 2100/day Tons of Municipal
Solid Waste is used for mass combustion for
generation of electricity.

On

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

9. Plastic Waste Management

Andhra Pradesh Pollution Control Board
installed 10 Automatic Cloth bags vending
machines for dispensing cloth bags to the public
at District Head Quarters in the State for
bringing awareness and promoting usage of
cloth bags as an alternative to Plastic carry bags
to protect the Environment. As per the CPCB
guidelines, the Board is implementing the
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) for
end of life plastics.

10. Green building concept

The Board has installed and commissioned
roof top solar power systems at Vijayawada,
Visakhapatnam, _ Tirupati,
Kakinada office buildings towards achieving
Net Zero Energy.

Kurnool and

5.12 SERICULTURE

Sericulture is the art and science of silk
production conducted in a systematic manner.
It is an agro-based cottage industry that
provides employment and regular income to
rural communities, — especially
Sericulture can generate employment and is
estimated that, one acre of Mulberry cultivation
can create direct employment to 6 persons
throughout the year. This employment spans
activities from mulberry cultivation to silk
fabric manufacturing.

Status of Sericulture in Andhra Pradesh

women.

5.12.1 Status of Sericulture in Andhra
Pradesh

Andhra Pradesh ranks second in India in
practicing mulberry sericulture. Additionally,
the rearing of Eri silkworms for spun silk
production has recently gained momentum.


--- PAGE 089 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Table 5.18 Types of Silk
SI.No | Type of Silk Major Producing States Food Plant
1 /Mulberry Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu, West Bengal Mulberry
> trasar Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Jharkhand, Chettisgarh,|Nallamaddi&
Madhyapradesh Thella Maddi
3 |Eri Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa, Telangana Castor, Tapioca
4 |Muga Only in Assam Sal tree

5.12.2 Major activities of sericulture

Sericulture is an agriculture activity (On-
Farm) involving the activities like - Raising
of Mulberry garden by farmers, rearing of
silkworms and production of Cocoons and
marketing in the Government Cocoon
markets.

Sericulture is also an Industrial activity
(Non-Farm) involving the activities such as
Reeling of Cocoons for production of Raw
Silk by Reelers, Twisting of Silk yarn and
dyeing by entrepreneurs and Weaving of
Silk yarn into Silk Fabric by Silk Weavers.

5.12.3 Performance during 2024-25(up to

December 2024)

Sericulture farmers have produced 61,394
MT of quality cocoons worth Rs. 2,701 crore
Silk reelers produced 8,458 MT of quality
raw silk worth Rs. 2,960 crore.

Sericulture contributed Rs.1,095 crore in
GVA to the state economy.

The government allocated Rs. 12.686 crore
under state development schemes to benefit
farmers and reelers through various
initiatives.

To empower Scheduled Tribe (ST) and
Scheduled Caste (SC) families.

Rs. 252.30 lakh under the Scheduled Tribe
Component (STC) with 90% assistance.

Rs. 11.43 lakh under the Scheduled Caste
Component (SCC).

1,049 farmers received a total of Rs. 4.93
crore under the Silk Samagra Scheme for
various mulberry
plantation, rearing sheds, and capacity
building. Additionally, a total of Rs. 42.08

crore (central share) and Rs. 5.76 crore

activities such as

(state share) have been sanctioned for
implementation of the scheme.

The significant achievements during 2024-25

up to December 2024 under Sericulture are
shown below in Table 5.19

Table 5.19 Significant achievements during 2024-25 up to December 2024

Sl. No. Indicators Unit Target for the Achievement
year
1 Mulberry acreage Acres 15000 5268
2
Construction of Rearing sheds Nos 490 485
3 Supply of Rearingequipments Nos 490 285
4 Brushing of BVH Dfls Lakh BVH 225 177.63

nn



--- PAGE 090 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

T tfor th
Sl. No. Indicators Unit anger forme Achievement
year
Cocoon production - CB MTs 66625 48087.76
7 Cocoon production - BV MTs 16874.6 13306.2
Total Cocoon Production MTs 83500 61393.93
8 Yield per 100 DFLs Kgs 75 76
9 . .
R Ik duction -CB
aw sik produenon MTs 8883.4 6411.7
( on total production)
10 Raw silk production - BV
aw sik produenon MTs 2596.1 2047.1
( on total production)
Total Raw Silk Producti
oral Naw ons Froduenon MTs 11479.47 8458.8
( on total production)
11 Total C db
otal Cocoons consumed by MTs 3950.74
the local Reelers
12 Raw silk Production in the MTs
state with local Reelers 450.26

5.12.4 Vision of the department

To position Andhra Pradesh as the largest
silk-producing state in the country and
emerge as a leader by increasing mulberry
cultivation from the existing 1.50 lakh
acres to 2.00 lakh acres by 2029-30.

To increase cocoon productivity per 100
DFLs (disease-free layings) of eggs from the
current 70 kg to 75 kg by adopting the
latest technology.

To produce 1,20,000 MT of cocoons by
2029-30, up from the present (2023-24)
production of 78,000 MT, achieving a
growth of 60%.

To cover the entire mulberry acreage with
drip irrigation to conserve water, address
labor shortages and reduce production
costs.

5.12.5 Strategies

nn

Production of high-quality bivoltine
cocoons for international-grade (3A and
above) raw silk.

Adoption of a cluster-based approach.

Encouragement of the chawkie rearing
concept by supplying 100% chawkie
worms to farmers instead of silkworm eggs
(DFLs).

Promotion of organic farming practices.

100% coverage of mulberry gardens with
drip irrigation systems.

Creation of demand for cocoons by
establishing Multi-End Reeling Units
(MERUs) for medium-quality bivoltine
cocoons and Automatic Reeling Machines
(ARMs) for high-grade cocoons in the
private sector.

Optimal utilization of the services of Village
Sericulture Assistants (VSAs) working in
RSKs (Rythu Seva Kendras)

5.12.6 Sericulture highlights

Andhra Pradesh is the second-largest
producer of raw silk in India and has been
awarded “Best Bivoltine Practicing State



--- PAGE 091 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

in India” by the Ministry of Textiles,
Government of India.

e The state uniquely produces both mulberry
and tasar silk.

e Mulberry has a low gestation period of 2-3
months and can yield 5-6 harvests annually,
ensuring periodic returns.

e Generates foreign exchange through the
export of silk and silk products.

e Sericulture activities like mulberry
cultivation, silkworm rearing, reeling,
twisting, and weaving are often household-
based, with 60% participation by women

due to the delicate handling required.

e Currently, 81,450 farmers practice
sericulture across 1,51,000 acres of
mulberry, while 705 silk reeler families
produce raw silk.

e Nine Automatic Reeling Machinery Units
established in the state produce 3A and
above international-grade raw silk,
yielding high returns.

e The government is ensuring fair and
remunerative cocoon prices through e-
marketing in government cocoon markets.

e The state implements Silk Samagra and
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY-
RAFTAAR), both centrally sponsored
schemes, alongside MG-NREGS in a
convergence program.

5.12.7 Present Status

On-Farm (Pre-Cocoon) :In the State Mulberry
is cultivated in an extent of 1,51,000 Acres by
81,450 farmers. There are 3 Grainages, 8
Government Cocoon Markets, 81 Number of
TSCs (Technical Service Centers) and 29
Government Seed Farms existing at present in
the state. One Research Institute (APSSRDI) is
located at Kirikera, Hindupur District.

Non-Farm Sector (Post-Cocoon)

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Government is providing servicesto cater to the
needs of the silk farmers for reeling through 3
Number of Non-Farm TSCs, 616 Charka Units,
36 (225 Basins) Cottage Basin/Back-End Units,
222 (2,006 Basins) Multi-End Reeling Units,9
(6,600) Ends) Automatic Reeling Units. 76,360
Cocoons Produced (MT) and 10,489 Raw Silk
Produced (MT). The Annual Net Income per
Family is between Rs. 2,50,000 to Rs.3,00,000

In the State, 188 Number of Families/Units and
4700 Persons Employed involved in Twisting
operating through 90,240 Spindles. The annual
net income per family is Rs.3,60,000 to
5,00,000

Tassar silk

Tasar silk, is primarily used for shirting,
furnishings, and interiors. Tasar_ silk is
produced by the silkworm Antheraea mylitta,
which feeds on plants like Asan and Arjun. The
rearing process takes place in nature, on
Terminalia trees in open forests. In the North
Coastal region of Andhra Pradesh, tribal
farmers in the Chintoor area are cultivating
Tasar silk. In the year 2024-25, nearly 900
tribal farmers produced 35 lakh Tasar cocoons.
The goal for the following year is to produce 50
lakh Tasar cocoons and involve more tribal
families to improve their livelihoods in
collaboration with the Chintoor ITDA Project.

The districtwise achievements undersericulture
are given in Annexure 5.27

5.12.8 Schemes implemented
On-farm sector

Silk samagra :The Silk Samagra scheme in
Andhra Pradesh is supported by the Central Silk
Board which aims to improve technology,
quality, productivity, and employment in the
silk industry. It specifically targets women,
SC/ST, and below-poverty-line farmers. Major
components include assistance for nurseries
and mulberry plantations, construction of
silkworm rearing sheds, and setting up reeling
and twisting units.


--- PAGE 092 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

State Development Schemes :Schemes to
assistance for disinfectants and farm
mechanization. Production Incentive provided
for Bivoltine &Tasar Cocoons and Raw Silk and
assistance for procurement of Tasar seed &
wage compensation to Tasar Tribal farmers.
Cocoon Incentive to Farmers for Production
of Quality Cocoons : To _ encourage
sericulturists and increase transactions in
government cocoon markets, an amount of
Rs.50 per kg of bivoltine cocoons is paid at the
government cocoon market level.

Incentive to Silk Reelers for Raw Silk
Production :To promote the production of
quality silk yarn, incentives are provided to
reelers. The raw silk produced by the reelers is
tested for quality at SCTH (CSB) Dharmavaram,
and the incentive amount is paid based on

MULBERRY GARDEN:

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

recommendations made by the constituted
committee.

5.12.9 Subsidy pattern

Silk Samagra is a Central Sector Scheme funded
by the Central Silk Board, Ministry of Textiles,
Government of India. The central share is
released through the PFMS platform, and the
corresponding MSS is released through BROs.

MG-NREGS: MG-NREGS is being implemented
by the Sericulture Department in convergence
with the Department of Rural Development to
support mulberry plantation with three years of
maintenance and the construction of rearing
sheds (Type I and Type II).

The scheme also utilizes the MG-NREGS labor
pool for sericulture activities, helping to
address the issue of labour shortages in the
sector.

5.12.10 Sericulture development through
Rythu Seva Kendaralu (RSKs)

Village Sericulture Assistants are actively
involved in expansion of mulberry cultivation,
RSKs provide technology to farmers, Pattu Badi
programs are organized by department officers
in collaboration with progressive sericulture
farmers at RSKs, and Technical Service Centre

nn

staff hold demonstrations and meetings to
promote new technologies.

5.12.11 Action Plan for 2025-26
* New Mulberry Area :12000 Acs

* Cocoon Production :83500 MTs

¢ Raw silk Production :11480 MTS


--- PAGE 093 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Non-farm sector in Andhra Pradesh

Andhra Pradesh is the second-largest raw
silk-producing state in the country, next to
Karnataka. The majority of non-farm sector
units related to the Sericulture Department are
established in the districts of Anantapur,
Chittoor, Prakasam, Krishna, and _ East
Godavari.Silk reeling units and silk twisting
units are classified as small-scale industries,
with a cost below Rs.17.00 lakhs.

Government Cocoon markets

Andhra Pradesh is the second state, after
Karnataka, to implement e-marketing in the
sericulture sector. Government cocoon
markets operate throughout the year
providing
opportunities to market their produce. To
ensure remunerative prices for cocoons, the
State has implemented an _ e-marketing
system across all government cocoon
markets.All transactions in these markets are
carried out exclusively online.

farmers with maximum

Assistance Provided by the Government to
the Non-Farm Sector

The government provides assistance through
the Silk Samagra Scheme (Centrally
Sponsored) and State Development Schemes.

Silk Samagra :This scheme provides support
for setting up Multi-End Reeling Units, 480-
spindle twisting units, Automatic Reeling
Machinery of different capacities, pupae
processing units, and distributing machines to
tribal farmers in the Rampachodavaram area
for producing Tasar silk.

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

5.12.12 State Development Schemes

The government provides financial incentives for
raw silk production to encourage silk reelers in the
state. Filature BV Raw Silk receives Rs.130 per kg,
Filature CB Raw Silk receives Rs.85 per kg, and
Charka Raw Silk receives Rs.35 per kg. Sericulture
schemes are implemented to provide SC&ST
farmers through mulberry and Tasar sericulture,
with 90% financial assistance. General farmers
receive 75% assistance under all sericulture
schemes.

Silk fabic clusters:Silk Fabric producing clusters
in Andhra Pradesh areDharmavaram,
Mudireddipalli (Anantapuramu_ dist.), Uppada,
Peddapuram (E.Godavari dist.), and
Neerugattuvaripalli (Chittoor dist.)

Tasar culture in AandhraPradesh:TheTasar
culture is a forest-based industry that involves
rearing Tasar cocoons from Nalla Maddi and Thella
Maddi trees in the forests of East Godavari and ASR
District. 1,660 tribal farmers in 45 villages are
involved in rearing Tasar in 2000 Ha of forest area,
with the potential for three crops per year and an
annual income of Rs.50,000/- to Rs.60,000/- per
tribal family. Tasar cocoons are converted into
Tasar silk using Buniyad reeling machines and
spinning machines, with 128 Buniyad and 105
spinning units currently operating in Chinturu and
Kunavaram Mandals of ASR District.


--- PAGE 094 ---
a re SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25 a
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

Indigenous Autom

4 , yu

: es

~ = =

=

The institute conducts research in all aspects of
sericulture, from soil to silk, and has made
significant contributions to the silk industry in

the State. They have developed new mulberry Sericulture Handy Crafts made with Cocoons

varieties and silkworm breeds to increase The Department has also encouraged rural women
productivity and quality, as well as by training for preparation of Handy Crafts such as
implemented prevention and control measures. garlands, bouquet’s, flower pots etc.., through Sri
Tailor-made training programs are conducted Padmavathi Mahila University , Tirupathi under
to generate human resources development.The IOT project. In Andhra Pradesh, Sericulture activity
institute has also started a lab-to-land program is one of the major village activity undertaken by
to disseminate research findings among rural the farmers, would be brought for popularizing
people. This includes educating seed farmers on Sericulture and its effectiveness in empowering
feed quality, joint supervision, disease farmers with sustainable income.

monitoring, awareness meetings, and training
programs for entrepreneurs, farmers, students,

5.13 AGRICULTURE MARKETING
and staff.

The state has 1,052 godowns with a total
storage capacity of 9,65,492 MTs, of which 626
godowns (capacity: 5,65,508 MTs) are
e High initial investment for construction of operational. Annexure 5.28 provides district-

silkworm Rearing sheds. wise details of godowns under Agricultural
e Health hazards in reeling Sector. Market Committees for December 2024

Critical Gaps Identified in Implementation of
Schemes

e Exemption of GST on silk machinery.

On


--- PAGE 095 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED ACTIVITIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Market Committees collected Rs. 433.39 crores
in market fees during 2024-25 (up to December
2024). Annexure 5.29 presents the district-
wise market fee collection.

5.13.1 e-National Agriculture Market (e-
NAM)

e-NAM, an electronic trading platform by the
Government of India, integrates primary
markets nationwide to ensure fair pricing for
farmers. It operates in 33 markets across the
state, trading commodities like dry chilies,
cotton, turmeric, lemons, onions, tomatoes,
groundnuts, castor seeds, ajwain, and various
fruits and vegetables.

As of December 2024, e-NAM in the state has
registered 1,452 farmers, 69 traders, 9
commission agents, and 52 Farmer Producer
Organizations (FPOs). A total of 9.01 lakh MT of
commodities were traded, with a transaction
value of Rs. 5,954.96 crores. Online payments of
Rs. 26.88 lakhs were made for 28.33 MTs of
commodities. 11 mandis engaged in Inter-
Mandi trade, transacting 3,188.63 MT of
commodities worth Rs. 13.98 crores.

5.13.2 Rythu Bazars

To stabilize market prices, the government
intervenes in procurement operations when
perishable goods experience extreme price
fluctuations. The state operates 122 Rythu
Bazars, ensuring fair prices for both farmers
and consumers. Total 124 Rythu Bazars are
functioning in the state and 28 Rythu Bazars
construction is under progress. Recently 2
Ryhtu Bazars were completed and functioning.

WAY FORWARD

The Andhra Pradesh government is actively
working towards enhancing the agricultural
and allied sectors through various initiatives.
Encouraging the use of precision farming,
drones, and IoT-based solutions is a key focus
to optimize resource use and increase crop
yields. Promoting organic farming and
integrated pest management aims to reduce

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

dependency on chemical inputs and enhance
soil health. Efficient irrigation systems like drip
and sprinkler irrigation, along with large-scale
rainwater harvesting projects, are being
implemented to improve water management
and ensure availability during dry spells.

Diversification into high-value crops such as
horticulture and medicinal plants is being
promoted to enhance income stability for
farmers. The government is also developing
infrastructure for cold storage and processing
units to reduce post-harvest losses and add
value to agricultural produce. Strengthening
allied sectors like fisheries and_ livestock
through sustainable practices and improved
veterinary services is a priority to boost
productivity. Additionally, enhancing market
access through farmer-producer organizations
and expanding credit and insurance schemes
will provide financial stability. Investing in
farmer training, research, and policy reforms
will further support the sector's growth and
ensure food security and_ socio-economic
development in the stat


--- PAGE 096 ---
INDUSTRIES

Chapter

G



--- PAGE 097 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6. INDUSTRIES

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Andhra Pradesh has emerged as a premier
destination for industrial investment in India.
The state features the nation's third-longest
coastline, six operational ports, abundant
mineral resources, a_ strong agricultural
foundation, and a surplus of electricity,
providing a distinct advantage for industries.
This has consistently attracted interest from
both international and domestic investors.

Although primarily an agrarian economy,
Andhra Pradesh is dedicated to accelerating
industrialization and generating employment
opportunities for its youth. Efforts have been
made in the past to implement significant
structural reforms to create a_ robust
investment ecosystem and drive economic
growth.

To ensure’ rapid _ industrialization, the

Government of Andhra Pradesh has recently

introduced _ several

initiatives, including:

1. Industrial Development Policy (4.0) 2024-
29

2. MSME & Entrepreneur Development Policy
(4.0) 2024-29

3. Food Processing Policy (4.0) 2024-29

4. Policy for Establishment of Private
Industrial Parks with ‘Plug and Play’
Industrial Infrastructure (4.0) 2024-29

5. Electronics Manufacturing Policy (4.0)
2024-29

6. New Andhra Pradesh Sustainable Electric
Mobility Policy (4.0) 2024-29

progressive policy

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has
identified two key focus sector groups for
development:

1. Sustenance Sectors: Established industries
such as Automobiles, Chemicals &
Petrochemicals, Engineering, Food
Processing, Textiles, Apparel, Footwear,
Pharma & Life Sciences, Medical Devices,
Blue Economy, Metal Alloys, and Furniture.

nn Ee

These sectors have a strong presence in the
state and significant potential to contribute
to the GSDP and generate employment.

2. Propelling Sectors: Emerging industries
gaining global traction, including Aerospace,
Defence & Drones, Electric Vehicles &
Batteries, Biotechnology, Green &
Renewable Energy, Ports & Logistics, Toys,
Semiconductors, Ship Building, Specialty
Steel, and Maintenance, Repairs, and
Operations (MRO). These sectors can
integrate Andhra Pradesh into the global
supply chain.

The Government aims to provide world-class
infrastructure, a seamless setup process, skilled
labor availability, and comprehensive support
to industries, ensuring an investor-friendly
environment. The focus is on reducing the cost
and risk of doing business while creating
opportunities for entrepreneurs and generating
employment for the state's youth.

6.1 ACTIVITIES OF INVESTMENT
PROMOTION IN 2024-25

6.1.1 Investor Outreach Programs

The Industries Department, in collaboration
with the Andhra Pradesh Economic
Development Board (APEDB), has actively
conducted several investor outreach programs
across the country. These initiatives aim to
attract investments and showcase the state's
potential as a prime investment destination.

6.1.2 Global Presence and US Delegation

To strengthen its global presence, the
Government of Andhra Pradesh sent a high-
level delegation, led by the Hon’ble Minister for
Human Resource Development & Information
Technology, on a week-long visit to the United
States. The objective was to position Andhra
Pradesh as an ideal investment destination and


--- PAGE 098 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

attract investments from both domestic and
delegation
effectively showcased the  state’s’ vast
investment opportunities, emphasizing its
investor-friendly environment and highlighting
that at this junction, Andhra Pradesh is at the
perfect destination for investment.

international markets. The

6.1.3. Focus on Manufacturing Sector

The manufacturing sector, accounting for about
11% of the Gross State Domestic Product
(GSDP), remains a high-focus area in the state.
Following the state bifurcation, the MSME
profile of Andhra Pradesh has - shifted
significantly capital-intensive
industries. The government has _ identified
competitive MSMEs as a central theme for
developing the MSME sector, aiming to
integrate MSMEs into the global value chain and
establish them as the flag bearers of Brand
Andhra Pradesh.

towards

6.1.4 Future Plans and Industrial
Corridors

The Government plans to emphasize the
manufacturing sector by identifying value
creation and enhancement opportunities. The
Vizag-Chennai Industrial Corridor (VCIC) and
Chennai-Bangalore Industrial Corridor have
been identified as viable options to promote
growth and employment
opportunities.

enhance

6.1.5 District Industries Centres

The District Industries Centres (DICs) act as key
facilitators in each district, supporting
entrepreneurs by streamlining the process of
establishing industries through a_ Single
Window system for all necessary approvals and
clearances. They also implement the MSMED
Act, coordinate with financial institutions to
secure credit facilities, and maintain
comprehensive data on_ the _ industrial
development within their districts.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

6.1.6 Swarna Andhra@2047

The Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) has
set an ambitious goal to transform the state into
a $2.4 trillion economy by 2047, with a per
capita income target of $42,000. This
transformation requires an annual growth rate
of 15%. The Swarna Andhra@2047 vision
document outlines a blueprint for a "wealthy,
healthy, and happy" Andhra Pradesh, built on
ten guiding principles (Padi Sutralu). Promoting
growth through industrialization and attracting
huge investments is an integral part of the
Vision.

Andhra Pradesh aims to be globally recognized
by leveraging its social capital, promoting
gender equality, and emphasizing green
potential. The state focuses on:

* World-class hi-tech services: Emphasizing
engineering research and development,
healthcare, and education.

¢ Multi-faceted tourism hub: Aiming to
attract approximately 0.5% of total
international arrivals.

* Top 3 exporters for Agri and Processed
products: Bananas, mangoes, chilies,
shrimp, dairy, and poultry.

6.1.7 INDUSTRIAL INCENTIVES

The Government is providing the Industrial
Incentives under the following policies for
eligible Industrial units in the State. The policy
shall be in force and valid for a period of 5 years
from the date of the notification, or till a new
Policy is announced.

¢ Industrial Development Policy (4.0)
2024-29: As per GO Ms No. 68, Industries
& Commerce (P&I) Department, dt:
26/10/2024 incentives will be provided for
Sub-large, Large, Mega & Ultra Mega
Industries.

¢ AP MSME& Entrepreneur Development
Policy, (4.0) 2024-29: As per GO Ms No.
69, Industries & Commerce  (Prog.I)


--- PAGE 099 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Department, dt: 26/10/2024 incentives will
be provided for MSMEs.

¢ New AP Food Processing Policy (4.0)
2024-29: As per GO Ms No; 71, Industries &
Commerce (Prog.JII) Department, dt:
26/10/2024 incentives will be provided for
Food Processing.

6.1.8 Project Category Definition

Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
(MSME): The Government of Andhra Pradesh
(GoAP) adheres to the MSME definitions
provided by the Government of India under the
MSMED Act 2006, with updates as per the
notification released on June 1, 2020. The
classification criteria are as follows:

¢ Micro Industries: Investment in Plant and
Machinery or Equipment should not exceed
Rs. 1 crore, and Annual Turnover should not
exceed Rs. 5 crores.

¢ Small Industries: Investment in Plant and
Machinery or Equipment should not exceed
Rs. 10 crores, and Annual Turnover should
not exceed Rs. 50 crores.

¢ Medium Enterprises: Investment in Plant
and Machinery or Equipment should not
exceed Rs. 50 crores, and Annual Turnover
should not exceed Rs. 250 crores.

¢ Large Industrial Projects: These are units
with investment and turnover thresholds
exceeding those of Medium Enterprises as
defined in the MSMED Act, 2006.

¢ Mega Industrial Projects: Projects that
generate direct employment for 2,000 or
more individuals are granted mega-
industry status.

The Government extends tailor-made benefits
to Mega Projects to meet specific investment
requirements on a case-by-case basis. These
benefits consider factors such as the project's
gestation period, pioneering nature, vocational
aspects, technology, importance to the state's
industrial growth, potential for large-scale
employment generation, and overall economic
impact or revenue generation for the state.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

6.1.9 Industrial Development Policy (4.0)
2024-29

The Andhra Pradesh Industrial Development
Policy (4.0) 2024-29 has been formulated to
revitalize economic activity, promote industrial
growth, and create large-scale employment
opportunities. The policy aims to enhance
Andhra Pradesh’s competitiveness as an
industrial destination by integrating global best
practices, sustainability, and technology-driven
solutions.

The Andhra Pradesh Industrial Development
Policy (4.0) 2024-29 sets a clear vision for
transforming Andhra Pradesh into a globally
competitive industrial hub, with an emphasis
on sustainability, digital innovation, and
economic resilience.

Objectives of the Policy

The Industrial Development Policy (4.0) 2024-
29 is structured to achieve the following
objectives:

¢ Balanced, Resilient, and Sustainable Growth:
Strengthening industrial infrastructure
while ensuring social and environmental
responsibility.

* Green Energy Transition: Encouraging low-
carbon industrial practices, adoption of
renewable energy, and a circular economy
model.

¢ Integration into Global Value Chains:
Strengthening Andhra Pradesh’s position as
a global export hub by improving logistics
and trade facilitation.

* Gateway to the East: Leveraging Andhra
Pradesh’s strategic location for enhanced
connectivity with Southeast Asian markets.

* Technology Adoption (Industry 4.0 & Al):

Encouraging automation, artificial
intelligence, and digital transformation in
industries.

* Capitalizing on the Demographic Dividend:
Enhancing skill development, workforce


--- PAGE 100 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

training, and job creation to drive industrial
expansion.

Government is extending a _ package of

incentives for entrepreneurs belonging to Sub-

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

large, Large, Mega & Ultra Mega Industries who
are interested to set up manufacturing
industries under the policy. The following are
the incentives offered under different

categories of the projects.

A. Incentives and Concessions for Sub-Large Projects

Incentive Type

Description

12% of Fixed Capital Investment (FCI) for projects achieving DCP within the

Investment/Capital | standard investment period. Additional 5% subsidy for enterprises owned by
Subsidy Women, BC, SC, ST, or specially-abled investors domiciled in Andhra Pradesh.
The disbursement period is 5 equal annual installments from DCP.
Emplovment Based on direct employment-to-investment (FCI) ratio. Projects employing more
P ; y . than five people are eligible for up to 10% of FCI; those employing five or fewer
Creation Subsidy ; . : . 4:
(ECS) will receive 8%-9% of FCI. The disbursement period is 5 equal annual

installments from DCP.

Local Procurement
Subsidy

Reimbursement of 1% of annual export turnover for domestic sourcing of raw
materials for exporting units in selected sectors. The disbursement period is
annually for 3 years from DCP.

Fixed Power Cost reimbursement at INR 1 per unit for 2 years from the date of

Power Cost
. commencement of commercial production. The disbursement period is 2 years
Reimbursement
from DCP.
Reimbursement of 100% net SGST for 5 years from the date of commercial
Net SGST ; . ; ;
. production on the sale of final products manufactured, sold, and registered in
Reimbursement

the State. The disbursement period is 5 years from DCP.

B. Incentives and Concessions for Large Projects

Category Details
. Projects with FCI above INR 501 Crores up to INR 1000 Crores with a
Investment Size . . .
committed standard investment period of 3 years from CFE.
* Upto 12% of FCI for projects installing 100% of plant capacity.
* 6% of FCI for 50% capacity installation.
Investment Subsidy * 0.5% reduction in incentives per month for delays beyond the committed
DCP.
¢ Disbursed in 7 equal annual installments from the DCP.

nn



--- PAGE 101 ---
<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Category

Details

Top-up on PLI
(Production Linked
Incentive) from Gol

* Applicable only to Gol approved projects notified by the State.

* State government provides 10% of the total incentive sanctioned under
the Go] scheme, capped at 5% of the FCI in the state.

¢ Disbursed in 5 equal annual installments from the DCP.

Employment Creation

¢ Based on direct employment-to-investment (FCI) ratio.
Projects employing more than five people: up to 10% of FCI.
* Projects employing five or fewer: 8%-9% of FCI.
¢ Direct employment includes both full-time and contract on the payroll.

Subsidy (ECS)
¢ Disbursed in equal annual instalments over 5 years from DCP, subject to
cumulative employment on payrolls (new EPF accounts created by the
employer).
100% reimbursement of net SGST for 5 years from the date of commercial
Net SGST . . : .
. production on the sale of final products manufactured, sold, and registered in
Reimbursement

the State.

C. Incentives and Concessions for Mega and Ultra Mega Projects

Category

Details

Investment Size Mega
Projects

Projects with FCI above INR 1001 Crores up to INR 5000 Crores with a
committed standard investment period of 3 years.

Investment Size Ultra
Mega Projects

Tailor-made Benefits

Projects with FCI above INR 5001 Crores with a committed standard
investment period of 4 years.

The Government will extend tailor-made benefits to Mega and above Projects
to suit particular investment requirements on a case-by-case basis,
considering factors like gestation period, pioneering nature, locational
aspects, technology, project importance to the State’s industrial growth, and
its ability to generate large-scale employment or revenues for the State.

Investment Subsidy

* Upto 15% of FCI for Mega and Ultra Mega Projects upon installing the
committed total plant capacity.

* Applicable to both new and expansion projects.

¢ Disbursed in 10 equal annual instalments from DCP.

* 0.5% reduction per month for delays beyond the committed DCP.

Top-up on PLI from
Government of India

* Applicable only to Gol approved projects notified by the State.

* State government provides 10% of the total incentive sanctioned under
the Go] scheme, capped at 5% of the FCI in the state.

¢ Disbursed in 5 equal annual instalments from the DCP.

Employment Creation
Subsidy (ECS)

¢ Based on direct employment-to-investment (FCI) ratio.
Projects employing more than five people: up to 10% of FCI.
* Projects employing five or fewer: 8%-9% of FCI.
¢ Direct employment includes both full-time and contract on the payroll.
¢ Disbursed in equal annual instalments over 9 years for Mega and 10
years for Ultra Mega from DCP.

D. Incentives and Concessions for Mega and Ultra Mega Projects

nn



--- PAGE 102 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Category

Details

Standard Incentives ;
projects.

Applicable for all investment bands: Sub-Large, Large, Mega, and Ultra Mega

De-carbonization

¢ Encourages circular economy, clean production, waste reduction, resource
efficiency, green energy, and safety measures.

* Capital subsidy as a percentage of eligible project cost for Red Category
and Non-Red category industries.

Subsidy * Maximum limit of 6% of FCI.

¢ Applicable for projects built for captive use.
¢ Disbursed according to the tenure specified for the respective investment
band in the investment subsidy.

Stamp Duty
Reimbursement

on the same land.

* 100% reimbursement of Stamp Duty and Transfer Duty paid by the
industry on the purchase of land for industrial use, lease of
land/shed/buildings, mortgages, and hypothecations.

* Reimbursed only one time on the land and not on subsequent transactions

Land Conversion
Charges

100% reimbursement of the fee charged for land conversion.

Revival of Sick Units

Government will investigate sick enterprises and extend support on a case-by-
case basis to revive the sick units.

E. Special Package for Early Bird Project Scheme

Category Details
¢ For the first 200 projects meeting eligibility conditions and receiving CFE within 18
Category I months of notification of this Policy.
¢ Investment subsidy of 30% of FCI.
* To incentivize Value Added Manufacturing in sectors/sub-sectors identified for
promotion by Gol under any PLI Schemes.
Category II * Meeting eligibility conditions will be offered an investment subsidy of 40% of FCI.
* Reimbursement time to receive CFE relaxed to 24 months from notification of this
Policy.

6.1.10 AP MSME & Entrepreneur
Development Policy, 4.0 (2024-29)

The Andhra Pradesh MSME & Entrepreneur
Development Policy (4.0) 2024-29 has been
introduced to spur the growth of MSMEs,
strengthen entrepreneurship, and transform
Andhra Pradesh into a globally competitive
MSME hub. The policy aims to foster
innovation, enhance productivity, provide
financial and infrastructural support, and
promote sustainability. The government's
vision is to make the State a Champion State for

nn Ee

MSMEs, ensuring that every family in the state
has an entrepreneur by 2030.

Objectives of the Policy

The AP MSME & Entrepreneur Development
Policy (4.0) 2024-29 is structured around key
strategic objectives, including:

* One Family, One Entrepreneur Initiative:
Creating a robust entrepreneurship-driven
ecosystem to achieve self-reliance in MSMEs
by 2030.



--- PAGE 103 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25

<>----<>----<>----<>---<> INDUSTRIES <>----<>----<>----<>----<>
¢ MSME Formalization and Competitiveness: technology centers, and private industrial
Encouraging unregistered micro- clusters.
enterprises to join the organized sector for * Inclusive and Equitable Growth: Ensuring
better market outreach. women, SC/ST, and _ differently-abled
¢ Integration with Global Value Chains: entrepreneurs receive preferential access to
Enhancing export competitiveness by resources and financial support.
facilitating 500+ MSME Champions in global

The AP MSME & Entrepreneur Development
Policy (4.0) 2024-29 provides a structured
roadmap for industrial transformation,

trade.
* Technology and Digital Transformation:

Promoting Industry 4.0 adoption, Al-driven fostering sustainable, inclusive, and innovation

manufacturing, and e-commerce support. driven MSME growth.
* (Cluster-Based Infrastructure Development:

Establishing MSME parks, sector-specific

A. Incentives and Concessions for MSMEs

Category Details
100% Stamp Duty and Transfer Duty paid by the industry on purchase of land
Stamp Duty for industrial use, lease of land/shed/buildings, mortgages, and hypothecations
Reimbursement will be reimbursed. Reimbursed only one time on the land and not on

subsequent transactions on the same land.

Land Conversion 100% fee charged for land conversion will be reimbursed.

Charges

* Micro Enterprises: 25% of FCI (Cap: Rs. 25.00 lakhs) on CoD/1st invoice in 2
equal annual instalments.

¢ Small Enterprises: 25% of FCI (Cap: Rs. 1.5 Crores) on CoD/1st invoice in 3
equal annual instalments.

Capital Subsidy * Medium Enterprises: 25% of FCI (Cap: Rs. 7.00 Crores) on CoD/1st invoice
in 5 equal annual instalments.

* Additional 10% Capital subsidy (Cap: Rs. 7.00 Crores) for
women/BC/SC/ST/Especially abled entrepreneurs domiciled in the State.
Applicable only to new enterprises.

* Micro Enterprises: 20% of FCI (Cap: Rs. 20.00 lakhs) in 2 equal annual
instalments.
¢ Small Enterprises: 20% of FCI (Cap: Rs. 1.00 Crores) in 3 equal annual

instalments.
Technology

Upgradation Cost Medium Enterprises: 20% of FCI (Cap: Rs. 5.00 Crores) in 5 equal annual

instalments.

* Additional 10% Capital subsidy (Cap: Rs. 7.00 Crores) for
women/BC/SC/ST/Especially abled entrepreneurs domiciled in the State.
Applicable only to expansion units.

Reimbursement of power cost at Rs. 1.00 per unit for 6 years from DCP, with
Power Cost annual caps:
Reimbursement * Micro Enterprises: Rs. 1.00 lakh per annum.

¢ Small Enterprises: Rs. 5.00 lakhs per annum.

nn


--- PAGE 104 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<> Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Category Details

* Medium Enterprises: Rs. 15.00 lakhs per annum.

Net SGST 100% reimbursement of net SGST for 6 years with an annual cap of 5% of
Reimbursement annual turnover for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises.
* Micro Enterprises: Rs. 5,000 per person for a maximum of 10 persons.
Skill Upgradation ¢ Small Enterprises: Rs. 10,000 per person for a maximum of 20 persons.
Cost * Medium Enterprises: 100% of employer contribution to EPF, capped at Rs.
1.00 lakh per annum for 3 years.
* 75% of cost of Water audit, capped at Rs. 1.00 lakh for Micro, Small &
Medium Enterprises.
e 0 . .
Energy & Water 75 % of cost of Energy audit, capped at Rs. 2.00 lakhs for Micro, Small &
. Medium Enterprises.
Audit Cost

* 25% of cost of equipment as per auditing, capped at Rs. 20.00 lakhs for
Micro Enterprises, Rs. 40.00 lakhs for Small Enterprises, and Rs. 50.00 lakhs
for Medium Enterprises.

Encourages domestic sourcing of raw material for exporting units in select

sectors registered in the state:

* Micro Enterprises: 1% of annual export turnover for 3 years, with an overall
cap of Rs. 15.00 lakhs.

Subsidy * Small Enterprises: 1% of annual export turnover for 3 years, with an overall

cap of Rs. 1.5 Crores.

Local Procurement

* Medium Enterprises: 1% of annual export turnover for 3 years, with an
annual cap of Rs. 7.00 Crores.

Quality Certification | Balance of Gol subsidy to cover 100% cost for Micro, Small, and Medium
Cost Top-up Enterprises.

15, 2025, and Andhra Pradesh is actively
working on these reforms.

6.1.10 Ease of Doing Business

The Department for Promotion of Industry and

Internal Trade (DPIIT) launched the Ease of 6.1.11 SPEED OF DOING BUSINESS

Doing Business (EoDB) program in 2015 to
enhance transparency and regulatory efficiency
for businesses in India. Andhra Pradesh has
been proactive in implementing these reforms
and has consistently ranked No.1 since BRAP
2016.

The 7th edition, Business Reform Action Plan
(BRAP) 2024, includes 435 state-specific
reform points focusing on Simplification,
Elimination, Digitization, and Decriminalization.
The plan has been shared with relevant
departments for implementation by February

nn

Andhra Pradesh envisions a transformative
business ecosystem driven by speed, efficiency,
and innovation, aiming to reduce time at every
stage of the business lifecycle: Pre-
establishment, Pre-operation/Construction, and
during operations. The APSDP categorizes
services into self-certification-based approvals,
provisional approvals, regular approvals with
deemed provisions for speedy delivery.


--- PAGE 105 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6.1.12 Single Desk Portal

The Andhra Pradesh Single Desk Portal (AP
SDP), launched in April 2015, is a one-stop
platform for industry clearances within
stipulated timelines. It streamlines G2B services
by enabling online application submission,
document uploads, payments, status tracking,
and certificate downloads, eliminating the need
for physical interactions with regulatory
authorities.

Performance:

¢ Since its inception, the portal has received
over 1,20,634 applications for clearances,
with 1,17,954 approved as of January 1,
2025.

¢ From April 1, 2024, to January 1, 2025, the
portal received 16,783 applications for
clearances, of which 16,458 were approved
within the SLA, achieving a 99.20%
approval rate.

6.1.13 SDP 2.0

Enhancements to the AP SDP _ include
integrating new _ business-specific services,
improving service categorization for a better
user experience, and providing stepwise
application timelines with an approval
hierarchy. Additionally, a centralized dashboard
will display service fee collections.

6.1.14 Large & Mega Projects

During the FY 2024-25, the State Investment
Promotion Board (SIPB) approved eight
industrial investment proposals with a total
committed investment of Rs. 2,45,275 crores,
projected to generate employment for 65,541
people.

The state monitors the progress of large and
mega industrial projects under implementation
through the “Investment Tracker” system. The
dedicated relationship managers are appointed
to providing handholding support to ensure

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

timely project grounding and to extend
assistance post-establishment.

Currently, 1,074 large and mega industries are
in operational in AP, representing a total
investment of Rs. 3.01 lakh crore and creating
employment for over 5.33 lakh people.

6.1.15 Achievements in FY 2024-25:

The state has achieved remarkable milestones
through the government's constant efforts:

* Top Manufacturing Destination: The
Chittoor-Nellore region has emerged as one
of India’s Top 10 manufacturing
destinations, attracting significant domestic
and international investment.

¢ Established Projects: Ten large and mega
industrial projects were established in
2024-25 (up to December 2024) with an
investment of Rs. 12,830 crores, creating
employment for 11,925 people.

¢ Projects under Implementation: Sixty
large and mega projects (including PSUs)
are currently under active implementation,
representing a projected investment of Rs.
67,209 crores with the potential to generate
94,026 jobs.

* Projects in Initial Stages: One hundred
fourteen large and mega projects (including
PSUs) are in the initial stages of
implementation, with a total projected
investment of Rs. 6,16,000 crores and the
potential to create 3,18,000 jobs.

¢ IJInaugurations: The Hon’ble Chief Minister
inaugurated fifteen large and mega
industrial projects in FY 2024-25, which
have commenced _ production. These
projects involved an investment of Rs. 1,570
crores and are set to provide direct
employment to 8,480 people.

* Foundation Stones Laid: The Chief
Minister also laid the foundation stones for
seven large and mega projects, with a
committed investment of Rs. 900 crores and
the potential to generate 2,740 direct jobs.


--- PAGE 106 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Through these proactive efforts, Andhra
Pradesh continues to solidify its position as a
hub for industrial development and a preferred
destination for global investors. During the year
2024-25 (up to December 2024), ten large and
mega industries were established with an
investment of Rs. 12,830 crores, providing
employment to 11,925 people. The details of
these industries are shown in Annexure 6.1.

6.1.16 Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises

The Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises
(MSMEs) sector has emerged as a highly vibrant
and dynamic part of the Indian economy over
the last five decades. MSMEs_ contribute
approximately 8% of the country’s GDP, 45% of
the manufacturing output, and 40% of exports.
They provide the largest share of employment
after agriculture, making the development of
the MSME sector crucial for the socio-economic
progress of the country.

In Andhra Pradesh, the MSME sector is
recognized as a catalyst for job creation and
balanced regional development. The sector

6.1.17 Schemes of GoI implemented by the GoAP

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

manufactures a variety of products, with a high
concentration of micro and small units in the
food, mineral and building materials, drugs and
pharmaceuticals, fabricated materials, trading,
and service sectors.

The Industrial Development Policy, 2024-29,
provides a_ holistic framework for the
sustainable development of MSMEs in the state,
aiming to make them globally competitive. The
policy offers incentives, infrastructure
development, technology upgradation, | skill
development, marketing support,
simplification, administrative reforms, and
rehabilitation of sick industries.

During the year 2024-25, 2,61,393 MSMEs were
established in the state with an investment of
Rs. 7,743.57 crores, providing employment to
27,07,752 people. The year-wise details of
MSMEs established, along with the amount of
investment and employment generated from
2014-15 to 2024-25, are shown in Annexure
6.2. The district-wise details are provided in
Annexure 6.3. The district-wise progress made
under PMEGP is shown in Annexure 6.4

A. Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme - CSS

Aspect Details

Objective Generate employment in rural and urban areas through self-employment
ventures.

Impl ti

mp emen NB KVIC, KVIBs, State Governments, and District Industries Centers.

Agencies
Self Help Groups (including BPL), General and Special

Eligibility Categories(SC/ST/OBC/Minorities/Women, Ex-servicemen, Physically
handicapped, NER Hill and Border area).

Beneficiary ¢ 10% of project cost for general categories

Contribution e 5% for special categories.

Margin Money e General: 15% urban, 25% rural.

(Subsidy Rate) e Special: 25% urban, 35% rural.

Assistance Type One-time assistance.

Repayment
3 to 7 .

Schedule of years

nn



--- PAGE 107 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

INDUSTRIES
Aspect Details
2024-25 ; . ae .
1443 projects established, Rs. 71.98 crores distributed as Margin Money.
Progress
Guidelines Simplified procedure for selection and sanction of applications by
implementing agencies and banks.

B. MSME Cluster Development Programme:

Government of India has adopted the cluster
development approach as a key strategy for
enhancing the productivity and
competitiveness as well as capacity building of
Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) and their
collectives in the country. Clustering of units
also enables providers of various services to
them, including banks and credit agencies, to
provide their services more economically, thus
reducing costs and improving the availability of
services for these enterprises.

Objectives:

¢ Support for Sustainability and Growth of
MSEs:Address common issues such as
technology improvement, skill

Table 6. 1 Details of Cluster Development in Andhra Pradesh

enhancement, quality improvement, market
access, and access to capital.

Building Capacity of MSEs:Formation of
self-help groups, consortia, and upgradation
of associations.

Create /Upgrade Infrastructural
Facilities:Develop new or upgrade existing
industrial areas/clusters of MSEs.

Set Up Common Facility Centres:Establish
centres for testing, training, raw material
depots, effluent treatment, and
complementing production processes.
Promotion of Green & Sustainable
Manufacturing Technology:Enable units
to switch to sustainable and _ green
production processes and products.

Cluster Development in Andhra
Pradesh

Details

Identified Clusters

65 new clusters for establishment of common facility centers.

Active Implementation

8 clusters with a total project cost of Rs. 92.14 Crores.

Completed ID Projects

7 projects with a total project cost of Rs. 78.32 Crores.

Ongoing ID Projects

21 projects under implementation with a total project cost of
Rs. 283.47 Crores.



--- PAGE 108 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6.1.18 Best practices adopted for MSME
development.

1. Trade Receivables Discounting System
(TReDS):

The Trade Receivables Discounting System
(TReDS) is an _ electronic platform that
facilitates the financing of MSME_ trade
receivables, addressing delays in payment
cycles and improving sector liquidity. The
government’ signed MoUs’ with three
implementing agencies on June 27, 2024.

Key Benefits for MSMEs

* Faster Payments: Accelerates receivables
realization.

* Competitive Rates : Enables _ better

financing terms.
* No Collateral
asset pledging.

Financing without

* Improved Cash Flow: Supports working
capital management.

2. Raising and _ Accelerating ©MSME
Performance (RAMP)

RAMP is a World Bank-supported Central
Sector Scheme aimed at enhancing the
performance of MSMEs in India. The scheme's
duration is five years (FY 2022-23 to FY 2026-
27). The Government of India has approved a
Strategic Investment Plan (SIP) for the state,
with an amount of %107.07 Crores as the
Central share and 10.70 Crores as the state
share.

Major components under RAMP:

* Formalization of MSMEs

* Procurement and marketing support

* Export promotion programs.

* Increased participation in TReDS

* Creation of a supporting BDS ecosystem in
the state

¢ Enhanced uptake of MSME ZED

¢ Entrepreneurship and Skill Development
Programs with an emphasis on women and
SC/ST

a

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

3. Establishment of Technology Centers

The Government of India proposes to establish
Technology Canters and Extension Centers in a
Hub and Spoke model to cater to the needs of
MSMEs. These centers will provide access to
advanced manufacturing technologies, _ skill
manpower in the latest manufacturing
practices, and offer technical and business
support, including prototyping and
commercialization.

The Government of Andhra Pradesh is
conducting feasibility studies for setting up 17
extension centers in different locations across
the state. Consent has been received from JNTU,
Vizianagaram; SKU, Anantapuramu; and MIH,
APIIC, Kopparthy for the establishment of
extension centers on their premises.

4. AP Micro, Small, and Medium

Enterprises Facilitation Council

The Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises
Development Act of 2006 provides for the
constitution of Micro and Small Enterprises
Facilitation Councils by state governments for
the redressal and recovery of amounts due to
delayed payments. The APMSE Facilitation
Council, a quasi-judicial body, facilitates
payments to MSEs from their buyers. Four new
regional-level facilitation councils have been
established for the speedy disposal of pending
cases.

5. Skill Development

This intervention aims to identify existing and
aspiring MSMEs and empower them through
Entrepreneurship and _ Skill Development
Programs, with a special focus on women and
SC/ST categories. The Government of Andhra
Pradesh proposes to conduct a skill census to
estimate the skill gap.

6.1.19 Government Land Allotment Policy

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has issued
uniform guidelines for the allotment of


--- PAGE 109 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

government land for various purposes to
different government departments and private
organizations.

The A.P. Land Management Authority is
responsible for scrutinizing
applications/proposals received from the
District Collector and making recommendations
to the government for final approval.

6.1.20 AP Export Scenario (Export
Promotion Wing)

Andhra Pradesh is the sixth largest exporting
state in India for FY 2023-24. The state
contributes significantly to India's exports in
various sectors:

Table 6. 2 AP Export Scenario

Contribution to
S. No Sector |
India's Exports
1 Tobacco 88.05%
2 Silver 75.71%
3 Fertilizers 47.85%
4 Marine Products 40%
Ship, Boat &
5 Floating 36.84%
Structures
6 Bulk Drugs 10.32%
D
7 me 7.85%
Formulations

Andhra Pradesh's strategy focuses on coast-led
industrial development, leveraging its longest
coastline in India. The state has adopted a long-
term growth and development strategy with a
strong emphasis on _ globally competitive
exports.The total sector wise exports from
Andhra Pradesh in the last year is Annexed at
Annexure 6.5

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has issued
the Andhra Pradesh Export Promotion Policy
(APEX 2022-27) to establish the state as a
leading export hub through the development of
world-class logistics and export infrastructure,
promotion of high-quality products, enabling
robust export-oriented institutions, and

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

creating integrated export ecosystems from
districts to ports.

6.1.21 District as Export Hubs (DEH)

The DEH initiative aims to attract investments
in districts to boost manufacturing and exports,
provide an ecosystem for innovation and
technology use, and make _ exporters
competitive. This initiative helps reduce
transaction costs for exporters at various stages
of the export cycle and generates employment.
It also aims to provide a global reach for
products and services from districts through e-
commerce and digital marketing.

Under the DEH scheme, the Government of
India has identified three districts in Andhra
Pradesh for the first phase of implementation:

* Visakhapatnam: Marine Products,
Engineering Works, and Health Services

¢ East Godavari: Coir & Coir Products,
Cashew, and Nursery Plants

¢ Guntur: Chillies, Turmeric, and Cotton Yarn

The district wise products identified under the
‘District as Export Hub’ scheme having export
potentiality are annexed at Annexure 6.6

Under the District as Export Hubs scheme, the
Government of India has identified three
districts in the first phase: Visakhapatnam, East
Godavari, and Guntur. The identified products
for these districts are:

¢ Visakhapatnam District: Marine Products,
Engineering Works, and Health Services.

¢ East Godavari District: Coir & Coir Products,
Cashew, and Nursery Plants.

¢ Guntur District: Chillies, Turmeric, and
Cotton Yarn.


--- PAGE 110 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6.2 INDUSTRIAL CORRIDORS

Government of Andhra Pradesh is working on
implementation of 3 industrial corridors which
not only promote industries but also create
substantial urban infrastructure and contribute
for the overall development of the State. The
details of the corridors are presented below:.

6.2.1 Vizag Chennai Industrial Corridor
(VCIC)

Economic growth in Andhra Pradesh has
matched the national rate over the last decade,
despite challenges from the state's division. The
development of industries in the northern
region (Metallurgical, Pharmaceutical,
Petrochemical, IT) and the southern region
(Food Processing, Leather, Auto) will boost the
state's industrial base. Increased container
movement through seaports and enhanced
power generation capacity have further
facilitated economic development. Growth will
be supported by domestic investment and
foreign direct investment (FDI) in both existing
and new industries, along with strengthened
infrastructure.

The Visakhapatnam-Chennai Industrial
Corridor (VCIC), part of the East Coast
Economic Corridor (ECEC), is crucial for India's
Act East Policy and Make in India campaign.
This nearly 800-kilometer corridor links India
with ASEAN and East Asian economies.

The Visakhapatnam Chennai Industrial
Corridor Development Program (VCICDP) aims
to increase the manufacturing — sector's
contribution to the state's GDP, trade, and
employment. It focuses on improving ease of
doing business, strengthening VCIC
infrastructure, and enhancing institutional

capacities and program management.

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

6.2.2 The Key objectives of VCIC:

* Increase the manufacturing — sector’s
contribution to state and national output.

* Increase employment opportunities in
formal sector.

* Increase labour productivity &wages.

* Promoting dynamic SMEs

¢ Integrating India and the VCIC region with
the global production networks, particularly
East and Southeast Asia

As part of the VCIC Development Program,
several projects have been identified to
enhance ease of doing business and attract
industrial investments. The Asian Development
Bank (ADB) is partnering with the Government
of Andhra Pradesh to develop the industrial
corridor.

6.2.3. The VCIC loan includes:

A policy-based loan to support policy reforms
and institutional development in the state's
industrial sector. A project loan for priority
projects within the
Visakhapatnam-Chennai_ Industrial Corridor
(VCIC).

infrastructure

The policy loan provides budgetary support for
accelerated industrial development through
reforms. The project loan supports investments
in internal and external infrastructure, such as
roads, drains, street lighting, Plug & Play
facilities, CETP, water distribution systems, and
connectivity to highways and uninterrupted
power.

The ADB approved a $500 million multi-tranche
financing facility for the VCICDP on September
26, 2016.


--- PAGE 111 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<> Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Table 6. 3 Details of VCIC Loans

Amount ($ Million) and Share (%)
Policy Loan Project Loan Total

Source

Asian Development Bank 125.0 (100.0%) 500 (70.0%) 625 (74.4%)

Government of Andhra Pradesh 0.00 (0.0%) 215 (30.0%) 215 (25.6%)

Total 125.0 (100.0%) | 715(100.0%) | 840 (100.0%)

Policy-Based Loan: Supports the Government in
policy, institutional, and governance reforms to
promote accelerated industrial development:

* Investment climate - ‘Ease of Doing
Business’

* Strengthening institutional structures for
corridor management

* Capacity building and skill development

* Policy reforms & investment promotion

Project Loan: Supports investments in physical
infrastructure in selected nodes:

* Improvement of road connectivity projects

* Upgradation of energy transmission and
distribution infrastructure

¢ Augmentation of urban water supply
infrastructure in corridor nodes

¢ Internal and common infrastructure for
industrial parks

The Department of Industries and Commerce
(DOIC) is the executing agency, with a Program
Management Unit (PMU) under the
Commissioner of Industries (COI) responsible
for planning, implementation, monitoring,
supervision, and coordination of all activities
under the VCICDP. The project is being
implemented by four Project Implementation
Units (PIUs): Andhra Pradesh Industrial
Infrastructure Corporation (APIIC), Andhra
Pradesh Road Development Corporation
(APRDC), Transmission Corporation of Andhra
Pradesh (AP Transco), and_ Greater
Visakhapatnam Municipal Corporation (GVMC).

nn

6.2.4 Tranche-I & PBL Loan of VCICDP:

* Loan agreements signed on 23rd February
2017 by DEA, ADB, and GoAP.

* Eight sub-projects approved; 70.80%
physical progress achieved.

6.2.5 Tranche-II, VCICDP:

* Loan agreement signed on 23rd May 2023
for USD 141.12 million.

* Seven sub-projects: six awarded, one
commenced, five pending commencements,
and one under consideration for dropping.

6.2.6 Socio Economic Impact of the
Projects

1. Establishment of 1 MLD Common
Effluent Treatment Plant(CETP) at
Naidupeta Industrial Cluster

The plant has been completed and
commissioned to serve over 70 existing
industrial units and future investments around
Industrial Park, Naidupeta. It aims to support
MSMEs that struggle to establish and operate
individual ETPs due to their limited size,
operations, and financial resources. Effluents
from these industries will be treated at a
common Treatment Plant (CETP). The CETP
will have long-term socio-economic impacts by
effectively treating effluents, protecting public
health and the environment, and attracting
capital investments to the project area.



--- PAGE 112 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

2. Augmentation of Utility Services at
Naidupeta Industrial Cluster:

This project aims to _ positively impact
livelihoods by attracting new investments,
providing skill development and _ training,
localizing the value chain, and improving
foreign direct investment. It enhances working
conditions for construction labor and factory
workers, thereby reducing migration through
increased direct and indirect employment.
Physical work is 75.28% complete.

3. Providing Bulk Water Supply for
Naidupeta Industrial Cluster:

This sub-project involves drawing water from
the Telugu Ganga Canal to supply existing
industries and future investments. It aims to
ensure sustained economic growth and poverty
eradication by improving productivity in the
Naidupeta Industrial Area. Physical work is
81.65% complete.

4. 112 MLD Bulk Water Supply to Southern
Andhra Pradesh Industrial Clusters:

This sub-project supplies water to industrial
clusters in Krishnapatnam Node, Naidupeta,
Yerpedu-Srikalahasti, IP Mambattu,
Chinnapanduru, and SRI City, benefiting 64,617
acres of industrial area. It aims to accelerate
industrial development, increase employment,
and enhance socio-economic conditions.
Physical work is 63.10% complete.

5. Augmenting Power Distribution Capacity
at Visakhapatnam Node:

With the commissioning of substations at
Kapuluppada, Atchutapuram, and Chandanada,
an additional 900 MW load will be available for
over 1,200 industries. This project improves
industrial productivity and provides
uninterrupted power supply, enhancing socio-
economic development. Physical work is
65.59% complete.

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

6. Augmenting Power Distribution Capacity
at Srikalahasthi-Yerpedu Industrial
Node:

This completed sub-project has improved the
voltage profile and added significant load
capacity to the Yerpedu, Rachagunneri, and
Naidupeta Industrial Clusters. It supports over
700 existing industries and attracts new
investments, boosting industrial productivity
and socio-economic development.

7. Widening and _ Strengthening of
Samarlakota-Rajanagaram Road:

This sub-project involves widening a 29 km
stretch of road to four lanes, enhancing
connectivity from Kakinada Port to National
Highway-16. It aims to promote inclusive and
sustainable economic growth, improve physical
connectivity, create employment opportunities,
and catalyze changes in agricultural patterns.
Physical work is 45.10% complete.

8. Distribution Network Improvements for
NRW Reduction and 24x7 Supply in
GVMC Area:

This sub-project aims to provide 24x7 water
supply to 48,000 households in
Visakhapatnam's North-West Zone by
constructing reservoirs, a pump house, and
extensive water mains. It targets sustainable
water management, reliable water supply, and
improved sanitation services, enhancing local
economies and job opportunities. The cloud-
based SCADA system is expected to reduce
water wastage significantly. Physical work is
74.41% complete.

6.2.7 Grant Projects

1. Establishment of 3 MW Solar Energy
Park with floating panels’ on
Meghadrigedda Reservoir:

This sub-project, completed and commissioned
to promote climate resilience in Visakhapatnam


--- PAGE 113 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

city, has significant positive environmental and
technical impacts locally and globally. The solar
park, which does not occupy any habitable or
productive areas, features. solar panels
deployed in the Meghadrigedda_ water
reservoir. This setup reduces land-use issues,
saves water by mitigating evaporation, and
improves the water security of the drinking
water reservoir.

2. Watershed development and
Rejuvenation of Mudasarlova catchment
area:

Another climate resilience initiative, the
"Rejuvenation of Mudasarlova’ Lake" in
Visakhapatnam city, has been completed. This
project enhances the water storage capacity of
the lake's catchment area through flood control,
soil and water conservation, green cover
creation, and groundwater recharge. Around
10,650 plants have been planted around
Mudasarlova Lake, aiding in carbon
sequestration and reducing carbon levels in the
environment, thereby improving overall
wellbeing. Additionally, awareness programs
on better solid waste disposal and sanitation
were conducted with women groups, youth,
and community leaders.

3. Procurement of e-Vehicles for solid
waste management and_ passenger
movement in GVMC:

This sub-project involves procuring 65 e-
vehicles for solid waste management in GVMC
and 10 e-vehicles for passenger movement on
the beach road. It aims to reduce GHG emissions
by replacing petrol and diesel vehicles in
Visakhapatnam City, including the beach road
area.

4. Gender Equality and Social Inclusion
program being implemented under VCIC
Development Program:

To ensure meaningful participation and
benefits for all social groups, a Gender Equality
and Social Inclusion (GESI) action plan and a
Consultation and Participation Plan (CPP) have

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

been implemented. Over 22,000 people,
including 13,000 women, participated in
discussions on project designs, asset valuation,
compensation, female health and hygiene,
HIV/AIDS, communicable diseases, female
security, road safety, and women's rights. More
than 70% of the participants in community
orientation seminars, public meetings, and
gender sensitization programs were women.

5. Gender inclusive designing of industrial
and roads projects:

The VCICDP includes two industrial projects
and one road project in Tranche-1. These
projects feature gender-responsive designs,
such as walking paths/service lanes, separate
toilets for women, telephone helplines,
adequate lighting, safety measures like signage
and demarcated road crossings, and well-lit,
safe public spaces. Stakeholder consultations
were conducted to ensure _ sustainable
operation and maintenance of these facilities.

6. Gender sensitization of contractors and
construction workers:

All 10 contractors and construction workers
involved in the program received orientation on
gender-inclusive practices, covering
opportunities for female workers, equal pay,
prevention of sexual harassment, provision of
worksite facilities, compliance with the Building
and Construction Workers Act, and adherence
to core labor standards. Additionally, 1,276
workers, including 258 women, were trained on
gender aspects through 20 programs across 11
projects. These programs led to the provision of
worksite facilities such as separate toilets,
medical and créche facilities, and training on
preventing sexual harassment, which increased
female participation in project activities from
5% to 18%.

7. Orientation of factories in Gol and State
provisions for female workers:

All factories in the project areas of
Visakhapatnam and Chittoor nodes have been
informed about the Government of India and


--- PAGE 114 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

State Government provisions for female factory
workers, including maternity benefits, equal
pay, worksite facilities, welfare provisions,
worksite safety, and training. During the year,
120 factories at Atchutapuram and Naidupeta
industrial parks were oriented on these
provisions. The orientation programs helped
review and ensure the implementation of these
provisions, resulting in women making up more
than 18% of the total applicants on the single
desk portal for setting up businesses.
Additionally, 61.83% of women entrepreneurs
received incentives from the state government.

8. Awareness programs for public, youth,
women groups, construction workers:

The implementation of large-scale industrial
infrastructure projects often results in an influx
of migrants, necessitating awareness sessions
on human trafficking, HIV/AIDS, communicable
diseases, and road safety. Under VCICDP
subprojects, multiple awareness programs
were conducted with key stakeholders,
including local bodies, NGOs, and government
departments. Over 20,000 people, including
13,241 women, participated in public
consultations, workshops, seminars, and house
campaigns.

9. Maintaining Core Labor Standards at
Worksites:

Several industrial and sector policies have been
introduced under the VCICDP to stimulate
industrial growth with a focus on women.
These policies include enforcing labor rights,
creating a safe working environment through
measures against sexual harassment and
gender discrimination, ensuring equal pay for
equal work for both women and men, and
providing private, safe, sex-segregated toilets
with running water, soap, and a private space
for menstrual hygiene. Additionally, training on
health and hygiene is provided.

10. The expected impacts of VCIC on Socio
Economic Development of A.P. by 2035:

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

* Manufacturing sector output in VCIC
jurisdiction increased to INR4.20Trillion
(2015 Base Line Rs.1.10Trillion)

¢ Labour Productivity of Key Industries in
VCIC jurisdiction
Rs.2.60Millions per employee (2015 Base
Line Rs.2.30Million per employee)

increased to

¢ Share of women employed in Manufacturing
Sector in VCIC jurisdiction increased to 33%
(2015 Base Line 28%)

¢ 24-Hour Power Supply made available to
100% of Manufacturing Industries in VCIC
jurisdiction.

6.3 INDUSTRIAL
INFRASTRUCTURE

6.3.1 National Investment and
Manufacturing Zones (NIMZ)

The Government of India (Gol) announced the
National Manufacturing Policy in 2011, aiming
to increase the share of manufacturing GDP to
25% within a decade and create 100 million
jobs. National Investment and Manufacturing
Zones (NIMZs) are to be developed as
integrated industrial townships with state-of-
the-art infrastructure, clean and _ energy-
efficient technology, social infrastructure, and
skill development facilities.

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has
proposed NIMZs in Chittoor and Prakasam
Districts, with in-principle approval from the
Gol. The Andhra_ Pradesh Industrial
Infrastructure Corporation (APIIC) engaged
IIDC Limited(an IL&FS Group Company)to
prepare the Techno-Economic Feasibility Study
(TEFS) report, development plan, and final
application, which have been submitted for
final approval.


--- PAGE 115 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6.4 APIIC

A Snapshot of Activities

Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure
Corporation Ltd. (APIIC), an undertaking of the
Government of Andhra Pradesh, is a premier
organization dedicated to providing industrial
infrastructure through the development of
industrial parks across the state. As part of its
mission to foster industrial growth in Andhra
Pradesh, the APIIC aims to develop industrial
clusters throughout the state.

APIIC facilitates the provision of infrastructure
in both developed and existing layouts, the
allotment of developed plots, industrial
investment, project planning and development,
and the promotion of infrastructure projects
under the Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
model. APIIC has also been instrumental in
developing Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
across various districts in Andhra Pradesh.
Details of the industrial clusters across the state
and the 22JVs executed by the APII C are shown
in Table 6.4 and Chart 6.1

Table 6. 4 Details of Industrial Clusters

Description No. of Parks
APIIC Industrial Parks 264
UDL 283
Multi product SEZs -
IT SEZs -
Growth Centers -
BULK -
Non-APIIC parks 24
Total 571

10
a
100% Subsidy of JV with JV with Private

APIIC Governement Entities
Entities

Chart 6. 1 Details of 22 JVs executed by the APIIC

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Industrial Land Allotments from 1stJanuary
2024 to 31st December 2024

Andhra Pradesh Industrial Infrastructure
Corporation Ltd. (APIIC) serves as the Nodal
Agency for all industrial infrastructure projects
in the state, including IT, Biotech, Apparel
Parks, and Special Economic Zones (SEZs). Its
core functions encompass the acquisition and
alienation of government lands for industrial
parks, identification of sites for industrial areas,
and development of layouts.

Table 6. 5 Details of Industrial Land Allotments
from 1st Jan'24 to 31st Dec'24

5,862
acres
816
79,261

Allotted Industrial Land

Number of Units

Employment Potential

Proposed Investment %81,062

(2024) Crores

Land Bank for Allotment

New Initiatives
MSE Cluster Development programme

The MSE-Cluster Development Program of the
Government of India has initiated three new
industrial parks and upgraded existing ones.
The details are illustrated in Figure 6.1


--- PAGE 116 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Old MSE-CDP Scheme
14 PROJECTS
INR 139 Cr.
Tl Completed 3 Under Progress

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

NEW MSE-CDP Scheme

14 PROJECTS
INR 139 Cr.
15 Ongoing 7 Pending final
(INR 231 Cr.) approval from Gol

12 ID Projects 3 FFC Projects

Fig 6. 1 Projects Comparison by Old MSE-CDP and New MSE-CDP Scheme

APIIC as the SIA of GoAP, has accorded approval
for 29 projects of which, 11 are completed, 18
are under advance stages of completion.
Further, 28 new proposals have been submitted
to GoAP, which are at various stages of
approval.

6.4.1 Mega Food Parks

The Ministry of Food Processing Industries,
Government of India, has sanctioned the
establishment of a Mega Food Park at
Mallavalli, Bapulapadu Mandal in Krishna
District, with an estimated cost of %112.97
Crores and a projected investment of %400
Crores. The Government of India has released
its third installment of the grant, totaling
43.55 Crores as of 30.03.2020.

All infrastructure works at the Central
Processing Centre (CPC) are completed, with a
trial run pending, and the facility is expected to
become operational very shortly. Additionally,
the Primary Processing Centre at Peddapuram
has been completed.

6.4.2 PM Gati Shakti - Special Assistance to
States for Capital Investment(SASCI)

The Government of India has allocated %202
Crores for the development of a 46 MLD
External Water Supply project and a railway
siding facility in Kopparthy. The project works
have commenced and are scheduled for
completion by mid-2025. This initiative aims to

nn

enhance the industrial ecosystem, making it
more conducive for the upcoming industrial
node in Kopparthy under the Visakhapatnam-
Chennai Industrial Corridor (VCIC).

6.4.3. Industrial Corridors

Under the "National Industrial Corridor
Development Programme,” APIIC is developing
industrial hubs within three industrial

corridors:

1. Visakhapatnam - Chennai Industrial
Corridor (VCIC)

2. Chennai - Bengaluru Industrial Corridor
(CBIC)

3. Hyderabad - Bangalore Industrial Corridor
(HBIC)

These corridors are being implemented with
financial assistance from the Asian
Development Bank (ADB) and the National
Industrial Corridor Development and
Implementation Trust (NICDIT).

I. Visakhapatnam-Chennai Industrial

Corridor (VCIC)

VCIC includes three industrial nodes at Vizag,
Chittoor, and Kopparthy, planned over an
extent of 33,000 acres, with 30% currently
being developed as a ‘Start-up’ area. Various
industrial infrastructure projects with an
estimated investment of %5,000 Crores have
been planned, supported by a 23,300 Crore loan
from ADB in two tranches. Projects under


--- PAGE 117 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Tranche-I], with an estimated investment of
~%2,300 Crores, are at advanced stages of
implementation, with some _ targeted for
completion in the upcoming quarter.

Vizag Node:

Development of two clusters: a bulk drug park
(2,002 acres) with financial assistance from the
Government of India under the Department of
Pharmaceuticals, and a steel cluster (Phase-1:
2,200 acres, with an additional 4,000 acres
planned).

Chittoor Node:

Srikalahasti-Yerpedu cluster: Development of
major infrastructure and utility services in a
start-up area of 2,628 acres with an estimated
cost of 463 Crores.

Kopparthy Node:

Phase 1 development of 2,596 acres with a
trunk infrastructure cost of ~%1,264 Crores,
implemented with financial assistance from
NICDIT. The Cabinet Committee of Economic
Affairs approved the node on 28.08.2024.

II. Chennai-Bengaluru Industrial Corridor
(CBIC)

Orvakal — 2,621 Ac.

Kopparthy — 2,596 Ac.

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

The Government of India has planned the
development of the  Chennai-Bengaluru
Industrial Corridor (CBIC) along a proposed
corridor between Chennai, Bengaluru, and
Chitradurga, covering about 560 km. This
corridor will influence areas across Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, and Karnataka. Andhra
Pradesh hosts an_ industrial node at
Krishnapatnam North Node, spread _ over
10,834.5 acres. A start-up area of 2,500 acres is
currently proposed to be developed with an
estimated cost of %2,139 Crores, with financial
assistance from NICDIT.

Ill. Hyderabad-Bengaluru Industrial

Corridor (HBIC)

The HBIC will influence areas across Telangana,
Andhra Pradesh, and Karnataka, connecting
central and southern parts of the country. The
Orvakal node in Andhra Pradesh has been
identified for development under HBIC. The
Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs
approved the Orvakal Industrial Node on
28.08.2024. Project development activities are
being initiated to create an industrial node at
Orvakal over an extent of 2,621 acres in Phase-
1, with a trunk infrastructure cost of %1,781
Crores.

Visakhapatnam
_—* Steel Cluster — 2,200 Ac.
+ AP Bulk Drug Park — 2,002 Ac.

_ Krishnapatnam
— - * Startup Area — 2,500 Ac.

Tirupati: Srikalahasti Yerpedu —

2,628 Ac. (Startup Area)


--- PAGE 118 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6.5 ANDHRA PRADESH GAS
INFRASTRUCTURE
CORPORATION PVT LIMITED

Andhra Pradesh Gas Infrastructure Corporation
(APGIC) is a joint venture between APIIC and
APGENCO with a 51:49 equity ratio. Established
in 2009, APGIC aims to facilitate the State
Government's participation in the upstream
(exploration and _ production), midstream
(service sector), and downstream (distribution)
activities related to the petroleum and natural
gas sector. The corporation's objective is to
optimize the utilization of natural gas in Andhra
Pradesh, particularly in the Krishna Godavari
Basin, and to transform the state into a gas-
based economy.

Key Details:

¢ Authorized Share Capital: 3100 Crores
¢ Paid-up Capital: 355.44 Crores (as of the
present date)

Objectives

¢ Natural gas exploration and production
activities, particularly in the Krishna
Godavari Basin.

¢ Transforming Andhra Pradesh into a gas-
based economy.

Major Projects

* Consortium Formation (2009): APGIC
formed a consortium with ONGC, OIL, NTPC,
and British Gas, holding a 10% stake.

¢ Hydrocarbon Exploration Blocks: The
consortium won four hydrocarbon
exploration blocks (1 deep water block and
3 shallow water blocks: KG-DWN-2009/1,
KG-OSN-2009/1, KG-OSN-2009/2, and KG-
OSN-2009/4).

¢ Shallow Water Blocks: Operated by ONGC
with various consortium partners, including
APGIC with a 10% participating interest.
These blocks are located in shallow waters
off Ongole in the Krishna Basin.

Ee

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

¢ Financial Contributions: APGIC has paid
%30.17 Crores against ONGC cash calls for
exploration and production activities. As of
31.10.2024, the payment due to ONGC,
including cash calls, interest, and service tax
GST, is approximately %706.39 Crores.

Current Status

Exploration work by ONGC ceased in 2018 due
to the failure of all blocks, and no further
activity has been undertaken by APGIC.

The Draft Andhra Pradesh State Gas Policy is
currently under preparation.

Other Activities

* Andhra Pradesh Gas _ Distribution
Corporation (APGDC): Established in
January 2011 as a subsidiary of APGIC to
develop natural gas infrastructure in
Andhra Pradesh. APGDC focuses on
midstream activities such as laying natural
gas pipelines, regional grids, CNG stations,
and developing a regional gas grid. It also
aims to establish a fast-track FSRU-based
LNG regasification terminal at Kakinada to
meet the immediate gas requirements for
power plants, industries, and domestic
supply.

¢ Joint Venture: In September 2011, APGDC
became a joint venture between GAIL Gas
and GoAP entities, with a 50:50 equity
partnership. APGIC has invested %31.19
Crores in APGDC so far.

6.6 INDEX OF INDUSTRIAL
PRODUCTION (IIP) &
ANNUAL SURVEY OF
INDUSTRIES (ASI)

The Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) is the
principal source of industrial statistics in the
state. It provides comprehensive statistical
information to assess and evaluate changes in
the growth, composition, and structure of the
organized manufacturing sector. This sector
includes activities related to manufacturing


--- PAGE 119 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

processes, repair services, gas and water
supply, and cold storage. The ASI is conducted
annually to collect data from organized
manufacturing units registered under Section
2m(i) [20 or more workers with the aid of
power] and 2m(ii) [40 or more workers
without the aid of power] of the Factories Act,
1948, as well as units registered under the
Beedi and Cigar (Conditions of Employment)
Act, 1966.

Objectives of ASI:

* Estimation of Contribution: Assess the
contribution of manufacturing industries to
the state income.

¢ Structural Study: Conduct a systematic
study of the structure of the industry.

¢ Influence Analysis:Analyse various factors
influencing industries in the state.

* Policy Formulation: Provide a factual and
systematic basis for policy formulation.

Data for 16 principal characteristics based on
the ASI from 2017-18 to 2021-22 is provided in
Annexure 6.7.

Index of Industrial Production (IIP)

The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) is a key
measure of industrial growth, reflecting the
relative change in physical production in the
industrial sector over a_ specific period
compared to the previous period. The IIP is
estimated monthly for the manufacturing,
mining & quarrying, and electricity sectors. Its
main objective is to estimate the contribution of
the industrial sector to the Gross State
Domestic Product (GSDP). The IIP in the state is
compiled with the base year 2011-12 for 23
industrial classifications at the 2-digit level
under the manufacturing sector.

IIP Growth Rates (2023-24 compared to
2022-23):

¢ Mining and Quarrying: -7.21%
¢ Manufacturing: 2.13%

¢ Electricity: 12.84%

* General Index: 2.85%

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

The indices of JIP for the state are detailed in
Annexure 6.8.

6.7 MINES AND GEOLOGY

Minerals are a key source of revenue for
Andhra Pradesh, often referred to as “Ratna
Garbha”, and play a significant role in the state's
economic growth. The state is rich in a diverse
range of mineral resources, including crude oil,
natural gas, Barytes, heavy mineral beach
sands, manganese, limestone, dolomite, quartz,
feldspar, silica sand, semi-precious stones, ball
clay, laterite, iron ore, gold, diamonds, mica,
asbestos, calcite, uranium, lead, zinc, shale,
Pyrophyllite, steatite, serpentine, graphite,
Kyanite, vermiculite, clays, ochre, black and
colored granites, limestone slabs, fuller’s earth,
marble, road metal, building stone, ballast,
gravel, mosaic chips, and ordinary sand.

6.7.1 Department of Mines and Geology

The Department of Mines and Geology oversees
the development of the mineral sector and the
collection of mineral revenue for the state
exchequer. Responsibilities include processing
mineral concession applications, granting
mineral leases, approving mine plans,
inspecting mines, curbing illicit mining and
transportation, and conducting vigilance
activities.

Significance of the Mining Sector

Mining is crucial for India's economy, providing
essential raw materials for industries like steel,
power, and cement. The Government of India's
Vikasit Bharat 2047 initiative aims to promote
the manufacturing ecosystem, highlighting the
importance of the mining sector. Incremental
growth in mining and quarrying significantly
impacts industrial production and GDP growth.
Andhra Pradesh, with its abundant resources,
plays a critical role in meeting the demand for
minerals and _ basic metals, contributing
significantly to India's economic growth.


--- PAGE 120 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6.7.2 Key Mineral Resources

Copper, Zinc, Silver:
Bondalamottu in Guntur district.

Agnigundala,

Nepheline Syenite: Guntur and Prakasam
districts.

Uranium: Thummalapalli, YSR Kadapa
district.

Iron Ore: Dharwar Super Group Meta
in Ananthapuramu District,

Kurnool, and YSR

sediments
Prakasam, Krishna,
Kadapa districts.

Granite Varieties: Chimakurthy Black
Galaxy, Steel Grey, Ocean Blue, Black Pearl
in Prakasam; Blue’ in
Srikakulam; Vizianagaram Green in
Vizianagaram; River White, Kashmir White
& Moon White in Visakhapatnam; Yellow

Srikakulam

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Granite in East Godavari; Silver Pearl, Indian
Labrador, Blur Paradise, Copper Green,
Platinum Blur in Guntur; Viscon White,
Tiger Black, Kuppam Green English Teak in
Chittoor; Pista Green in YSR Kadapa; Chilli
Red in Ananthapuramu; Chocolate Brown in
Kurnool.

6.7.3. Leases and Mineral Revenue

AS

of the latest data, there are 174 mining

leases for major minerals and 3,831 quarry

leases for minor minerals in the state. The

mining and mineral sector contributed Rs.
2,031 Crores to the state exchequer during the
fiscal year 2024-25 (up to January 10, 2025),
with major minerals contributing Rs. 737

Cro

res and minor minerals Rs. 1,294 Crores.

Table 6. 6 Details of Mineral Revenue Achievement (Rs. In Crores)

Year Major Minor Sand Total
2015-16 655 786 55 1,496
2016-17 600 1102 0 1,702
2017-18 1047 1100 0 2,147
2018-19 1114 1349 0 2,463
2019-20 683 1149 240 2,072
2020-21 633 1400 425 2,458
2021-22 797 2060 590 3,447
2022-23 874 2152 451 3,477
2023-24 1011 2163 251 3,425
2024-25* 737 1294 0 2,031

(*up to 10th Jan 2025)

6.7.4 Action Plan for 2025-26

Key Interventions

nn

Policy Reforms: Preparing an effective State
Mining Policy.
Revamp of Minor Mineral Policy Regimes.

Promotion of Exploration Activities.
Auction of Mineral Blocks.
Administration.

Promotion of Mineral-Based Industries.



--- PAGE 121 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Detailed Activities

Policy Reforms

Develop a State Mining Policy focusing on
exploration, sustainability, technology,
skilled manpower, and enhancing ease of
doing business.

Introduce streamlined permitting processes
and a single-window clearance system.
Establish frameworks for community
engagement and benefit sharing through
District Mineral Foundations (DMFs).
Promotion of Exploration Activities
Utilize NMET funds for major mineral block
exploration.

Collect 2% S. Fee from minor mineral
leaseholders for the Mineral Exploration
Research and Innovation Trust (MERIT).
Convert major mineral blocks (G4) to G2/G3
levels for auction.

Estimate resources of expired/surrendered
major mineral leases.

Explore manganese deposits in
Vizianagaram and Srikakulam, and iron ore
deposits in Anantapur and Prakasam.
Identify deep-seated minerals and explore
minor minerals for industrial purposes.
Auction of Major Mineral Blocks

Prepare an annual auction program for 56
major mineral blocks (Limestone - 23,
Manganese - 15, Iron-Ore - 13, Diamond -
2, Lead & Zinc - 2, Copper - 1).

Conduct a roadshow in February 2025 to
disseminate information to potential
investors.

Obtain necessary approvals from HPC
meetings, and state and central
governments.

Revamp of Minor Mineral Policy Regimes
Conduct benchmarking studies with other
states to introduce  investor-friendly
policies.

Rationalize statutory taxes to facilitate
small-scale investments.

Promotion of Mineral-Based Industries

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

* Identify focus minerals (e.g., manganese,
iron ore, heavy minerals, beach sands,
limestone, gold, diamond, dolomite, oil &
natural gas, uranium, garnet, granite,
titanium).

* Encourage investments by promoting
mineral-based industrial clusters:

a. Develop ceramics industrial clusters for
clays.

b. Develop manganese processing clusters
in Vizianagaram.

c. Promote beneficiation plants for low-
grade iron ore and CDW grade barytes.

d. Promote metallurgical silicon and poly
silicon manufacturing clusters.

e. Promote solar glass making units with

long-term linkages to silica
sand/quartzite.
6. Port-Based Mineral Processing
Industries

* Leverage Andhra Pradesh's 974 km
coastline for importing raw materials and
establishing beneficiation plants near ports
to enhance strategic advantages and
facilitate efficient mineral processing and
exports.

6.7.5 Social Welfare Measures

¢ Establish District Mineral Foundation Trusts
(DMFT) in all 26 districts to implement
developmental and welfare projects in
mining-affected areas.

¢ Collect Rs. 2,138 Crores under DMF, with Rs.
2,075 Crores sanctioned for over 20,678
projects/schemes.

¢ Allocate Rs. 1,198 Crores for physical
infrastructure, Rs. 378 Crores for drinking
water supply, and Rs. 213 Crores for
education, healthcare, and welfare under
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Kalyan Yojana
(PMKKyY).

* Sponsor the conservation of the Oliver
Ridley Turtle project in Srikakulam through
DMF funds.


--- PAGE 122 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
INDUSTRIES

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

6.8 HANDLOOMS & TEXTILES

The Department of Handlooms and Textiles
oversees handlooms and power looms in both
the cooperative and decentralized sectors, as
well as the establishment of apparel and textile
parks in the garment sector. Andhra Pradesh
plays a significant role in the handloom
industry.

6.8.1 Welfare Schemes and Progress (up to
31st December 2024)

1. New Policy - AP Textiles, Apparel and
Garment Policy 4.0 (2024-29):The
Government has implemented the new
"Andhra Pradesh Textile, Apparel and
Garment Policy 4.0 (2024-29)" as per
G.O.Ms.No.89, dated 11.12.2024.

2. Sanction of Small Cluster Development
Programme (SCDP) by  DCH:The
Government of India sanctioned 5 SCDPs
managed by the DCH, benefiting 1,041
beneficiaries across various districts with a
project cost of Rs. 544.100 lakhs. The first
installment of Rs. 209.379 lakhs has been

released.
3. Handloom Marketing Assistance
(Exhibitions):Handloom Weavers

Cooperative Societies organized exhibitions
in 5 locations to sell piled-up stocks from
the COVID pandemic. A total of 313
societies benefited, generating Rs. 6.22
Crores in sales. Guntur recorded the highest
footfall and sales with 1,80,000 visitors
generating Rs. 2.46 Crores, benefiting 87
societies. Vijayawada followed with
1,20,000 visitors generating Rs. 2.83 Crores,
benefiting 108 societies.

4. Collaborations: Initial meetings were held
to collaborate with TATA Taneria and
Aadyam (Aditya Birla Group) to provide
continuous work for identified weavers.

5. Weavers Shala (Under MP LAD Funds):
Two weavers’ shalas were established: one
in Vizianagaram with 500 beneficiaries at a
cost of Rs. 1.50 Cr, and another in Kurnool

nn

10.

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

with 500 beneficiaries at a cost of Rs. 1.20
Cr. These shalas_ provide advanced
machinery and training in the latest
designs.

Cluster and Skill Development: Four
Cluster Development Executives and four
Designers were appointed. Skill
development training was conducted to up-
skill weavers and artisans in producing new
products with new designs. Training
programs started in Guntur and East
Godavari Districts.

Weavers Mudra Scheme: The scheme
provided financial assistance to 1,182
weavers, totaling Rs. 11.78 Cr.

Raw Material Supply Scheme (RMSS):
The scheme aimed to provide quality yarn
and blends at subsidized rates. So far, 90
units have benefited with Rs. 10.68 Cr.
Open Network for Digital Commerce
(ONDC):This initiative promotes open
networks for digital exchanges of goods and
services. Currently, 532 handloom products
are onboarded.

Geographical Indication (GI): Ten
handloom products have been identified for
GI, which signifies their geographical origin
and linked qualities.

6.8.2 Plan of Action for Future

Schemes /Programmes

National Handloom Development
Programme (NHDP):

Submit proposals for projects targeting
weavers outside cluster areas, aiming to
benefit 244 weavers with Rs. 2.52 Cr.
Propose a Mega Handloom Cluster in
Dharmavaram to benefit 12,800 weavers
with Rs. 30.00 Cr GOI share.

Submit proposals for special projects in
Angara and Pitapuram, benefiting 1,260
weavers with Rs. 24.00 Cr GOI share, and a
Handloom & Handicraft Museum in
Amaravathi with Rs. 10.00 Cr GOI share.
Arrange 4 exhibitions during Sankranthi &
Ugadi Festivals and Bharat Tex-2025.


--- PAGE 123 ---
<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

INDUSTRIES

* Provide Rs. 1.00 Cr financial assistance to
200 beneficiaries under the Weavers Mudra
Scheme.

* Onboard 500 handloom products under
ONDC.

* Commence construction of Unity Mall at
Visakhapatnam.

6.8.3. Focus on Policy Initiatives

1. Weavers Shala:Continue providing
advanced machinery and training in
Vizianagaram and Kurnool.

2. Collaborations:Finalize MoUs with Taneria
and Aadyam to provide continuous work for
identified weavers.

6.9 STATE LEVEL PUBLIC
ENTERPRISES

There are 123 State Level Public Enterprises

(SLPEs) functioning in the State. The Annual

Financial Statement of few SLPEs for the Year

2024-25 are shown in Table 6.5

Table 6. 7 Details of State Level Public Enterprises (SLPEs)

SI. No Name of the SLPE Net worth Turnover Capital
Employed

1 _ | AP Forest Development 775.25 257.74 776.78
Corporation Ltd.,
AP State Road Transport

2 1,524.32 4,777.06 7,210.27 1,023.51
Corporation (APSRTC &APPTD)

3 AP Agro Industries Development 32.22 5.50 68.95
Corporation Ltd.,

4 AP State Minorities Finance 955 1,588.00 7A.81
Corporation Ltd.,
AP Eastern Power Distribution

5 555.54 23,372.27 | 9 -----
Corporation Ltd, (APEDCL)



--- PAGE 124 ---
ECONOMIC
INFRA-
STRUCTURE

Chapter

/



--- PAGE 125 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

7.ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

7.1 IRRIGATION

[oe infrastructure is one of the most
crucial contributors in Andhra Pradesh’s
overall economic growth. It comprises canals,
dams, reservoirs, tube-wells, borewells and
other water channelizing network. These
elements are instrumental in enhancing
agricultural productivity, thus making irrigation
vital for economic stability and agricultural
sustainability.

7.1.1 WATER AVALIABILITY

Andhra Pradesh has around 40 major, medium,
and minor rivers, out of which 15 are inter-
state rivers (Table 7.1). Water of Krishna and
Godavari rivers is shared based on resolution
awarded by water dispute tribunals, whereas
water of Bahudha, Vamsadhara, Nagavali,
Pennar, Palar, Ponniar Rivers is shared based
on Agreements among _ respective _ states.

Godavari, Krishna, Pennar, Vamsadhara and
Nagavali are the most prominent rivers in
peninsular India, and they supply water to
Andhra Pradesh for meeting its irrigation
needs.

However, availability and utilization of surface
and groundwater is uneven, with considerable
variation from one place to another. To ensure
uniform and equitable distribution of water, the
state government has taken several initiatives
like establishment of Smart water grids,
restoration of water bodies, development of
tank cascades and other micro irrigation works.
Other initiatives include _ installation of
automatic weather stations, rain gauges,
reservoir water level sensors, soil moisture
sensors, automatic groundwater level recorders
with telemetry system that can help generate
and disseminate data on real time basis through
web based digital system.

Table 7.1 Sharing of river waters between Andhra Pradesh and other surrounding States

SN | River Name States sharing rivers
1 Bahuda River
2 Mahendra Tanaya River
3 Poondi Minor Drainages AP & Orissa
4 Vamsadhara River
5 Nagavali River
6 Godavari River AP, Maharashtra, Orissa, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh & MP
7 Krishna River AP, Maharashtra & Karnataka
8 Pennar River AP & Karnataka
9 Araniar River
10 | Kortaliar River AP & Tamil Nadu
11 | Palar River
12 | Ponniar River AP, Karnataka & Tamil Nadu
13 | Budameru River
14 | Errakalava River AP & Telangana
15 | Tammileru River

ES



--- PAGE 126 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Enhancing Irrigation Potential

Given the growing demand of agricultural
produce and heavy reliance of state’s economic
activity on agriculture, Government of Andhra
Pradesh has realized the importance of
enhancing the state’s irrigation potential. As of
Dec 2024, 106.15 lakh acres of irrigation
potential has been created under major anicuts

on Krishna, Godavari and Pennar rivers.

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Projects like Nagarjuna Sagar, Telugu Ganga,
Somasila, SRBC, Vamsadhara, including other
medium irrigation projects/
schemes have contributed significantly towards
this endeavour. Irrigation potential created in
the state is classified based on the type of river.
The details of sector wise irrigation potential
created are shown in Table 7.2 and the district-
wise, source wise irrigation potential created is

and minor

shown in Annexure 7.1

Table 7.20. Sector Wise Irrigation Potential created up to 31.12.2024.

Sector Ayacut (Lakh acres)
Major Irrigation 66.81
Medium Irrigation 5.62
Minor Irrigation 25.60
APSIDC 8.12
Total 106.15

Andhra Pradesh has contemplated 40 Projects
(23 Major + 7 Medium + 4 Flood Banks + 6
Modernisation) that collectively aim to create
37.63 lakh acres of new Irrigation Potential
besides stabilization the existing 4.48 lakh
acres. The details of Ongoing Projects are given
in Annexure 7.2. Polavaram Irrigation Project is
a project of national importance and is being

developed under the Jalayagnam Programme
(Box 1). Other 54 irrigation projects worth over
Rs. 77,845 crore (Table 7.3) are _ being
implemented through Special Purpose Vehicles
to create 9.20 Lakh Acres new ayacut and for
stabilising 49.93 Lakh Acres of ayacut (details
annexed in Annexures 7.3, 7.4, 7.5 & 7.6 )

Table 7.3 Irrigation projects being implemented through Special Purpose Vehicles (SPV)

. Ayacut to be created .
SN SPV Project (Acres) Cumulative Cost
count New Stabilised | Of SPV (Rs crore)
1 | Andhra Pradesh Rayalaseema Drought
Mitigation Projects Development 33 8,08,000 | 39,25,971 40,480
Corporation Limited (APRDMPDCL)
2 | Andhra Pradesh Palnadu Drought
Mitigation Projects Corporation Limited 6 1,11,536 | 10,09,458 8,276
(APPADMPCL)
3 | Uttarandhra Irrigation Projects
Development Corporation Limited 5 0 51,465 9,277
(UIPDCL)
4 | Andhra Pradesh Godavari Krishna Salinity
Mitigation and Water Security Irrigation
Projects Development Corporation 10 0 6,000 19,812
Limited (SMWSIPDCL)
Total 54 9,19,536 | 49,92,894 77,845

nn



--- PAGE 127 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<> Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

Polavaram Irrigation Project

Located 42 Km upstream of Sir Arthur Cotton Barrage at Dowlaiswaram on Godavari River in
Eluru District, the Polavaram Irrigation Project is a Multipurpose Terminal Reservoir Project,
contemplated in 1941 but commenced in 2005 under the Jalayagnam Programme. The
project was accorded National Project status under the AP Reorganization Act, 2014. Gross
Capacity of its Reservoir is 194.6 TMC and it facilitates utilization of 322.73 TMC water.

Intended Benefits: Upon completion, the project is expected to provide irrigation facility to
7.20 lakh acres in East Godavari, West Godavari, Visakhapatnam & Krishna Districts, generate
960 MW Hydropower, facilitate diversion of 80 TMC of Godavari water to Krishna River and
supply 23.44 TMC water for drinking and industrial needs of Visakhapatnam city. It will also
provide drinking water facility to 28.5 Lakh population in 540 villages.

Progress of PIP Works: As of Dec 2024, the overall progress of the Project was 53.47%,
including Head works -74.92%, Left Main Canal - 73%, Right Main Canal - 93% & Total Project
(Works) - 77%. 25% progress is achieved considering Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation &
Resettlement.

7.1.2 CENTRAL ASSISTANCE FOR STATE
IRRIGATION PROJECTS

National Hydrology Project

National hydrology project (NHP) is a Central
sector scheme with 100% grant to the
state/Central Implementing agencies for a
period of 8 years from 2016-17 . Scheme’s
objective is to improve the extent, quality, and
accessibility of water resources information,
and to strengthen the capacity of water
management institutions/
departments in India. Several ground water

resources

nn

studies have been undertaken under this
project and based on the findings a
comprehensive data base has been created. The
project entails conducting water audit under
sub basin approach and other scientific studies
related to aquifer
groundwater development. The project has
enabled establishment of a real time ground
water monitoring system (Figure 1),
comprising 3 state-of-the-art district data
centers, one state level data center along with
support infrastructure. The project

management and


--- PAGE 128 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

implementation plan, for a total amount of Rs
76.39 Crores is approved by MoWR.

Annual work plan of Rs 23.5 crore has been
approved under the scheme for FY,2024-25 by
Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR,
RD&GR). Govt. of Andhra Pradesh has
constituted a State Level Steering Committee
(SLSC) to provide policy direction to
Implementing Agencies of the Project and to
exercise overall administrative, management
and financial control on the project. A State
Level Procurement Committee (SLPC) has also
been constituted for effective implementation
of NHP in both Surface Water & Ground Water
projects and to advise on the procurement of
different items included in NHP. So far, 8 SLPC
meetings have been conducted. The state govt.
is also looking forward to the implementation
of Water Information Management System
(WIMS), being developed by Central Water
Commission (CWC) for Validation, Storage and
Dissemination of Hydrological and Hydro
meteorological data.

Projects under Command Area Development
Authority (CADA)

i. Accelerated Irrigation Benefit

Programme (AIBP)

Government of India (Gol) launched the
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme
(AIBP) to provide financial assistance to States
for completing various on-going Multi-purpose
irrigation projects. These projects aim to
enhance irrigation potential of the state. Out of
the total 99 priority projects identified under
AIBP (PMKSY), 8 projects worth Rs 4,539.48
crores (with central assistance of Rs.504.81
Crores) are in Andhra Pradesh. Out of these 8
projects, Maddigedda project (East Godavari)
has been completed, while 90% progress has
been achieved in other 7 projects. An amount of
Rs. 45.67 Crores has been incurred during
2024-25 (up to 31st December, 2024), under
these seven projects. The over all expenditure

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

incurred up to 31.12.2024 is Rs.3433.89 Crs.
The project has enabled creation of total
Irrigation Potential (IP) of 2.26 lakh Ha against
a target of 3.01 lakh Ha.

ii. Command Area Development and Water
Management (CADWM):

CADWM is working towards increasing the
state’s irrigation potential by increasing the
utilization efficiency of irrigated areas. Andhra
Pradesh has 7 projects included under the
CADWM scheme, having an approved cost of Rs.
971.42 crore with 50% Central Share. The total
Cultivable Command Area (CCA) is proposed to
be 1,78,620 Ha. The expenditure incurred
under seven ongoing projects during 2024-25
(upto 31st December, 2024) is Rs.3.92 Crs and
the total expenditure incurred is Rs.7.44 Crs.

ili. Repair, Renovation and_ Restoration

(HKKP-RRR)

The programme is being implemented by Govt.
of India under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayi
Yojna (PMKSY) - Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP),
with 60% central assistance. Go] has approved
100 water bodies in Andhra Pradesh. Works
have been taken up for 97 water bodies, out of
which 36 have been completed and restored an
ayacut of 1,466.24 Ha. So far incurred Rs 6.22
Cr expenditure and value of work done is
Rs.37.30 crores.

7.1.3. PROGRAMMES IMPLEMENTED BY ANDHRA
PRADESH

Andhra Pradesh Irrigation Livelihood
Improvement Project (APILIP-I)

The programme
components:

comprises five major

1 Modernization of Irrigation Projects:
Under this component, 4 Medium Irrigation
projects and 93 Minor Irrigation tanks have
been completed since inception. Through
these projects 30,166 Ha of total ayacut has


--- PAGE 129 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

been stabilized, including gap ayacut of
9,960 Ha.

2 Participatory Irrigation Management
(PIM): Under this component, 57 Trainings
and 4 Training of Trainers (ToTs) have been
conducted. 1,871 PIM trainings/ awareness
programs, 436 Micro plans and 86
Livelihood plans have been completed.
Moreover, 300 wall writings are completed
and 5 WUA training modules have been
published.

3 Promotions of Farmers’ Producer
Organizations (FPO): 172 orientation
programmes for formation of Farmer
Interest Groups (FIGs) are completed and
96 Farmer Field School (FF) & cluster
demonstrations have been organized.

4 Livelihood Support Programme:

¢ Animal Husbandry: 3 Mini Silage baling
machines have been supplied, 39 Fertility
Camps conducted, 120 Breeding Rams given
to farmers, 51.20 MTs capacity of Total
Mixed Ration (TMR) supplied, 1,440
Capacity Building Programmes conducted
through Rythu Bharosa Kendrams (RBKs).

¢ Fisheries: 9 trainings have been conducted
and 3 Captive Fish seed nurseries
constructed. Administration accorded
approval for sanction of 219 nets/ boats and
6 retail outlets. Additionally, approval has
been accorded for stocking fish fingerlings
in 92 Minor Irrigation (MI) tanks.

5 Pilot Programmes: Four Farmer Producer
Organizations (FPOs) are involved in the
pilot programme APILIP. Programme for
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) has
been taken up on 300 Ha while programme
for Integrated Nutrient Management (INM)
has been taken up on 171 Ha. As part of
ongoing APILIP-II,
downsized activities with restructured cost
of Rs. 1,050 crores are planned for
implementation.

initiatives under

22

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Andhra Pradesh Irrigation Livelihood
Improvement Project (APILIP-II)

The project aims to increase irrigated area,
enhance local productivity, and strengthen
institutional and marketing capacities of the
ayacut farmers by rehabilitating existing
irrigation systems. This will help in improving
livelihoods of the farmers and other rural
communities in Andhra Pradesh. The project,
with overall cost of Rs 2,000 crore, is being
implemented with 84% financial assistance of
JICA (84% cost share) and is expected to be
completed in a period of 7 years (2018-19 to
2024-25). The project aims to benefit an ayacut
of 3,85,262 acres.

AP Integrated Irrigation & Agriculture
Transformation Project (APIIATP)

APIIATP, a World Bank aided Project, aims to
enhance agricultural productivity, profitability,
and climate resilience of smallholder farmers,
enabling them to stabilize an ayacut of 56,656
Ha in 536 selected tanks in the erstwhile 12
districts (except Guntur) of Andhra Pradesh.
The total cost of the project is Rs. 720 crore, out
of which World Bank is providing 70% financial
assistance (Rs. 504 crore), while the rest is
being shared by the state. The project is
intended to be completed in 7 years and is
likely to benefit 1.2 lakh families which include
small and marginal farmers, water-users
associations, FPOs and other Agro
entrepreneurs.

7.2 MINORIRRIGATION

Minor irrigation plays a crucial role in the
development of agriculture and livelihoods,
particularly in drought prone areas, including
those outside the command of Major and
Medium projects. It involves investigation and
execution of Minor Irrigation projects serving
ayacut of up to 5,000 acres. Minor Irrigation
happens to be a major source of Irrigation in
significant areas of the State, maintaining about


--- PAGE 130 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

38,862 tanks with a total registered ayacut of
25.60 lakh acres. It provides irrigation facilities
to increase the agriculture production by means
of creating new ayacut, stabilizing the existing
ayacut, apart from maintaining these sources
and providing drinking water to villages during
summer season.

The total registered ayacut of 25.60 lakh acres
is not being fully irrigated every year, leading to
a growing gap in the ayacut over time. On
average, this gap accounts for approximately
57% of the total registered ayacut. Govt. of AP is
undertaking several projects for restoring the
existing Minor Irrigation sources to original
standards wherever necessary, _ stabilizing
already created irrigation potential, controlling
wastage of water through water conservation
plans, implementing better water management
plans and bridging ayacut gap.

As compared to the 5th Minor Irrigation (MI)
census 2013-14, 1.37 lakh additional MI
sources were registered in the 6th MI census
2017-18, resulting in a total of 11.91 lakh minor
irrigation sources in Andhra Pradesh. Data on
various MI sources is provided in Annexure 7.7.
Similarly, 1st census of water bodies was
conducted along with Mi census with reference
year 2017-18. The details of number of Water
Bodies by type are given in Table 7.4.

7.2.1 LIFT IRRIGATION

This method of irrigation aims to enhance crop
yield, support sustainable farming, particularly
in drought-prone areas. It — enables
transportation of water from lower to higher
elevations, ensuring consistent water supply for
agriculture. This characteristic makes it is
crucial for regions with uneven terrain or

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

insufficient natural water flow. Government of
AP has implemented Kothakota Lift Irrigation
Scheme on Tungabhadra River in Kurnool
District at an approximate cost of Rs. 7.47 crore.
The project irrigated 656 acres Kharif dry land,
thus benefiting 562 farmers in three villages
viz. Remata, Kothakota and Mallapuram.
Akkajamma Cheruvu Lift Irrigation Scheme on
Srisailam Reservoir Back Canal is another
project implemented in Banaganapalle Mandal
of Nandyal District. The project has an overall
cost of Rs. 2.28 crore and it irrigated 126 acres
wet & dry and Kharif, thus benefiting 190
farmers in Cherlopalli village.

To implement lift irrigation schemes, the state
government has established the Andhra
Pradesh State Irrigation Development
Corporation (APSIDC) which can undertake
projects to provide irrigation facility to upland
areas of small and marginal farmers and other
weaker sections of the society. Funds for these
programmes are provided either directly by the
government or through district administration.
Once completed, the projects are handed over
to beneficiaries/agencies for operation and
maintenance. APSIDC has so far implemented
1,049 Lift Irrigation schemes and created
cumulative Irrigation potential of 8.12 lakh
acres. The district wise Irrigation Potential
Created till to date is shown in Annexure-7.1.
Currently, total 53 Lift irrigation schemes are
under execution to create 78,199 acres of
ayacut, while 85 schemes have _ received
Hydrological Clearance and are set to create
new Irrigation Potential of 1.74 lakh acres. Two
LJ. Schemes are commissioned and created
irrigation potential of 782 acres during 2024-
25. The expenditure incurred (upto
31.12.2024) is Rs.18.87 Crore.


--- PAGE 131 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Table 7.4 Number of Water Bodies in AP as per 1st Census of Water Bodies during 2017-18

Water conservation

Ponds Tanks Lakes | Reservoirs schemes/ percolation Others Total
Tanks/ Checkdams

14,132 1,13,425 62 703 57,492 4,963 1,90,777

State Govt. Initiatives to encourage Lift
Irrigation

Government of Andhra Pradesh has taken
various Policy Interventions to promote Lift
Irrigation. These’ interventions include
increasing target of APSIDC from ayacut of
10,000 acres to 25,000 acres, enabling High
Tension power supply, with dedicated power
lines for Lift Irrigation projects, reviving
defunct Lift Irrigation projects and maintaining
their functionality. As part of this initiative, 461
projects were revived and 2.98 lakh acres of
ayacut was stabilized. Other initiatives include
implementation of social engineering projects
for improving farmers participation and
capacity building.

7.2.2 OTHER PROGRAMMES/ SCHEMES BEING
IMPLEMENTED IN THE STATE

State Development Scheme (SDS): This plan
includes construction of new schemes and
restoration of existing schemes with plan funds.
The expenditure incurred as on 31st December,
2024 is Rs. 31.30 Crores.

Government of Andhra Pradesh has been
implementing the Tribal Area Sub Plan (TASP)
and Scheduled Caste Sub Plan (SCSP) for areas
inhabited by Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled
Castes, respectively. These programmes entail
construction of mini reservoirs, new tanks,
anicuts, percolation tanks, and check dams, etc.
thus enhancing irrigation potential of the state.

Neeru Chettu, another water conservation sub-
mission aims at implementing water
conservation measures across the line
departments with Water Resources Department
as the nodal department. Works under this
programme include clearance of jungles,

nn

desilting of tank bed, strengthening of Tank
bunds, repairs/reconstruction of sluices and
weirs, repairs/replacement of — shutters,
construction of check dams on minor streams,
desilting of supply/irrigation channels and
development of cascades etc. Total 1,00,171
works with overall estimated cost Rs 6,790
crore have been taken up under the Neeru
Chettu programme.

Other Possible interventions

a) Modernization of 68 lift irrigation projects
under NABARD - RIDF, with an estimate
cost of Rs. 74.22 crore to stabilize an ayacut
of 1.03 lakh acres

b) Implementing micro irrigation at lift
irrigation projects for improved water use
efficiency and development of more ayacut
in phased manner

c) Undertaking phase wise repairs of lift
irrigation projects and entrusting Operation
& Maintenance of those projects to O&M
contractors for 10 years on annuity basis.

7.3. GROUND WATER

Groundwater plays a crucial role in agriculture
in Andhra Pradesh, as it accounts for 41 percent
of the gross irrigated area in the state, with
approximately 19 lakh agricultural bore wells.
The Ground Water and Water Audit
Department conducts technical assessment of
groundwater resources annually, investigates
the construction of bore wells and water
conservation structures for various
organizations/users. It also monitors the
groundwater regime in real-time to facilitate
effective conservation, management, and
utilization of groundwater. During the current



--- PAGE 132 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Water Year 2024-25, the state has received
11.7% less rainfall than normal. However, due
to improved conservation and management
practices, the groundwater levels in the state
have been sustained.

Ground Water Resources Status

The stage of Ground Water Development in a
region refers to the ratio of annual groundwater
extraction to the net annual groundwater
availability. This ratio helps in assessing the
sustainability of groundwater use & categorizes
areas like watershed (basins)/ mandals/
villages into different stages such as Safe, Semi-
critical, Critical, or Over-exploited based on
their extraction levels. Andhra Pradesh is
divided into 748 watersheds (Groundwater
Basins or Assessment Units) for estimation of
groundwater resources. As per report of the
Ground Water Resource Estimation Committee
(GEC) 2023-24, the availability, utilization, and
stage of dynamic ground water resources are
shown in Table 7.5 as well as in Fig 7.2 & 7.3.
The overall stage of ground water development
is 29.8%. However, this parameter is 22.58% in
command areas & 37.4% in non-command
areas, details of which are shown in Figure 7.4

In terms of quantity, 26,411 MCM-million cubic
meters (932 TMC-thousand million cubic feet)
of total groundwater is available in the state,
out of which 7,879 MCM (278 TMC) is utilized
for various purposes leaving a balance of
18,532 MCM (654 TMC). At present, ground
water is used to irrigate about 41.44 lakh acres.
With commissioning of 40,000 to 50,000 new
wells annually, the average unit area irrigated
per well is gradually decreasing.

During 2023-24, about 29.12 lakh acres of net
area & 41.44 lakh acres of gross area were
irrigated through groundwater. If micro
irrigation practices are adopted on saturation
mode, net irrigation potential through
groundwater can reach up to 40 lakh acres,
along with additional ground water recharge by
scaling up up water conservation works.

ES

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

To further tap the groundwater potential, the
state is conducting various hydrogeological,
geophysical, and hydrological investigations, in
accordance with the APWALTA-2002 norms.
These investigations are aimed at selecting
suitable sites for bore wells & artificial recharge
structures, and obtaining hydrological
environmental clearances etc. In FY 2024-25,
investigation of 6,805 sites was undertaken for
construction of wells under programs like the
Scheduled Castes Sub-plan, Scheduled Tribe
Sub-plan, WALTA, Lift Irrigation, Artificial
Recharge Structures, Industries, Sand Mining, &
Drinking Water projects.

7.3.1 MONITORING OF GROUND WATER LEVELS
AND WATER QUALITY

The state has created a network of 3,005
observation wells including 1,810 piezometers
to monitor ground water levels and water
quality. Piezometers are installed with Digital
Water Level Recorders in all 748 basins with
telemetry system for real time monitoring of
Ground Water Levels, covering all hydro-
geological environments in the State. The data
of groundwater levels is analyzing and
preparing the reports showing the different
ranges of water levels in the state like, < 3 m., 3
to 8m., 8 to 20 m. and > 20 meters below
ground level. Water samples are collected from
all monitoring wells during pre-monsoon (May)
and post-monsoon (November) months, as well
as during investigations. In 2024-25, 6,771
water samples were collected and analyzed
against the annual target of 7,042 samples
(96% achievement).

In the recent pre monsoon period, the area with
8-20 m water level was 34% and the area with
> 20m was 18%%. Total groundwater deeper
water level area is 52% of the total area.
District wise Ground Water Level Zones in
Andhra Pradesh (as on Jan-2025) is shown in
Annexure 7.8

Our government has set an ambitious goal to
bring the groundwater levels of > 20m to 8-


--- PAGE 133 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<> Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

20m. and 8-20m to 3-8 meters by planning and To create awareness about efficient use of
adopting appropriate groundwater recharge groundwater, the state departments also
initiatives using a _ holistic & integrated conducted 389 trainings on crop water
approach and in convergence with Gol schemes. budgeting for farmers. About 16,000+ farmers

_ benefited from these training programme
Farmer training on use of groundwater

Table 7.5 Category Watersheds, Mandals wise and Villages

Ground water Resources Command Area | Non-command Area Total
Annual . extractable Ground water 13439 12922 26411
availability
Ground water extraction for all uses 3046 4834 7879
Balance Ground water availability 10443 8089 18532
0 eas
% of utilization (stage of Ground 23% 37% 30%
water development)

Category Safe Safe Safe

656 59]

Over Exploited Critical Semi Critical Safe Saline GW Stress

= Watersheds (Basins) = Mandals

Source: GEC 2023-24
Figure 7.2 No. of Watersheds (Basins) and Mandals in different categories

14020
2551
830 450 1271 896
a {| a | |
Over Exploited Critical Semi-critical Safe Saline GW Stress

= Villages

Source: GEC 2023-24
Figure 7.3 No. of villages in different categories

ED


--- PAGE 134 ---
<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

Table 7.6 Ground Water Resources (All figures in MCM-million cubic meters)

RD aenead Damen Donen e Daneel >

Category Watersheds (No.) Mandals (No.) Villages (No.)
Over Exploited 20 9 830
Critical 7 2 450
Semi-critical 33 38 1271
Safe & Saline 688 630 14916
Total 748 679 17467
Ground Water Stress 60 49 2551
Over exploited villages proposed for notification under APWALTA; 300 villages
(As per GEC, 2023-24)

Command

GROUND WATER RESOURCES IN ANDHRA PRADESH

GEC : 2023-24 (in MCM)

26411

Non Command

= Annual Extractable Ground water Resource

= Ground Water Extraction for all uses

m= Net Annual Ground Water Availability for Future Use

Total (without PQ)

Figure 7.4 Ground Water Resources in Andhra Pradesh

7.3.2 RAINFALL SCENARIO

In the present water year 2024-25, Andhra
Pradesh overall received 11.7% excess rainfall,
with 19 districts receiving Normal Rainfall and
07 districts receiving excess rainfall. The state
witnessed an increase in net groundwater level

Sn

by 4.36 m when compared to the pre monsoon
water level in May-2024, after utilization of
groundwater for agriculture and other needs.
District wise rainfall deviation in shown in

Table 7.7.


--- PAGE 135 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

7.3.3 Monitoring and Evaluation

Andhra Pradesh Water Resources
Information and Management System

The State Government has deployed innovative
world class technologies for irrigation of about
200 lakh acres of cultivable land in the state. To
achieve this goal, Govt. of Andhra Pradesh has
signed an MoU with National Remote Sensing
Centre (NRSC), an ISRO unit, to develop a full-
fledged Andhra Pradesh Water Resources
Information and Management System
(APWRIMS) by integrating the Geo-Spatial
layers, Satellite data, Hydrology models into a
well-developed Geo-Portal.

The portal consolidates information about all
water resources coming from satellite data,
model data, high-density-real-time sensors
data, field data, mobile app inputs etc. into a
unified interactive platform. APWRIMS is an
authenticated one step solution for better
management of all water related issues in
Andhra Pradesh. It is being maintained by the
Ground Water and Water Audit Department.
Interface of the platform is shown in Figure

National Aquifer Mapping and Management

Andhra Pradesh is implementing the National
Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM)
programme in coordination with Ground Water
Management and Regulation (GWMR) under
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). The
programme aims to. delineate aquifers,
characterize them and suggest strategies for
ground water management. Groundwater
Coordination Committees at the district level
have been constituted under this programme to
oversee implementation of the scheme. A study
covering recharge worthy area of 1.43 lakh Sq.

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

kms was undertaken and reports have been
shared with district groundwater coordination
committees. Findings of the NAQUIM studies
are also shared through state level ground
water coordination committees.

Water Audit in 74 River Sub Basins

Andhra Pradesh’s geographical area of 1.63
lakh sq.km is divided into 74 micro-level River
Sub Basins for conducting comprehensive
water audit. The Programme started in year
2022 with the aim to assess the utilization of
water received from different sources, study
the sector wise water demand, and ascertain
water use efficiency of the system in order to
develop appropriate management plans in line
with the audit findings. Under this programme,
45 River Sub Basins have been identified as
surplus and 29 basins identified as deficit.

7.3.4 Alignment of Irrigation Goals with
Swarna Andhra Vision

The state has adopted an integrated approach
to address groundwater issues. This approach
involves selection of scientific, environmental,
social, and economic indicators as part of the
evaluating criteria. The state aims to maintain
groundwater level between 3-8 meters, which
can be achieved by strengthening cooperation
behavior between groundwater users. Efficient
communication and diffusion instruments are
being used to distribute information about use
of groundwater, as well as motivate and
influence individuals in their decisions related
to consumption of water. Govt. of AP is
preparing and implementing plans to ensure
timely and periodic aquifer recharge, ensuring a
balance between recharge and withdrawals.
Sources for groundwater pollution and their
remedial measures have also been identified.


--- PAGE 136 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Table 7.7 District wise Rainfall Scenario

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

SN District Rainfall | sw District Rainfall
Deviation Deviation

1 Srikakulam -5.8 14 __| Anammayya 14.2

2 YSR Kadapa -1.6 15 __| Visakhapatnam 14.7

3 Prakasam 1.8 16__| Krishna 16.1

4 Kurnool 4.5 17__| Nandyala 16.6

5 Sri Potti Sriramulu Nellore 4.6 18 | Vizianagaram 16.7

6 Dr.B.R.Ambetkar Konaseema 5.5 19 __| Chittoor 18.5

7 Palnadu 7.1 20 __| Tirupati 24.4

8 Bapatla 7.5 21 | AlluriSeetaramaRaju 27.5

9 __| Anakapalli 8.4 22 | Anantapuramu 31.1
10 | ParvatipuramManyam 9 23 NTR 31.6
11 | West Godavari 10 24 | Guntur 32

12_| East Godavari 12.2 25 Eluru 33.4
13 | Kakinada 13.8 26 __| Sri Satya Sai 46

Figure 7.5 APWRIMS Portal Snapshot (www.apwrims.ap.gov.in)

1
Wie

@ -Deviation @ +Deviation
Arable Ground Water Storage i

425.51 .M.c
Ground Winter Level in Now 2024: 7.6 mm
Rise Fal from June Vst. 202:

uatiatarll alli Whltitet ttl

Above 20% Ml Below 20%

Wi Rise (mm) Fall (mi

\is?/ NaTionAL HYDROLOGY PRosect (7 — »)\ Andhra Pradesh Water
Sat ree tears eters “4#) Resource Department

7.4 POWER

Power sector is essential to propel economic
growth in the state as it supports functioning of
industries, agriculture and household. Reliable
and low-cost power is fundamental for
industrial growth as well as poverty reduction.
The sector comprises generation of power
through renewable and non-renewable sources
of energy, as well as its transmission and
distribution to end users. To ensure energy

22

security in the state, various energy efficiency
and energy conservation (EE&EC) programs are
being implemented.

7.4.1 AP TRANSCO AND GENCO

Andhra Pradesh has an overall installed power
generation capacity of 27,392 MW. This energy
is generated using thermal, hydel, gas, and
renewable energy sources, including Captive /
Private generators. The State generated total
53,122.21 MU of energy and met an average



--- PAGE 137 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

energy demand of 217.74 MU per day during FY
2024-25. The Peak energy demand during FY
2024-25 was 13,712 MW, registering a growth
of 3.45% over last year. (energy-demand in
FY2023-24 was 13,255 MW)

APTRANSCO, a state-owned power
transmission entity, presently comprises 17
nos. of 400KV substations, 111 nos. of 220KV
substations and 244 nos. of 132KV substations.
As on date, the total capacity of Extra High
Tension (EHT) transformer in the state is
67,508.50 MVA. As on date, the state has 32,946
Ckm length of transmission lines (400kV,
220Kv and 132kvV level) and total 372 nos. of
EHT sub-stations. Similarly, the distribution
network of the state spans over 6.9 lakh kms
(including 33kV, 11kV and LT lines) with 3,557
no. of 33kV substations, serving around 216
lakh diverse consumers across the State. During
FY 2024-25, the state witnessed 2.63%
Transmission losses and 9.32% of Transmission
& Distribution Losses.

7.4.2 Ongoing Schemes and Programmes
of the State

Consumer Welfare Schemes during FY 2024-
25

Andhra Pradesh provides 9 hours of free
daytime power supply to 21.87 lakh agriculture
pump sets, through 6,744 feeders. Sugar cane
units and Rural horticulture Nurseries are also
being given free Power supply. Subsidized
power @ Rs.1.50 per unit is being supplied to
67,800 nos. of aqua farmers in the state. The
State Govt. is also providing free power supply
(up to 200 units per month) to existing 20.26
lakh households in Below Poverty Line SC/ST
category. Additionally, Free/Concessional tariff
is being charged to professionals in BPL
Category, or those belonging to Backward Caste
communities / Most Backward Caste
communities. Concessional tariff has also been
extended to Dhobi Ghats, handloom units, hair
cutting saloons/shops, gold covering
units/imitation jewelry units and to units

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

falling under cottage industries category. The
total subsidy released by the Government for
FY 2024-25 is Rs. 10449.92Crs.

AP State Energy Conservation Mission
(APSECM)

APSECM is India’s first standalone State
Designated Agency (SDA) of Bureau of Energy
Efficiency, MoP. The agency was constituted in
2012 to implement energy efficiency initiatives
in the state. APSECM is responsible for
coordinating, regulating, and enforcing the
provisions of Energy Conservation Act 2001
within the State. APSECM has won First Prize in
the National Energy Conservation Award
(NECA)-2024 among all the State Designated
Agency (SDA) in Group II States. Remarkably, in
State Energy Efficiency Index (SEEI) 2024, the
state achieved 87.25 points, with a 4 percent
improvement from SEEI 2023 score of 83.25
points. The state agency has been instrumental
in implementing several energy efficiency
measures in the state:

* Installation of energy efficient appliances
like LED Tube lights and BLDC EE Fans (35
W) in MPDO office, ZPHS School,
Pagidigudem in Dwaraka Tirumala, West
Godavari District. The initiative resulted in
annual energy savings of approximately
12,746 kwh per year and reduction in
annual electricity charges by Rs 97,503.
Additionally, the initiative contributed in
reducing 10.83 Tons of CO2 emission per
year.

¢ Similarly, energy efficiency measures have
been implemented in two Govt. institutions.
(SRR & CVR Govt. Degree College,
Vijayawada and Govt. Polytechnic College of
Women, Guntur), resulting in annual energy
savings of approximately 34,427kwh per
year and reduction of annual electricity
charges by ~Rs 2 lakhs. Additionally, the
initiative contributed in reducing 22.8 Tons
of CO2 emission per year.


--- PAGE 138 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

¢ Training and awareness _ generation
workshops were organized by APSECM in
Sri Venkateswara Cold Storage unit in
Prathipadu Mandal of Guntur District to
promote Energy Efficiency in the Integrated
Cold Chain Sector.

¢ Supply and Installation of Energy Efficient
appliances in 21 EHT Sub Stations in
Kadapa Zone i.e. Tirupati Circle.

* Notification of Energy Conservation
Building Code (ECBC) in 123 Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs) and approval of 1,300 nos. of
ECBC compliant buildings

¢ Widening of Perform, Achieve & Trade
(PAT) to total 27 sectors and
implementation of the PAT scheme in 59
highly energy-intensive industries, resulting
in energy savings of around 1.16 million
tons of oil equivalent.

* Conducting Energy Audit, implementing De-
Carbonization/EE project in 4 MSME
clusters of Gold Ornaments, Imitation
Jewelry, Food Processing, and
Pharmaceuticals and establishing Energy
Management Centre (EMC) at Common
Facilitation Centers (CFCs) of the respective
clusters in Andhra Pradesh.

* Achieving energy and monetary savings
across various sectors such as savings of
0.95 lakh kwh/annumin Pharma Cluster,
0.14 lakh kwh/annumin Imitation Jewelry,
0.17 lakh kwh/annumin Gold Ornaments
and 5.5 lakh kwh/annum in_ Food
Processing.

* Organized Energy Conservation Week-2024
from 14 to 20 December-2024 to spread the
awareness on Energy Conservation &
Energy Efficiency across various sectors

* Organized State Energy Conservation
Awards-2024 covering Thermal power
plants, textiles Iron & steel (Industries),

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

State & central govt. buildings, hospitals &
RTC depots, and urban local bodies
(Institutions). Best performers were
presented with gold and silver awards for
effectively implementing energy
conservation & energy efficiency measures
in their respective organizations.

7.4.3 Strengths and Challenges of the
Power Sector in AP

Challenges in AP Power Sector

After bifurcation of the erstwhile state of
Andhra Pradesh, the successor state lost its coal
mines and had to rely on coal plants located far
away to meet its coal requirements, leading to
increase in transportation cost of coal.
Dependence of the state on external sources
also led to poor quality coal getting delivered to
APGENCO. GCIL levied Central Transmission
Utility (CTU) charges of ~Rs 3.4 lakhs/
MW/month on Andhra Pradesh is during FY
2024-25 (up to Sept-2024). These charges also
add up to the overall cost of power purchase in
the state.

Strengths of AP Power Sector

Andhra Pradesh has about 44GW of wind and
38 GW of solar potential. The cumulative
Renewable Energy capacity installed in the
State for the FY 2024-25 is 7522.236 MW, out of
which 3,755.6 MW comes from Solar Power
Projects, 3,636.48 MW from Wind Power
Projects, 10.5 MW from Small Hydro Power
Projects and 119.6 MW from Biomass, Bagasse,
Municipal & Industrial Waste Power Projects.
The state additionally has 4 GW _ of
hydro/reverse-pumped hydro potential. To
promote use of hydro energy, the state Govt.
has notified “AP Pumped Storage Promotion
Policy 2022”. Techno-Commercial feasibility
Reports of 29 locations indicate an estimated
potential of 33,240 MW. The state has also been
successful in bringing down its T&D losses from
12.10% (FY2014-15) to 9.32% (FY2024-25).


--- PAGE 139 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

7.4.4 Externally Aided Projects

Externally Aided Transmission Projects

Visakhapatnam-Chennai Industrial Corridor
(VCIC) - VCIC is a project funded by Asian
Development Bank (ADB). It started in year
2018. Two packages under Tranche-I have been
awarded with an administrative sanctioned
cost of Rs. 694.90 crore, out of which
construction works have been completed in one
package, while works are in progress for the
remaining package. The expenditure incurred is
Rs 481.81 Crs

Green Energy Corridor Projects (Phase -1) -
This project is funded by KfW, a German Bank.
The project started in year 2016 under InSTS
GEC-I scheme with administrative sanction of
Rs. 1,379.75 crore. It is being governed by
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy and it
targets grid expansion and Renewable Energy
(RE) integration. The total cost awarded for
GEC Projects is Rs. 940.68 crore. Out of total 8
packages of the project, 4 packages have been
completed and works on 4 packages are in
progress. So far, an amount of Rs.872.30 Crs
incurred as expenditure for works.

Other system improvement works of AP
Transco are being funded by Indian PSEs - M/s
REC and M/s PFC. Presently in AP Transco, 14
Nos. of 400 kV construction works are under
progress with a total contracted project value of
Rs. 3730.70 crore. Expenditure incurred as on
31st December 2024 is Rs.1161.44 Cr.
Additionally, construction works such as like
network expansion for improvement of voltage
profile, load growth due to newly proposed
industries and power’ evacuation from
generation stations are regularly undertaken by
AP Transo at 220kV & 132 kV level, in all three
zones, aS per requirements. The expenditure
incurred as on 31st December 2024 is Rs
630.97 Cr.

a

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

APGENCO’s ongoing joint venture projects

Chitrakonda (Balimela) Dam Toe Power
House (2x30MW): Andhra Pradesh has signed
an agreement with Govt. of Odisha/OHPC in Oct
2020 for R&M of Machkund HE Project covering
implementation of Chitrakonda (Balimela) Dam
Toe Power-House. Construction of Chitrakonda
(Balimela) Dam Toe Power-House is planned to
be taken up jointly by APGENCO and OHPC
(Odisha Hydro Power Corporation).

New Pumped Storage Projects in Andhra
Pradesh by AP Genco: Government of Andhra
Pradesh has approved construction of six new
pumped storage projects in the state. These
projects include Kamalapadu PSP (950 MW),
Yaganti PSP (1000 MW), Gadikota PSP (1200
MW), Aravetipalli PSP (1320 MW), Deenepalli
PSP (750 MW), and Rajupalem PSP (800 MW).
A joint venture agreement has been signed
between APGENCO and National Hydroelectric
Power Corporation (NHPC) in Sep 2024 for
taking up 5 Nos New Pumped Storage Projects
in Andhra Pradesh state APTRANSCO has also
prepared a Capital Investment Plan as well as
the Distribution Network enhancement Plan for
Period FY2024-25 to FY2028-29. The same has
been approved by Andhra Pradesh Electricity
Regulatory Commission (APERC). Details of
these plans are provided in Annexure 7.9 and
Annexure 7.10

7.4.5 Support from Ongoing Schemes

Electrification of PVTG Households under
PM JANMAN

The Ministry of Power, Govt. of India has set out
norms for electrification of identified
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Group
(PVTG) households. The scheme has enabled
electrification of 24691 nos. of PVTG
households through ON GRID under the
PMJANMAN programme funded under RDSS.
DISCOM wise number of households electrified
under PMJANMAN are shown in Table 7.8.


--- PAGE 140 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<> Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Table 7.8 No. of House Holds electrified under PMJANMAN

Name of the No. of Habitations as No. of Un electrified House No. of House Holds
Discom per DPR Holds as per DPR electrified
UE PE Total UE PE Total UE PE Total
APEPDCL 207 2607 2814 1853 21234 23807 1689 21189 22878
APCPDCL 0 129 129 0 1754 1754 0 1737 1737
APSPDCL 2* 7** 9 137 76 213 0 76 76
APDISCOMs 209 2743 2952 1990 23064 25774 1689 23002 24691

*UE- Un Electrified

Progress of Revamped Distribution Sector
Scheme (RDSS)

The Ministry of Power has sanctioned the
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS).
It is a Reforms-Based and _ Results-Linked
Scheme launched with objective of improving
the quality and Reliability of power supply to

*PE- Partially Electrified

c)

was proposed. Details of households
electrified under RDSS is shown in Table
7.9

Progress of RDSS Scheme in SPDCL:
AMISP under RDSS - Works for rollout of
smart prepaid meters for consumers and
smart meters to system metering works

have been awarded to the Advanced

consumers through a ffinancially and
: : tp gs Metering Infrastructure Service Provider
operationally efficient distribution sector.
Onvoi : : (AMISP). The agency has_ undertaken
ngoing projects under the scheme include:
detailed survey, prepared consumer
a) Smart Metering works & LR works: This engagement plan, and __ initiated

project aims to implement Smart metering
& Distribution Loss Reduction works such
agricultural feeder segregation, bifurcation
of over loaded feeders, UG cabling &
covered conductor works in Disaster prone
areas, Replacement of Old/Frayed
Conductor Works and IT/OT works. Out of
2,67,071 meters installed in APSPDCL, data
from 2,29,351 meters has been integrated
with the DISCOM server.

UEHH under RDSS: Under this project,
electrification of 5,577 nos. of households

b)

Table 7.9 Households electrified under RDSS

procurement as well as installation of smart
meters. Apart from these, loss reduction
works have also been undertaken by state
DISCOM, APSPDCL. Under RDSS, 312 nos. of
11KV mixed agricultural feeder segregation
work have been completed against the
approved 3,015 feeders. Work is in
progress for 739 feeders.

Progress of AP DISCOMS on smart metering
is shown in Annexure.7.11 and details of
loss reduction works is shown in Annexure
7.12

Name of the No. of Habitations as No. of Un electrified House No. of House Holds
Discom per Rev DPR Holds as per Rev DPR electrified
UE PE Total UE PE Total UE PE Total
APEPDCL 121 |; 1600 | 1721 2127 13348 15475 956 10677 11633

particular solar power projects in line with the
Policies of Ministry of New & Renewable
Energy, Govt. of The
Renewable Energy capacity installed in the

7.5 RENEWABLE ENERGY

India. cumulative

Govt. of Andhra Pradesh has given top priority

to Renewable Energy Power Projects, in

2235


--- PAGE 141 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

State is 9,068.46 MW, out of which 4,357.33
MW is generated from Solar Power Projects,
4,083.57 is generated from Wind Power
Projects, 106.8 MW is generated from Small

The Solar Pump sets programme was taken up
in the State with the financial assistance of
MNRE, Gol. 32,000 Solar pump sets have been
installed for Irrigation purpose. Grid connected
solar roof top systems with capacity of 123 MW
have been installed in the State.

PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijili Yojana

Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
(MNRE), Govt. of India has developed a
simplified procedure for providing subsidies
to all the residential consumers towards
installation of Solar Roof Top panels. State
owned DISCOMS like APEPDCL are already
implementing the procedure for installation of
solar roof top under domestic category. This is
being monitored and facilitated by integrating
the APEPDCL DISCOM portal in the state with
the National Portal. In line with its Solar
Power Policy, 2018, state govt. through its
DISCOM Andhra Pradesh Southern Power
Distribution Company Limited (APSPDCL) is
encouraging for development of solar energy

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Hydro Power Projects and 520.77 MW is
generated from Bio-Mass, Bagasee, Municipal
&Industrial Waste Power Projects.
and accepting Gross and Net metering options
from eligible residential consumers. APSPDCL
is also undertaking capacity augmentation of
existing power distribution networks to
possibly enhance load wherever necessary
and facilitate consumers in installation, net
metering and post-installation support.

APDISCOMs are encouraging for development
of solar energy and accepting gross and net
metering options from eligible residential
consumers. The capacity augmentations is
being done for existing networks to possible
for enhancement in load where ever necessary
and facilitate consumers in installation, net
metering, and post-installation support.

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has
targeted to cover 10 Lakh households under
PM Surya Ghar Mufti Bijili Yojana and complete
installations before 2026-27.

As per the MNRE guidelines, the DISCOMs are
implementing the program at the ground level.
The progress as on 28.01.2025 is shown in the
Table 7.10

Table 7.10: DISCOM wise number of Rooftop Solar Panels installed, and the Capacity added under PM

Surya Ghar Yojana in AP

Name of the Ne oi Ne oi No oi Total capacity

SN DISCOM applications applications installations installed

registered submitted completed (KWp)

1 APEPDCL 4,87,400 65,831 5,158 19,072.84

2 APCPDCL 556,482 4,64,229 3,250 11,734.07

3 APSPDCL 5,91,790 4,49,605 1,870 6,774.76

Total 16,35,672 9,79,665 10,278 37,581.67

Enhancing energy efficiency of govt. owned
buildings

Govt. of Andhra Pradesh is taking up mandatory
replacement of all old inefficient pump sets
with highly energy efficient pump sets. This will
help in achieving substantial energy savings

nn

and reducing energy demand. Govt. of AP has
also planned to take up energy efficiency
measures with the CSR funds in_ the
establishments of APSRTC and APTDC. 27
appliances in APSRTC and 10 appliances in
APTDC have been identified for replacement
with energy efficient appliances.


--- PAGE 142 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

7.5.1 Resource Plan

Andhra Pradesh _ Electricity Regulatory
Commission (APERC) has accorded approval on
the Resource Plan prepared by AP Transco and
AP DISCOMs for 5‘ Control Period (FY 2024-25
to FY 2028-29) and 6% Control Period (FY
2029-30 to FY 2033-34). The proposed plan has
projected additional generation capacity of
11,544 MW in the next five years, including the
following projects:

e APGENCO Thermal-VTPS-Stage V-1X800
MW: Under this project,APGENCO signed
power purchase agreement with APGENCO
in Oct 2022 for procurement of 100%
power for 25 years. The power plant was
commissioned in Dec 2023.

e Two Units at Lower Sileru 2X115 MW:
This project  includesinstallation of
additional two 115 MW units at Lower
Sileru hydel power to meet peak demand
within the existing water discharge
capability.

e APGENCO Hydro- Polavaram Hydro
Project 12X80 MW: The project entails
construction of Polavaram hydel power
units, which is under progress and is
expected to be commissioned in phased
manner in next two financial years.

e Upper Sileru Pumped Storage Hydro
Project 9X150 MW: The project envisages
development of Upper Sileru Pumped
Storage Power Plant, with an aggregate
installed capacity of 1,350 MW. 8x150 MW
capacity is planned to be set up during
FY2027-28 and 1 x 150 MW capacity is
planned to be setup during FY2028-29.

e CGS-Nuclear-Bhavini-100 MW:
APDISCOMs have requested for allocation of
100 MW from the proposed BHAVINI
Nuclear Plant, expected to be commissioned
in the year FY2024-25.

e CGS-Talcher-Stage-III -264 MW:
APDISCOMs have requested for allocation of
264 MW from the proposed Talcher Stage-

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

III Thermal. The plant is expected to be
commissioned in the year FY2027-28.

e CGS-Telangana Super Thermal Power
Station Phase I: APDISCOMs have been
allocated 8 MW as minimal share from the
STPS Phase-I Unit-I, 1x800 MW plant. It is
expected that an additional 1% share of 8
MW from 2"4 unit of this project.

e SECI-Solar 7000 MW: Andhra Pradesh has
formulated a separate nodal agency
(Andhra Pradesh Rural Agricultural Power
Supply Company - APRAPSCom) to extend
9 hours of uninterrupted power supply
during daytime to the Agricultural farming
consumers in the state. APDISCOMs have
sought approval for procurement of 7,000
MW solar’ power from the _ SECI
manufacturing linked scheme.

e Wind Projects: The state has envisaged
addition of 1174.9 MW of wind power
during FY 2025-26, out of which 774 MW of
wind power from will be harnessed from
AXIS and 400MW wind power will be
harnessed from M/s AXIS Bundling and
Balancing & Banking (BBB) scheme.

State Electricity Plan (Generation Plan and
Transmission Plans)

The APTRANSCO have prepared and submitted
the State Electricity Plan to Andhra Pradesh
Electricity Regulatory Commission (APERC) in
June 2023. The approved generation and
transmission plans for the 5%& 6 Control
Periods are detailed in Annexure 7.13 & 7.14 &
7.15. The plans will be notified by APTRANSCO
after incorporating comments from APERC and
obtaining approval of the State Coordination
Forum.

7.5.2 Way Forward

Efforts are being undertaken by DISCOMs to
reduce cost of power in the state. In this
regard, all the high cost expiring contracts are
not being renewed and efforts are being taken
to request Government of India to permit
surrender of costly CGS power. Additionally,


--- PAGE 143 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Govt. of AP is committed for timely release of
subsidy and departmental charges. All the
govt. offices are mandated to install pre-paid
smart meters. These measures will help in
reducing the ARR-ACS gap.

Apart from this, precautions are being taken
to reduce the thermal power generation cost.
Govt. of AP is trying to secure high grade coal
from SCCL and minimize penal charges to
Railways and transit losses by implementing a
supervision contract to curtail the overloading
& under loading of the wagons at mines.

The availability of reliable, quality, and
affordable power in Andhra Pradesh will help in
overall and rapid economic development of the
state in the industrial, commercial, and other
sectors.

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

The AP Power Sector at a glance is shown in
Annexure .7.16

7.6 ROADS AND BUILDINGS

Roads are one of the most crucial elements of
transport Infrastructure in the state, as they
cater to more than 80 percent of the Goods and
Passenger traffic. The existing network of roads
provide connectivity to Rural and Urban
facilitates thus enabling trade and ensuring
social integrity. The productivity and efficiency
of road transport is directly linked with the
availability and quality of the road network. As
of December 2023, the total Road Network in
the State (excluding National Highways) was
45,379 Km. Additionally, the state has 8,744 Km
of National Highways. Details of type of road,
lane-wise and surface-wise are shown in the
Table 7.11.

Table 7.11 Status of R&B Roads - Lane wise, Surface wise & Type of Road details (in Kms)

Lane Total Surface Wise Total Type of road ea
Four lane 660 CC Roads 3,031 National Highways 8,744
pe Lane +) 544 | BT Roads 40,898 | State Highways 12,653
Two Lane 11.650 | Metalled 259 Major District Roads 26,486
Single Lane 30,433 | Un-Metalled 1,191 Other District Roads 6,240
TOTAL 45,380 Total 45,379 Total 54,123

Major District Roads (MDR)

The state comprises 26,485 Km of Major
District Roads (MDR) and 6,240 Km of Other
District Roads (ODR). As of December 2024,
construction of 92 roads with a length of 402.56
Km and 10 bridges has been completed at the
cost of Rs 602.88 crores, while work is in
progress on 60 roads with a length of 659.17
Km and 14 bridges amounting to a total
expenditure of Rs 1,008.66 crores. Some works
are at pre-construction or procurement stage.
For instance, 23 roads with length of 106.24 Km
and 18 bridges are at tender stage, while 12
roads with length of 93.08 Km and 4 bridges are
at estimation stage. Few high priority MDRs,
with total length of 2,210 Kms have been

nn

accorded administrative sanction for Rs. 631.12
Crores. Out of these 92 works have been
completed and remaining are in progress.

State Highways

The state comprises 12,653.39 Km length of
State Highways, for which development works
are taken up by Andhra Pradesh Road
Development Corporation (APRDC). As_ of
January 2025, 31 road works worth Rs 97 crore
have been completed, while 32 road works
worth Rs 460 crore are in progress. To ensure
efficient traffic flow and reduce the risk of
accidents and fatalities, 67 road safety works
worth Rs 34 crore are being undertaken on
State Highways. Out of these, 29 road safety


--- PAGE 144 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

works have been completed, while 34 works
are in progress.

Few High Priority State Highways, with total
length of 1,222 Kms have been accorded
administrative sanction of Rs. 491 crores. From
these works, 39 works costing Rs 152 crore
have been rolled over to Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF) scheme. Out of these,
12 works have been completed and 27 works
are in progress. The balance 93 works costing
Rs 339 crore have been rolled over to State
Disaster Mitigation Fund (SDMF) of which 38
works have been completed, 52 works are in
progress.

Repairs and Maintenance

Repair works are being taken up on roads that
got damaged due to natural disasters such as
cyclones. Out of total 866 temporary repair
works on state highways and culverts, 494
works have been completed and 382 works are
in progress. Temporary repair and restoration
works have also been taken up for state
highways/ culverts that got damaged due to
heavy rains and floods during July-September
2024. Out of total 1,256 works identified, 567
works have been completed and 689 works are
in progress. These works are being funded
through the State Disaster Relief Fund (SDRF).

As part of disaster mitigation measures, 145
nos. of repair and maintenance works worth Rs
118.36 crore, involving filling of potholes in
damaged roads are being taken up through the
State Disaster Mitigation Fund (SDMF). To
further ensure pothole free roads, 1,100 road
works worth Rs 282 crore with a total length of
5,000 Km have been sanctioned. 70% of the
works have been completed and the remaining
works are under progress. To temporarily
restore damages caused to state roads/ culverts
due to Michaung cyclone in December 2023,
State Govt. has sanctioned Rs 62 crore for 273
works under the State Disaster Relief Fund
(SDRF). Out of these works, 71 works are

Ee

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

completed, 152 works are in progress and 35
works are in tender stage.

7.7 ANDHRA PRADESH ROAD
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION

Andhra Pradesh Road Development
Corporation (APRDC) is a state government
body established in the year 1998 to develop
and maintain roads and other allied and
incidental activities in the State. APRDC has
recently completed up-gradation of existing
225.698 Km State Highways from single lane to
2 lane or 4 lane. The project comprised 26
packages covering length of 4301 Km to be
maintained for 5 years at a cost of Rs. 891
crores.

Govt. of Andhra Pradesh is now planning to
strengthen the APRDC for self-sustainability
and enhance the functional, organizational,
staffing, financial, administrative, and legal
capacities. Necessary studies have been
conducted and proposals are under review
regarding strengthening the APRDC. The
proposals include (a) Restructuring of
Organization (b) Amendment to APRDC Act,
1998 and (c) Creation of dedicated Road Fund.
In addition, Road Management System and
Management Information System has also been
established by APRDC’ which is now
operational.

As part of road safety initiatives, APRDC has
also developed a demonstration corridor, i.e.,
Renigunta - Kadapa Road using a multi-sector
(Engineering, Transport, Police and Medical)
approach. Additionally, APRDC has finalized the
Road Safety Policy which includes improvement
works aimed at reducing black-spots.

Projects developed on PPP

e A second bridge across river Godavari near
Rajahmundry has been recently completed
on PPP at a cost of Rs 808 crores.


--- PAGE 145 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

e The Narketpally - Addanki - Medarametla
Road, 125 km long and_ connecting
Narketpally on NH 65 and Medarametla on
NH 16 was completed on PPP at a cost of Rs
1,197 crores

e Nine other roads with a total length of
163.30 Km have been completed on PPP
(Annuity) mode at a cost of Rs 393.55 crore

Govt. of AP has also implemented the NIDA
Scheme to complete the ongoing plan works
(Roads and Bridge works) of 99 State Highways
and 134 Major District Roads & ODRs, with Rs
1,158.53 crore loan assistance from NABARD .
Under NIDA, 99 SH works and 133 MDRs &
ODRs have been completed. Additionally, 1,168
renewal works for a length of 8268 Kms have
been undertaken to improve the riding surfaces
of State Highways and Major District Roads.
Complying to the directions of the Committee
on Road safety appointed by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court, the state is also conducting
Road safety Audit for a length of 1,000 Km.

Improvement of Rural Roads

The state has been taking assistance from
NABARD for undertaking improvements works
on its rural roads. These works include
upgradation of non-BT roads to BT standards,
widening of Single Lane roads to double lane
roads connecting Mandal Head Quarters and
Constructions of bridges, under NABARD, RR
Plan & RCPLWE = and_ other various
schemes.Nearly 9,346 km of rural roads,
connecting nearby towns, have been upgraded
to bituminous riding surface. Since 1996-97,
total 1,931 works pertaining to roads and
bridge have been taken up under RIDF II to
RIDF XXVIII (including RIAD Phase I to V) in 28
tranches. Out of total 3 works sanctioned by
Govt. of AP, 1 road work sanctioned under
RIDF-XXVII, covering a length 45.57 Km and
costing Rs148.95 crores,is under progress and
will be completed by May 2025, while 2 bridge
works sanctioned under RIDF-XXVIII and
costing Rs 169.54 crores are under pre-
entrustment stage.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Under the scheme “Road Connectivity Project
for Left Wing
Areas’(RCPLWE), aimed at providing seamless
connectivity to remote areas affected by
violence of Left-Wing Extremists (LWE), 46
works (30 roads + 16 bridges) have been
sanctioned across four districts in AP i.e,
Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam &
East Godavari. Out of these, 27 road works and
14 bridges have been completed and about 397
Km of road have been upgraded at a cost of Rs
391 crore.

Extremism Affects

The state had initiated a Rural Roads Plan
Scheme during the year 2016-17, which
included conversion of non-BT roads to BT
roads in a phased manner. 304 road works
costing Rs.898 crores and covering a total
length of 1,119 Km have been sanctioned, out of
which 199 road works costing Rs.495 crores
and covering a length of 678 Km have been
completed. 5 works(including 4 roads and 1
bridge) costing Rs.31 crore and covering a
length of 23.44 Km are in progress. As on date,
the state has 152 nos. of Non-BT Other District
Roads (ODRs) covering a total length of 620.60
Km.

External Aided Projects (EAP)

Andhra Pradesh has taken financial assistance
from New Development Bank (NDB) for
development of two projects worth Rs 6,400
crore with 70:30 cost sharing between NDB
Share and the State. These two projects are the
AP Roads and Bridges Reconstruction Project
(APRBRP) and the AP Mandal Connectivity and
Rural Connectivity Improvement Project
(APMCRCIP). Both the projects aim to provide
double lane connectivity from District Head
Quarters to Mandal Head Quarters. The projects
include the following activities:
¢ Widening of roads connecting economic
centers with PCUs more than 2,000 PCUs
per day.


--- PAGE 146 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

* Construction of Bridges at un-bridged
crossings to provide uninterrupted traffic
movement.

* Reconstruction of weak and narrow bridges
to provide improved transportation.

As part of first phase, administrative sanction of
Rs 3,014 crores has been provided by Govt. of
AP for improvement of 1,243 Kms of roads and
the same are in progress at various stages.In
the second phase, improvement of 539.45 Km
State Highways has been proposed for Rs
1,398.54 crore under APRBRP, and
improvement of 728.59 Km Roads and Bridges
of Major District Roads/Other District Roads
has been proposed for Rs.1987.60 Cr under
APMCRCIP, for which administrative sanction is
under process.

Improvement of National Highways

There are 55 National Highways in the state of
Andhra Pradesh covering a length of 8,744 Km,
out of which 4,649 Km is four-lane and above,
3,613 Km two-lane with paved shoulder, 253
Km two-lane, 85 Km intermediate lane and 144
Km are of Single Lane. The density of National
Highways in the State is 17.64 Km per lakh
population (2011) as against all India average
of 12.09 km.In terms of area coverage, a length
of 53.65 km is available for every 1,000 Sq. km
in the State as against all India average of 44.46
km/1,000 Sq.km. Out of the total National
Highways in the state, 4,406 Km is under the
control of National Highways Authority of India
(NHAJ), 600 Km under MoRT&H, Project
Implementation Unit(PIU) and 3,738 Km under
the control of State PWD. NHs works are
sanctioned broadly under Planned and Non-
Planned expenditure category in different
schemes. These works include:

e 446 NH works for a total length of 1,150
Kms and cost Rs13,294 crores are in
progress. 7 works for a length of 91 Km
and total cost of Rs755 crores have been
completed in FY,2024-25, as against 12
works for a length of 271 Km and total

2

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

cost of Rs 1,975 crores completed in
FY,2023-24.

e 9works fora length of 338 Km and cost
of Rs 6,233 crore is yet to be awarded.
Appointed date is to be issued for 9
works for a length of 226 Km and cost of
Rs 2,895 crore.

e Construction of 477 Km of National
Highways costing of Rs3,926 crore has
beencompleted in FY, 2023-24

Road Safety Implementation Programme
(MoRT&H)

Operational Road Safety Engineering Audits
and short-term improvements are taken up at
few selected stretches where execution of some
major project is expected to commence. Based
on operational audits, these short-term safety
measures are taken at least 1 year ahead of
implementation of new projects.

For the stretches not covered in any ongoing
EPC projects/ O&M completed projects, Road
Safety Audit was undertaken by M/s ARMENEG
for auditing 1,365 Km of roads. Based on e-Dar
accident data and on Road Safety Auditor
report/recommendation, rectification measures
at sensitive and vulnerable road segments are
set to be taken up on priority.

The stretches which are covered in ongoing /
likely to be taken up projects under Annual
Plan, identified sensitive and vulnerable road
segments of length 1,533 km are being taken up
on priority as per Contract Agreement/ IRC
Guidelines. So far, road safety works of 281 Km
length have been completed in ongoing projects
and the balance length is in progress.

Road Safety EPC Works: Most of the Works on
National Highways with State PWD are taken up
under Engineering Procurement & Construction
Mode (EPC), wherein the contractor shall
appoint the ‘safety consultant’ to carry out safety
audit at the design construction and
commissioning stage of the project highway in


--- PAGE 147 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

accordance the Applicable Laws and Good
Industry Practice. The recommendations of the
Safety Consultant are incorporated during the
design construction and commissioning of the
Project Highway. Additionally, audit of Road
Safety Amenities and resting places for drivers
are also awarded on EPC mode. In FY , 2023-24,
5 works were completed under Road Safety
Annual Plan 2022-23 for a length of 47.33 Km
and costing Rs.7.87 crore. MoRT&H has
sanctioned 2 works for improvement of roads
under Road Safety Annual Plan 2023-24 for a
total length of 31.7 Km amounting to Rs 6.89
crores, of which 1 work is completed and
another work is in progress.

Centrally Sponsored Programmes

Central Road Infrastructure Fund scheme
(CRIF) is a centrally sponsored programme
under which Gol sanctions works for
improvement of State Roads. These works are
funded through cess or taxes levied by Union
Government on Petrol and High-Speed Diesel.
Expenditure towards the works is _ initially
borne by the State Government, which is fully
reimbursed later by Govt. of India. The works
sanctioned are intended for improving the
condition of the roads which benefit large
number of population to transport their
agricultural produce and other industrial goods
to the nearby market yards, towns, cities, etc.

During the year 2024-25, MORT&H, Gol
accorded administrative approval for 13 works
for a length of 200 Km costing Rs 399.65 crores
for improvement of state roads under CRIF
Scheme. Additionally, 97 works costing Rs
1,635.87 crores with a length of 1,341 Km were
sanctioned, out of which 32 works costing
Rs.368.32 crores with a length of 222 Km have
been completed and balance 65 works costing
Rs 1,267.55 crore covering a length of 1,119 Km
are in progress. Under the Setu Bandhan sub-
scheme of the CRIF scheme, Nine (9) Railway
Over Bridges (ROBs) costing Rs 580 crore have
been sanctioned by the MORT&H, Gol, out of

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

which works are in progress for 5 ROBs with a
cost of Rs 351 crores, whereas 4 ROBs with a
cost of Rs 244 crores are in the process of
obtaining administrative sanction by the State
Govt.

Buildings & RSW

To enhance infrastructure and improve public
services across the state, Govt. of Andhra
Pradesh is taking up construction and
maintenance works of various administrative
buildings, health units, hospital blocks, ITIs,
judicial buildings and other government office
buildings. Some of these works are:

Judicial Buildings: Under CSS scheme, 38 nos.
of Judicial
administrative sanction of Rs 199.43 crore have
been completed and 14 nos. of works with an
administrative sanction amount of Rs 201.96

Infrastructure works with

crore are in progress.

PHCs: Under Phase-I of Nadu-Nedu scheme,
administration sanction of Rs 255 crore for 110
out of 152 PHCs have been completed and 943
out of 976 works involving strengthening /
repairs of PHCs with sanction amount of Rs
403.55 crore have been completed. Under
Phase-II of the scheme, work for 88 PHCs with
administration sanction of Rs 225.32 crore has
been taken up, out of which 1 work is
completed, 25 works are in progress and
balance works are to be entrusted.

Block Public Health Units: Govt. of Andhra
Pradesh has sanctioned 168 works costing Rs
84 crore for establishment of Block Public
Health Units (BPHUs) in all mandals to address
the gaps in primary health. Out of which only 42
works are feasible for execution. 14 works are
in progress.

Govt. Polytechnic works: The State has
accorded administrative sanction of Rs 44.32
Retrofitting works for
Modernization and Branding of 43 Government

crore towards


--- PAGE 148 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Polytechnics. 10 works have been completed, 8
works are in progress and remaining 25 works
are related to technical education.

Govt. ITI works: Administrative sanctions of Rs
43.77 crore have also been accorded towards
repairs and_ retrofitting works to 22
Government Industrial Institutes in Andhra
Pradesh, out of which 12 works are in progress.

Renovation of Inspection Bungalows: An
amount of Rs 68.79 crore has been sanctioned
for 124 works , out of which 23 works are
completed, and remaining works are in
progress.

Office Buildings: The state has taken up
construction of IOC at Kuppam and ICC at
Srikakulam with total estimated cost of Rs
126.50 crore, out of which the IOC at Kuppam
has been completed and ICC at Srikakulam is
nearing completion.

7.8 PANCHAYAT RAJ ROADS

Panchayat Raj Engineering Department maintains
80,635 Km rural roads in the state as of April,
2024. This includes 6,077 Km of Cement Concrete
(CC) roads, 28,693 Km of Bituminous roads, 7,824
Km of Water Bound Macadam (WBM) roads,
17,613 Km of Gravel surface roads, and 20,428 Km
of earthen roads. During FY 2024-25, 728 Km road
have been completed duly incurring an
expenditure of Rs 312 crore connecting 99.09% of
targeted habitations by all-weather roads under
PMGSY.

7.9 TRANSPORT

Vehicles registered

Govt. of Andhra Pradesh, through its Transport
Department, has been granting Driving licenses
to Motor Vehicle drivers, and facilitating
registration vehicles,
transport permits, besides levy and collection of
motor

of motor issue of

vehicle tax and _ enforcement of

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

provisions of Motor Vehicles Act and Rules
made there under. The department also acts as
nodal agency for road safety and pollution
control in the state. At the end of Dec 2024, 1.8
crore motor vehicles are registered in the state,
out of which 1.59 crore motor vehicles are of
Non-transport category and being used for
personalized purposes, whereas 21.12 lakhs are
Transport Vehicles. Details are shown in
Annexure 7.17

Transport Vehicles: Out of 21.12 Lakhs
transport vehicles, 0.21 Lakhs are Stage
Carriages (1.03%), 11.13 Lakhs are Goods
Carriages (52.70%), 1.13 Lakhs are cabs
(5.38%), 7.51 Lakhs are Auto -rickshaws
(35.58%), 0.51 Lakhs are passenger vehicles
(2.46%), 0.07 Lakhs are ambulances (0.36%)
and 0.52 Lakhs (2.50%) are other vehicles in
transport segment.

Non-Transport Vehicles: Out of 1.59 crore
Non-Transport Vehicles, 1.40
motorcycles which constitute 88.08%, 4 -
Wheelers are 13.19 Lakhs which constitute
8.25% and 5.83 Lakhs are other vehicles i.e.,
tractor trailers, road rollers, rig mounted,
construction equipment, fire tenders and others
of the non-transport segment.

crores are

Revenue collection through motor vehicles

Motor vehicles have the fourth largest revenue
earning contribution in the state. The revenue is
generated through taxes on motor vehicles and
fee collection for various transaction filed by
vehicles Owners/Drivers. An
Rs.3454.56 Crores has been collected as revenue
during 2024-25 ( upto December, 2024) and the
district-wise revenue collections during the FY
2024-25 is given in Annexure 7.18 The details of
year wise revenue collections from FY 2013-14 to
FY 2023-24 are shown in Annexure 7.19.

amount of

Enforcement of Vehicular Laws

The state has been ensuring enforcement of
motor vehicle law through its enforcement
wing to enable’ better compliance of


--- PAGE 149 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

registration, licensing and_ taxation by
operators. Through active enforcement, the
state has mobilized Rs 134.16 crore of revenue
up to Dec 2024 in FY 2024-25. During the
current year, the enforcement wing is focusing
on Road Safety related violations such as 1)
Drunken Driving, 2) Carrying passengers on
Goods Vehicles, 3) Over Speed, 4) overload, 5)
Driving Without helmet, 6) Not having valid
driving License, 7) No reflectors, 8) Not wearing
seat belt, 9) Driving in wrong/ opposite
direction, and 10) Overloading of Passengers on
vehicles. During FY 2024-25 (up to December
2024), 9.92 lakh cases were booked against the
above violations under the M.V. Act 1988 and
Special emphasis is being given to enforce
wearing of helmet by two-wheeler drivers with
co-operation of Police Department. Action is
also being taken to suspend driving licenses on
erring drivers.

Road Safety

Andhra Pradesh stands at 8 place in the country
in terms of number of road accident deaths. In
the year 2024 (January to November) the state
has witnessed 7,477 deaths out of 16,898 road
accidents.

Andhra Pradesh declared the Road Safety Policy
in year 2015 with a targeted annual reduction of
15% in road accident fatalities. The District Road
Safety Committees have also been constituted in
every district under the chairmanship of District
Collector. These committees have _ regular
monthly meetings. As per the directions of
SCCoRS, government has also constituted a Lead
Agency on Road Safety to focus exclusively on
improving road safety. The committee will
comprise officials from the Transport, Police,
Road Engineering, and Medical & Health
departments.

Additionally, the state has created a Road Safety
Fund to fund Road Safety initiatives by allocating
a percentage share of enforcement revenue
collected by the
departments.Various

enforcement
initiatives have been

a

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

identified by the state to improve Road Safety

measures and efficiently utilize the Road Safety

Fund. These initiatives include:

e Conducting Road Safety Audit on all national
and state highways in the State
(approximately 20,000 kms of road length)
by engaging a Road Safety Audit Consultant

e Improving Road Safety enforcement by
introducing latest technology such as Speed
Cameras, Speed Guns, Breath Analyzers,
Interceptor Vehicle and Towing Cranes

e Effective implementation of the Road Safety
Policy-2024

Ongoing projects to enhance Road Safety
measures

i. Electronic Detailed Accident Report (e-
DAR) (erstwhile Integrated Road
Accident Database (iRAD)) App

A web portal has been developed by MORTH to

collect Road Accidents data from concerned

departments, analyze the data and formulate
policies to improve response time in the

interest of Road Safety. In FY 2024-25, 18,124

road accidents have been registered from

Andhra Pradesh up to December 2024 in the

iRAD App. Government has also developed the

eDAR App in which field officers of different
stakeholder departments - Police, Transport,

Health, National Highway Authority of India,

R&B, Municipal Administration, Panchayat Raj

and 108 services are given roles at District level

to feed the accident data received by their
respective departments from Police department

(that has registered the accidents). The module

is live for Transport, Police, Medical and Road

Engineering departments, with data being

entered by the officials of Transport, Police and

Road Engineering departments at the field level

and all the hospitals in the State into e-DAR

App.

ii. Good Samaritan Awards Scheme:

This program aims to motivate the general
public (Good Samaritans) to help road accident
victims in the Golden Hour. The programme
recognizes the efforts of general public who


--- PAGE 150 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

save life of a road accident victim by
administering immediate assistance and
rushing to Hospital / Trauma Care Center
within the Golden Hour of the road accident for
medical treatment. Under this programme, in
addition to certificate of appreciation to each
Good Samaritan, a cash reward of Rs 5000/- has
also been provisioned for all Good Samaritans
in a single accident. The programme also
comprises National awards worth Rs 1 lakh
cash each for 10 most worthy Good Samaritans
(to be selected from all who those awarded
during the whole year)”. The scheme is being
implemented over five financial years w.e.f. 15
Oct 2021 to 31 Mar 2026. So far, 23 Good
Samaritans have been recognized and awarded
in Andhra Pradesh under this scheme.

iii. Institute of Driving Training &Research
(I.D.T.R)

.D.T.R, Darsi

A driver’s training institute is being constructed
near Darsi, Prakasam district under the Govt of
India Scheme, IDTR at a cost of Rs 18.51 crore,
out of which Rs 2.17 crore (12%) will be borne
by GoAP and remaining by Gol. For this
institute, equipment worth Rs 1.69 crore is
being provided by M/s Maruti Suzuki India
Limited and Rs 47.50 Lakh is being funded by
GoAP. The Institute will be operated by M/s
Maruti Suzuki India Limited on a ‘not for profit’
basis. Tender for this project has already been
awarded and works are in progress.

LD.T.R, Dhone

Another Driver Training Institute is being
constructed near Dhone, Kurnool district under
the Govt of India Scheme IDTR at a cost of Rs
18.5 crore in collaboration with M/s Ashok
Leyland Ltd., Chennai. For this institute, GoAP
has allotted 33.96 acres of land at Kothakota
village, Dhone. Foundation stone of the institute
has been laid by Hon’ble Finance Minister in
February 2022, and an MoU has been signed
with M/s Ashok Leyland Ltd. So far, the project
has achieved 48% progress.

a

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

iv. Automation of Driving Test Tracks
(ADTT):

Phase-I: The state has Driving Test Tracks in all
the district headquarters, for manual testing of
drivers. An amount of Rs 9 crore has been
committed by Gol for automation of 9 such
driving test tracks in Visakhapatnam
(Gambheeram), Gannavaram, Guntur, Nellore,
Chittoor, Tirupati, Ananthapur, Kurnool and
Proddutur. A service agreement to execute the
project with the Transport Dept., GoAP. The
Committee headed by the Chief Secretary on
Road Safety Fund has additionally sanctioned
Rs 4.44 crore to be spent from Road Safety
Fund for completion of automation of 9 Driving
Testing Tracks. Automation has already started
at Chittoor, Ananthapuram, Kurnool and
Proddutur whereas in Tirupati, Gambheeram,
Gannavaram it will start soon. Automation
work of remaining tracks is under progress and
is expected to completed by 31 March 2025.

As part of Phase IJ, the state has proposed
establishment of ADTT at 7 places - Srikakulam,
Vizianagaram, Anakapalli, Eluru, Sri Satya Sai,
Annamaya and Adoni. The Executive Committee
for Road Safety has accorded sanction for
attending the required civil works and inviting
of tenders is under process

As part of Phase III, the District Collectors of the
remaining districts have been instructed to allot
Government land for establishing ADTT

v. Inspection and Certification Centre (I&C
Centre)

MORTH, Gol sanctioned Rs 16.50 crores for
setting up of an Inspection and Certification
Center (I&C Center) at Gambheeram,
Visakhapatnam. A Tripartite MoU has been
signed up between ARAI (a Pune _ based
Executing Agency), MORTH and GoAP. So far,
70% of civil works have been completed and
the project is expected to be completed by 30
June 2025.


--- PAGE 151 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

vi. Automated Testing Station (ATS)

To conduct precision-oriented vehicles fitness
tests of vehicles, ATS have been established in
Anantapuram and Nandyal districts. They are
expected to be operational by March 2025 in all
20 remaining districts.

vii. NIC Integration Implementation of
Vahan &Saradhi in AP

Under the Sarathi Module, 34 SARATHI Services
have been onboarded and citizens are availing
these services through online mode. There are
total 51 VAHAN Services available. These
services were introduced in NTR District in
June 2024, and later expanded state-wide.

7.10 ANDHRA PRADESH STATE
ROAD TRANSPORT
CORPORATION

APSRTC is a state-owned entity that operates

network services,

connecting urban and rural areas in the state. In
the year 1958, the Corporation had a fleet
strength of 609 buses (16 depots) with a staff of

5,081 workers. Given the increase in demand

for public transportation, the fleet strength was

increased year after year. As on December

2024, APSRTC operates 129 Depots across 4

Zones and 26 Districts with a total fleet

strength of 11,226 buses and 46,612 employees

on rolls.

an extensive of bus

Schemes aimed at welfare and development
of AP

Public transportation has emerged as a critical
enabler of economic participation and social
inclusion, particularly for women. Based on the
success of Karnataka's Shakti Scheme, which
provides free public transport for women
including girl students, GoAP has constituted a
Group of Ministers (GoM) to _— study
implementation of a similar scheme in AP. In
this regard, a delegation visited Karnataka State
on 2nd & 3rd January 2025 and studied on
operational details of the scheme and best
practices adopted by them.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Highlights of Achievements during 2024-25

Revenue realisation: APSRTC realised
traffic revenue of Rs 4261 crore during FY
2024-25 i.e. (up to December 2024) as
against Rs 4360 crore during FY 2023-24,
maintaining the same occupancy ratio of
69% as last year.

Bus Passes: APPTD is providing bus passes
with 80% concession to 8.90 lakh students
thus enabling access to schools and
educational institutions, especially for
economically weaker sections.

Temple Tourism: APSRTC operated 1,780
special buses to Arunachalam located in
Tamil Nadu from various Depots and
realized additional revenue of Rs 5.25 crore.
An additional amount of Rs 9.89 crore was
also realised by operating 2,718 additional
buses as KarthikaMasam and Sabarimalai
specials.
Senior concession: 25%
concession on ticket fare is provided to all
Senior Citizens as a gesture of concern

citizen

towards the aged _ people thereby
encouraging them to _ prefer public
transportation over other means. of

transport. Around 6.48 crore journeys have
been performed by Senior citizens in the
year.

Marketing Strategies: 10% concession is
offered on all long-distance passengers for
both up and down journeys. So far, 3.03
Lakh passengers have utilized this facility.
The Commercial & MED departments have
received the ASRTU National Excellence
Award under the category of Special jury for
achieving the highest non-ticket revenue
(Increase of revenues in Cargo & Logistics)
and achieving highest KMPL in_ fuel
efficiency in Mofussil category of fleet size
4,001-7,500 respectively.

Digital Practice - In 2024, the state has
introduced effortless digital travel by
providing in-bus UPI payments and vehicle
tracking for a smarter, more connected ride.


--- PAGE 152 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Up to December 2024, APSRTC has inducted 60
Non-AC sleeper buses to compete with private
operators, and has planned to increase this fleet
to 115. The corporation has additionally
inducted 1,891 new buses to meet the growing
demand for new buses.

Safety measures by APSRTC to avert
Accidents:

APSRTC has initiated various measures to
ensure safety of its bus passengers and other
road users and they have yielded good results.
These measures include streamlining the
system of Drivers,
Comprehensive training before deployment of
drivers, periodical medical examination,
defensive driver’s training program at Regional
Headquarters/Zonal Staff Training Colleges
(ZSTCs), payment of enhanced Safety Driving
Allowances to drivers and the institution of
Safety Driving Instructors (SDIs) in all Depots
etc. Recently, a two-day Road Safety training
program was conducted for hired bus drivers
and On-call drivers at all Zonal Staff training
colleges of the Corporation, in which about
10,000 drivers were trained.

recruitment of

The state has also reoriented Safety Driving
Instructor’s job with larger focus on imparting
training to drivers on Road Safety including
PHB and on-call drivers. Moreover, every driver
is being sensitized by Traffic supervisors before
going to duty and senior drivers are being
booked for special type of services. The
accident rate during FY 2024-25, upto Dec-
2024 is 0.06, same as last year.

System for addressing Complaints and
Enquiries

APSRTC has established a 24x7 Central
Complaint Cell at PNBS Vijayawada with toll
number 0866-2570005 from June-2016 to
receive and attend enquiries and complaints
raised by customers. Additionally, a Short Code
dialling number 149 is also provided for ease of
customers. On an average 4,000 calls and 100 e-
Mails are answered daily by trained personnel

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

to assist commuters and render immediate
help/ rectification of problem. Apart from this,
customer calls and alert messages on
breakdowns, accidents, medical emergency, and
woman safety incidents registered through
www.apsrtclivetrack.com are also _ being
monitored and responded for necessary
assistance.

Mechanical Department achievements

As at end of December 2024, APSRTC has a total
fleet size of 11,226 buses (8,475 RTC + 2,751
Hired), comprising 467 AC Buses (348
RTC+119 Hire), and 10,759 Non-AC Buses
(8127 RTC+2632 Hire). The agency has
acquired 1,032 New Buses in 2024-25. JnNURM
buses are being operated in Visakhapatnam,
Vijayawada and Tirupati cities.

To improve the performance of its staff,
APSRTC has introduced latest Technological
developments, identified and trained low KMPL
& accident-prone drivers, and deployed BS.VI
model buses through M/s Tata Motors Ltd. M/s
Ashok Leyland as OEMs.

To reduce the power consumption of bus
depots, Rooftop Solar Plants have been installed
at 4 Bus. stations (Kakinada, Chittoor,
Madanapalle and Nandyal) with a capacity of
100KW each, thus enabling saving of Rs 2.2
crore since inception till Dec’, 2024. Installation
of additional Rooftop Solar Plants has been
proposed at 19 APSRTC identified locations
under RESCO model.

In November 2024, 2 New Rooftop Solar plants
under the RESCO model were commissioned at
PNBS, Vijayawada (499 KW) & Central Hospital,
Vidyadharapuram, Vijayawada (64 KW),
facilitating saving of electricity expense by
Rs.1,60,757 up to Dec’2024

Commercial Revenue

During 2024-25, APSRTC realised Rs 348.48
crore of Revenue from commercial operations
upto Dec-2024, as compared to Rs 299.66 crore
last year. As a result of good fiscal management,
APSRTC was able to reduce its losses by Rs 226


--- PAGE 153 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

crore up to Nov’2024 (achieving reduction in
losses from Rs 999 crore in FY2023-24 to Rs
773 crore in FY2024-25).

APSRTC has realized additional revenue of
Rs.196.12 lakhs as of Dec’24 by attending
Janatha garage works at Zonal workshops &
Depots. These works included Retreating of
Tyres& Overhauling of hired buses, Internship
to Vocational, ITI, Diploma & Engineering
students, Bus body repairs for hired buses/
private vehicles.

Employee welfare - best practices in the
State

Provision of compassionate appointments:
With approval of the Govt. of AP, 1,524
compassionate appointments have been
provided in APPTD, with 713 appointments in
APSRTC and 811 appointments in APPTD in lieu
of the employees deceased while in service
after 01 Jan 2020

Medicare to the employees: Govt. of AP has
extended the Employee Health Scheme (EHS) to
all APPTD employees at all notified hospitals
under EHS. This facility is also extended to all
PTD employees who are working at inter-state
stations such as Bangalore, Chennai and
Hyderabad. Additionally, a 50 bedded hospital
at RTC Central Hospital, Vidyadharapuram,
Vijayawada and a 20 bedded Area hospital at
Kadapa have been establishment with ll
modern and latest medical equipment to cater
to the medical needs of employees and their
dependent family members. Apart from this, 19
Dispensaries under APSRTC are functioning in
the district headquarters. One Dispensary has
been established in Tarnaka area at Hyderabad
to meet the medical care of retired employees
settled at Hyderabad. The
reimbursement scheme also applies to PTD
employees.

medical

Employees’ deposit linked insurance
scheme: All the APPTD employees are
presently covered under EPS-95 scheme of Gol.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

The dependent family members of the deceased
employees are slated to receive benefits
ranging from Rs.35,000/- to Rs.7,00,000/-.

Corporate salary package with insurance
benefits: All APSRTC employees are covered
under Corporate Salary Package (CSP) with SBI.
Under CSP, employees are provided with Group
Personal Accidental Insurance (GPAI) for an
amount of Rs 85 lakhs. Additional Personal
Accidental Death Insurance cover for an
amount of Rs 10.00 lakhs is provided to
employees holding SBI Platinum Salary RuPay
Debit Card. A Group Term Life (GTL) Insurance
coverage of Rs 5 lakhs is also provided for
natural death at a monthly premium of Rs.200/-
per month/per employee.

Training to outside drivers: 25 Heavy Vehicle
Driver Training Schools have been established,
with one school in each parliamentary
constituency to impart training in Heavy
Vehicle Driving to unemployed youth. These
schools also facilitate issuance of HMV Driving
License. So far, 5,313 outside candidates have
been trained in Heavy Vehicle Driving skills.

IT Department

APSRTC has implemented a Unified Ticketing
Solution (UTS) that provides all the customer
centric services in a single platform. All the
modules of UTS including passenger ticket
services, QR code payments, Bus Passes,
Commercial stalls and Cargo/ Parcel booking
including door delivery and door pick-up have
been successfully implemented. The UTS
application is seamlessly integrated with the
ERP system for in-house activities.

APSRTC has also enabled live tracking of buses
with the same _ ticketing e-POS machine
eliminating the need for a separate device for
vehicle tracking. This unique model is under
study by all sister organisations in other states
for replication. The corporation has also
completed integration of ticket booking duly
leveraging the Open Network for Digital


--- PAGE 154 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Commerce platform and the ticketing through
the WhatsApp interface. The year-wise
operational performance of APSRTC from 2015-
16 to 2024-25 (up to Dec.24) is given in
Annexure 7.20

Action Plan for 2024-25

* Buoyed by the success of launching Non-AC
sleeper buses and cost effectiveness of both
AC and Non-AC_ Sleeper buses, the
Corporation is now planning to procure 121
additional Non-AC and 30 AC sleeper buses
in the coming months. Procurement of 750
e-buses has been sanctioned through PM e-
bus Seva Scheme, for which tenders are
being finalized through CESL, New Delhi.

¢ The state is also planning to expand the
rural operations of APSRTC by
strengthening operations on high potential
routes.

¢ Andhra Pradesh has signed agreements
with the states of Tamil Nadu and
Telangana to further enhance govt.-owed
inter-state connectivity and compete with
private operators.

¢ APSRTC has published a Common Annual
Training Calendar (CATC) on _ refresher
training programs for all categories of
employees including officers and
supervisors.

* It has also initiated steps to improve
internal efficiency of the organisation on
operation, maintenance and human
resources.

7.11 AIRPORTS

Airports connect the state with the rest of the
country and the world, enabling swift
passenger travel and the movement of goods,
which enhances trade and commerce. The
airports and civil aviation sector play a crucial
role in generating direct and_ indirect
employment opportunities and _ supporting
other key economic sectors such as hospitality,
tourism, industries, and road transportation

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

services. According to International Civil
Aviation Organization, expenditure of every
US$ 100 in Air transport produces benefits
worth US$ 325 for the local economy and
creation of every 100 jobs results in generation
of 610 new jobs in the local economy.

Andhra Pradesh Civil Aviation Policy

The State Government released the Andhra
Pradesh Civil Aviation Policy in 2015 to
encourage private participation in airport
development, regional/national airline
operations and other aviation infrastructure.
The policy includes provision of fiscal
incentives and means to bridge financing gap
through Viability Gap Funding Scheme on case-
to-case basis. Andhra Pradesh has decided to
develop new Greenfield Airports and also
upgrade existing airstrips for better air
connectivity and economic growth. The State
currently handles 1.6% of the total passenger
traffic in India. The new Andhra Pradesh Civil
Aviation Policy, 2025 is now being prepared for
the next 10 years.

Govt. of Andhra Pradesh has established the
Andhra Pradesh’ Airports Development
Corporation Limited (APADCL, formerly
Bhogapuram International Airport Corporation
Limited -BIACL) as an SPV with 100%
ownership of GoAP. It is the state’s nodal
agency for facilitation and improvement of
aviation infrastructure.

Summary on development of Greenfield
Airport projects in AP

APADCL has proposed to develop Greenfield
Airports at  Bhogapuram (Vizianagaram
District), Dagadarthi (Nellore District), No-frills
Airport at Orvakallu (Kurnool District),
Srikakulam Airport (Srikakulam District), Tuni-
Annavaram (Kakinada), Nagarjunasagar
(Palnadu District), Tadepalligudem (West
Godavari District), Kuppam Airport (Chittoor
District) &Ongole Airport (Prakasam District).


--- PAGE 155 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Orvakallu Airport is operational since 25th
March 2021.

Greenfield International Airport at
Bhogapuram: The proposed _ Greenfield
International Airport near Visakhapatnam is
envisaged to be developed on public-private
partnership (PPP) mode with GMR
Visakhapatnam International Airport Limited
(GVIAL) as the concessionaire. A total extent of
2,703.26 acres has been acquired by APADCL
for this airport, out of which 2,203.26 acres has
been handed over to the concessionaire. The
construction period of the airport is 3 years
from the appointed date. The Govt. of AP is
proposing a 6/8 lane expressway from
Visakhapatnam city to Bheemili beach to
connect the International Airport.

An amount of Rs 795 crores has been invested
for procurement of land and Rehabilitation &
Resettlement (R&R) activities. Since 2015-16,
an amount of Rs 120 crores has been paid by
Government to the land holders of Bhogapuram
Airport. Estimated cost of the Project for Phase-
Tis Rs 2,302.51 crores. The airport will have a
cumulative capacity of 6 Mppa in Phase - I, 12
Mppa in Phase - IJ and 18 Mppa in Phase - IIl.

Government of AP has entered an MOU with
AAI for the use of land at Civil Enclave at Vizag
Naval Airfield (INS Dega). No Objection
Certificate (NOC) has also been granted for
closure of Scheduled Commercial Operations at
the Civil Enclave at the existing Visakhapatnam
Airport for 30 years, upon commencement of
operations at Greenfield Airport at Bhogapuam.

No-frills Greenfield Airport at Dagadarthi:
This project is proposed to be developed on
PPP mode at Dagadarthi in Nellore district.
Overall land requirement of the project is 1,380
acres, out of which 635 acres has been
acquired, while 481.142 acres is yet to be
obtained from forest dept. An amount of Rs
116.88 crores has been spent on_ land
acquisition and pre-development activities. The
total cost of the Project is Rs 1,499.17 crores of

150)

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

which the LAR&R costs including connectivity
cost will be borne by GoAP, whereas the
developer will contribute capital expenditure
for project development. Revision of TEFR and
preparation of RFP for selection of developer
are under process. Along with this Airport,
Govt. of AP has also envisaged development ofa
Cargo Hub to boost the international trade for
nearby districts.

No-frills Green Field Airport at Orvakal,
Kurnool: This is the first airport in South India
to be entirely developed by a State government.
The Airport has been renamed as Uyyalawada
Narasimha Reddy Airport. Airlines have started
operations on routes connecting Chennai,
Bengaluru, Visakhapatnam. New routes have
also been proposed from Kurnool to Tirupathi
and Vijayawada to improve Air connectivity.

The renewal for commercial operations from
DGCA (Directorate General of Civil Aviation)
has been obtained till Jan 2028. Development of
city side land of 1,008 acres at Kurnool Airport
is under process on EPC mode, with 100%
funding from GoAP and loan guarantee to
APADCL. So far, Rs 180 crores have been spent
on the project. The Development of Airport City
on 541.22 acres of land is under progress.
Transaction Advisory services for development
of City Side land at Kurnool Airport has been
entrusted with AP Urban Infrastructure Asset
Management Limited (APUIAML). Additionally,
the Development, Operations and Management
of Flying Training Organization has been
allotted to Orient Flying Training Organization
School, Chennai.

Development of Water Aerodrome

Under RCS-UDAAN Scheme, AAI has proposed
the development of Sea Plane Services across
strategic locations having large water bodies
across the country. In Andhra Pradesh, APADCL
has identified 10 locations for the development
of seaplane operations and requested Gol to
provide financial assistance of Rs 200 crore
(considering cost of Rs 20 crore per location)


--- PAGE 156 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

for development of infrastructure for water
aerodromes under RCS-UDAN Scheme. Land
identification is in progress at locations of
Prakasam Barrage, Rushikonda, Lambasingi,
Araku, Kakinada, Konaseema,  Narsapur,
Gandikota, Tirupati, Srisailam. Seaplane
demonstration have been _ successfully
conducted at Prakasam Barrage on 9th Nov
2024,

The State Government has _ additionally
requested GOI for financial support of Rs 50
crores (Rs 5 crores for each project) under
IIPDF Scheme for preparing detailed project
report, conducting EIA study, providing project
management consultancy including statutory
clearances and O&M consultancy for the
proposed 10 water aerodromes.

Development of Water Aerodrome at
Prakasam Barrage, Vijayawada: The project
is envisaged to be developed at an estimated
cost of Rs 20 crore by Airports Authority of
India (AAI). Location of Prakasam Barrage has
been selected under RCS UDAN 3.1 and bids
have been received on Hyderabad - Prakasam
barrage - Hyderabad sector. MoCA/ AAI/DGCA
team have recently concluded site visit to
ascertain feasibility of the project and have
requested following considerations:
¢ Shifting of certain obstructions and further
next steps in the development of Water
Aerodrome and related infrastructure
* AAI has envisaged reimbursement of the
estimated project cost of Rs 20 crores, with
the condition of any additional cost to be
borne by GoAP
* GoAP has requested AAI for extension of
Scheme’s validity for the Project till August
2025. The same has been approved by Gol.

Existing Airports in Andhra Pradesh

Currently there are 6 operational Airports in
Andhra Pradesh. These comprise 3 Domestic
Airports at Rajahmundry, Kadapa, Orvakallu at

25

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Kurnool and 3 International Airports at
Vishakhapatnam, Vijayawada and Tirupati.

Airport Up-gradation:

Vijayawada International Airport:
Government of Andhra Pradesh had signed an
MOU with AAI for expansion of Gannavaram
Airport in 5 years period (2017-2022). AAI
agreed to spend Rs 1,000 crores. GoAP has
agreed to provide 837.69 acres of land for the
project. AAI has spent total Rs 400 crore, out of
which Rs 170 crore is spent towards new
internal terminal building, Rs 160 crore for
extension of runway, Rs 40 crore for new
parking base and Rs 30 crore for other works
like compound wall and new DVOR.

A new initiative called DIGI YATRA project was
initiated on Vijayawada Airport. It facilitates
passenger access to the airport without any
identity requirement. The system uses face
identity for registration in the DIGI YATRA App.
The total cost incurred for DIGIYATRA initiative
is Rs 25 crores.

Tirupati Airport: The Airport has been
granted International Airport status in October
2015 from Ministry of Civil Aviation. Expansion
of the airport has been taken up as per
provisions of the Andhra Pradesh
Reorganization Act, 2014. The airport has all
the support functions for the operations in
place. International flights are yet to be
commenced from this Airport. Additional land
to an extent of about 732 acres has been
provided by the State Government to AAI for
expansion of the airport at a cost of about Rs
200 Crore. 4 new parking bays have also been
commissioned. Extension of runway to 3,810
mts has been undertaken. Runway for the
airport has been expanded to handle larger
aircraft of code 4E such as Airbus A330 and
Boeing B787.

A new ATC Tower is likely to be installed within
AAI land. Additional construction of 3 Bays has
taken place to accommodate code 4E type of


--- PAGE 157 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

aircrafts. Construction of a new taxi track
connecting the new Apron is completed. A new
DOR building is likely to be constructed for
accommodating the navigational requirement.
Tender process is in progress for the DOR
building and it shall come into operation within
3-4 months. 90% of the extensions of runway
work have been completed.

Rajahmundry Airport: The Airport is owned
and operated by AAI under Ministry of Civil
Aviation. It is licensed under 4C category and is
capable to handle A-320 type of aircraft. State
Government handed over 852.42 acres of land
in 2016 for various development works. The
Extension of Runway from 1,750 M to 3,165 M,
strengthening of existing Runway, construction
of Isolation Bay, Blast pad, Development of
Basic strip, and RESA have been completed at a
total cost of Rs 110.89 crore and was
commissioned in April 2019. Widening of Turn
pads for Runway and Taxiway to accommodate
VVIP aircraft of B-777-300 ER have been
completed at a cost of Rs 9.5 crore

The existing Apron is capable of handling Six
(6) aircrafts at a time and further planned to re-
configurate to accommodate 11 aircrafts with
power in-power out configuration. As a part of
Renewable energy, 1 MW Solar Power Plant
was commissioned on 20 Dec 2020 at a total
cost of Rs 4.65 crore, due to which average
annual savings of Rs. 85 lakhs (approx.) was
witnessed during the last FY. With the growing
traffic demand, construction of new Departure
Terminal Building in an area of 22,000 Sqm
with peak hour capacity of 200 passengers
(1050 arrival+1050 departures) has been
planned at an approximate cost of Rs. 350 Cr
which is likely to be taken up in next Financial
Year. To meet the growing demand of Cargo, an

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

interim Cargo Terminal has been recently
commissioned. Presently, Cargo facility is
available to and from Rajahmundry Airport. So
far, 6,400 Kg of Cargo is being handled from
Rajahmundry Airport.

Visakhapatnam Airport: The existing integrated
terminal building at Visakhapatnam airport is
expanded by another 5,000 sqm on either side,
separately to facilitate the international
passengers, while the existing terminal building
is used only for domestic passengers. With this
expansion, the peak hour domestic passenger
capacity has been increased to 600 from 400
and peak hour international passenger capacity
has been increased to 450 from 300. At present,
the annual passenger capacity of the terminal
stands at 2.6 MPPA.

Kadapa Airport: The Kadapa airport was
developed by AAI and opened for commercial
air traffic on 7th June 2015 with a scheduled
flight operated by M/s. Air Pegasus in the route
Bangalore=> Kadapa => Bangalore. Later M/s.
Trujet Airlines started scheduled flight
operations in the year 2017 under UDAN RCS
connecting Chennai, Hyderabad, Vijayawada &
Belgaum. The total area of land available for
Kadapa Airport is 1,106 acres. The Airport is
having a runway of 2,515 M length, with
availability of night landing facility and 7
Parking bays. FY 2023-24 witnessed movement
of 2,111 Aircrafts with 65,544 Passengers.
Presently Indigo Airlines is operating, with
regularly scheduled flights (ATR 72) from
Kadapa Airport to major cities like Hyderabad,
Chennai & Vijayawada. Daily Aircraft
Movements on the airport involve 02 Arrivals
and 02 Departures, with average Daily
movement of (Approx.) 100 passengers. Details
are given below in Table.7.12


--- PAGE 158 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Table.7.12.Status of Infrastructure development works by AAI.

Name of the Works Physical Progress Date of
Airport upto 17.01.25 Completion

. Construction of New
Vijayawada

Airport Works

i Integrated
Terminal Building and Associated 61% 30.06.25

Rajahmundry Construction New Domestic 0
2 | Rahmnry Terminal and Miscellaneous Works 11.08.25

Construction of New
Kadapa

Airport works

Domestic
Terminal Building and Miscellaneous 19% 26.01.26

4 Tirupati Construction of ATC cum Technical 92% 23.02.25
Airport Block

7.12 SEAPORTS

Andhra Pradesh has a Coastline of about
1,053.07 Kms with one Major Port at
Visakhapatnam under the administrative
control of Gol and 16 notified Ports under the
control of GoAP. Following is the status of Major
ports in Andhra Pradesh:

Kakinada Port: This port includes Kakinada

anchorage port and Kakinada deep water port.

a) The Anchorage Port is being operated and
managed by the State Government. It has a
capacity to handle about 4 million metric
tons of cargo per annum. During FY, 2024-
25 (up to November 2024), the port
handled 2.326 MTs of cargo and realized
revenue of Rs 46.08 crores is shown in
Annexure 7.21

b) Kakinada Deep Water Port has 3 berths
constructed at a total cost of Rs 293.00
crores. It was awarded to M/s Kakinada
Seaports Limited on PPP (OMST) basis,
wherein the Concessionaire is required to
pay 22% of Revenue share as Gross Income
to GoAP. Presently, the Port is under
operation with 7 berths, 6 OSV berths and
one North return wall berth of 635 Mts.
length. So far, an extent of 558.47 acres land

nn

has been given on lease. During FY 2024-25
(up to Novemner,2024), the port handled
11.15 MTs of cargo and realized Revenue of
Rs 461.00 crores, in which Government’s
share is Rs 101.42 crores.

Gangavaram Port: GoAP had awarded the
development of a green field Deep Water Port
at Gangavaram near Visakhapatnam to M/s
Gangavaram Port Limited under PPP. The
Concession agreement was signed on 07 Aug
2003 with M/s. Gangavaram Port Limited (GPL)
for development of the port on PPP (BOOT)
mode. The concession fee is 2.10% of the gross
revenue earned by the developer. The Capacity
of the Port is 64.00 MMT. The Commercial
Operations of the airport commenced on 17-
Apr-2009, with total investment under Phase 1
of Rs 1,675 crores and Rs 1,320 crores under
Phase 2. During FY 2024-25 (up. to
Novemner,2024), the port handled 16.201 MTs
of cargo and realized Revenue of Rs 702.436
crores, with Government share of Rs 14.751
crores. Details are covered in Annexure 7.21

Krishnapatnam Port: GoAP had awarded the
development of Krishnapatnam Port to M/s
Krishnapatnam Port Company Limited (KPCL)
under PPP Mode on Build, Operate, Share and
Transfer (BOST) basis. The Concession


--- PAGE 159 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

agreement was signed on 17-Sep-2004. The
developer is required to pay a concession fee of
2.6% of Gross income for 30 years. Commercial
operations of the project commenced on 20-
Mar-2009. Presently, 11 berths of the Port are
under operation. Construction of additional
berths under Phase II is in progress and the
estimated cost of Phase-II is Rs 6,000 crore. So
far, an extent of land 4,834.15 acres has been
given against 6,800 acres approved by the
Government. During FY 2024-25 (up to
November,2024), the port handled 37.786 MTs
of cargo and realized revenue of Rs 2,211.205
crores, with Government share of Rs 57.49
crores. Details are covered in Annexure 7.21

Rawa Port: The Port is located near
Surasenayanam in East Godavari District and it
facilitates transport Crude Oil from S. Yanam to
Chennai / Visakhapatnam / Haldia by Sea. M/s
Cairn India Pvt. Ltd. have installed Single Buoy
Mooring System (SBM) at Rawa Port. During FY
2023-24, the Port handled 0.65 Million tonnes
of cargo and realized revenue of Rs 3.35 crores.
As against this, during FY 2024-25 (up to
November 2024), the Port handled 0.443
Million tonnes of cargo and realized revenue of
Rs 2.310 crores. The state’s share is shown in
Annexure 7.21

Other Non- Major Ports under Development:

Non-Major Ports in Andhra Pradesh are under
development at (a) Kakinada SEZ _ (b)
Machilipatnam, (c) Mulapeta Port (Formerly
known as Bhavanapadu) and (d)
Ramayapatnam are under’ development
process. Details of these ports are given below:

Kakinada SEZ Port: Government entrusted the
development of Kakinada SEZ Port to the
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) GMR Kakinada
Gateway Port Limited. The Concession
Agreement has been signed in 2018. Project has
been developed on a total land area of 1,944
acres. The Total Cost of Project is Rs 2,123
crores which includes Dredging, Breakwater
Revetment, construction of Berths, Port

Ee

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Buildings, Road works, Railway line, Port Craft
berth, Miscellaneous etc. As a part of the
Project, 3 berths are being constructed - one for
Coal handling and other two Berths for General
Cargo. Environmental Clearance and land for
the Project have been obtained. Concessionaire
has also achieved financial closure and project
development works have commenced from
2022. After completion of the Project, the
Capacity of the Port is expected to reach 16
Million Metric Tons of Cargo. Till November
2024, project has achieved 22.57% Physical
progress.

Machilipatnam Port: It is being developed
under Land-lord Model with a total Project cost
of Rs 5,155.73 crores in Phase -1. The core area
of land is 1,688.84 acres (which is in possession
of APMB) comprising 4 Berths (3 general and 1
coal) with total capacity of 35 MTs. The contract
agreement has been signed with M/s.Megha
Engineering and Infrastructures Ltd, Hyderabad
for Rs 3,668.83 crores on 26-Aug-2022 for
development of the Port on EPC basis with a
completion period of 36
Environmental Clearance (EC) has been
received from MoEF&CC on 28-Feb-2023. The
Project Development works commenced on 21-
Apr-2023 which included Breakwaters -
56.69%, Dredging & Reclamation - 19.60%,
Berths - 40.38%, Onshore Facilities - 19.60%
and the overall physical progress of 28.09% has
been achieved till November 2024.

months.

Mulapeta Port (formerly known as
Bhavanapadu Port): Mulapeta Port is being
developed under Land-Lord Model with a total
Project cost of Rs 4,361.91 crores. The total
core area of land 826.72 acres comprising 4
Berths (3 general and 1 coal) with total capacity
of 23.5 MTs in Phase 1. The Contract Agreement
has been signed with M/s. Vishwa Samudra
Ports (JV), Hyderabad for Rs. 2949.70 crores on
02-Aug-2022 for the development of the Port
on EPC basis with a completion period of 30
months. Environmental Clearance (EC) has
been received from MoEF&CC on 31-May-2023.


--- PAGE 160 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Land acquisition is under progress. The Project
Development works have commenced and
progress achieved till November 2024 include
Breakwaters - 41.38%, Dredging &
Reclamation - 41.93%, Berths - 31.73% and
overall progress of 30.09%.

Ramayapatnam Port: Development of this
port is proposed on Ramayapatnam Village, a
Coastal Village located at SPS Nellore District in
Ulavapadu Mandal, located 5.0 Km East of
Thettu on NH-16 and 93 Km North of
Krishnapatnam Port. The proposed location is
12.8 Km away from its Mandal main town
Ulavapadu and 78.7 Km away from Ongole.
South Central railway passes adjacent to the
NH-16, the nearest Railway stations is
‘THETTU’ located within 6 Km from the sea.
Government of Andhra Pradesh has accorded
permission for establishing Ramayapatnam
Port Development Corporation Limited in
February 2020. The total administrative
Sanction amount for Phase-1 of the project is
Rs. 4,929.39 crores with IBM estimate of Rs
2,647.62 crores. Letter of Award was issued to
the Contractor, and the contract Agreement was
signed on 30-July-2021. The total value of the
contract is Rs 2,634.65 crores. Environmental
Clearance for the Phase-1 with handling
capacity (34.04 ©MMTPA) - has been
obtained from MoEF&CC and Financial Closure
has been obtained by RPDCL

The Port is being developed through a Special
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) with a total project cost
of Rs 4,922.62 crore in a core land area of
850.79 acres comprising 4 Berths (2 general, 1
coal and 1 Multipurpose/Container) with a
capacity of 34.04 MTPA in Phase-1.The Project
Development works have commenced and
progress achieved till November 2024 include
Breakwaters - 82.18%, Dredging &
Reclamation -56.80%, Berths - 39.15%,
Onshore facilities - 20.84% and overall physical
progress of 30.09%.

15

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Other Ports

Nizampatnam and Vodarevu Port: The State
Government has proposed development of
Vodarevu. Port in  Prakasham District
&Nizampatnam Port in Guntur District under
Public Private Participation (PPP) Mode on
Build, Own, Operate and Transfer (BOOT) basis.
The project is on hold due to ongoing
investigated by CBI.

The State Government have also proposed 2
other Ports. One is the Meghavaram (Captive
Port) in Srikakulam District being developed as
a Minor Port for imports of Coal, fly ash for the
Thermal plants and the other is Nakkapalli
Minor Port in Visakhapatnam District for
Export of Alumina by M/s ANRAK Aluminum
Ltd. The Projects work is yet to be commenced.

Fishing Harbors

The State Government concluded agreement for
four (4) Fishing Harbors for Rs 1,204.56
croresat Juvvaladinne, Nellore _ District,
Nizampatnam, Bapatla District, Machilipatnam,
Krishna District &Uppada, Kakinada District
with M/s MRKR Constructions and Industries
Pvt. Ltd. on 18-March-2021 with completion
period of 24 months for Phase 1. Physical
progress achieved in the Fishing Harbors till
November-2024 include Juvvaladinne FH -
86.35%, Nizampatnam FH 62.84%,
Machilipatnam FH - 60.60% and Uppada FH -
64.99%

Development of 6 Fishing Harbors in
Phases-II - The State Government has
sanctioned an amount of Rs 1,977.77 crores for
development of five (5) Fishing Harbors namely
- Biyyaputhippa, West Godavari District,
Kothapatnam, Prakasam District, Pudimadaka,
Anakapalle District, Budagatlapalem,
Srikakulam District &Vodarevu,  Bapatla
District. Contract agreement with M/s.
VishwaSamudra Holdings Pvt. Ltd was signed
on 20-Oct-2022 for Rs 1,495.35 crore, with
completion period of 18 months for Phase II


--- PAGE 161 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Manchineellapeta (Srikakulam) - Draft DPR
has been submitted and observations of CICEF
(Gol) have been communicated for compliance
by M/s Indomer. Preliminary report has been
submitted to Gol for sanction of funds under
PMMSY. Development
construction of Training Wall/Breakwaters,
Dredging and Disposal & Reclamation and
leveling of Quays, Construction of Traffic areas
and surfacing, Fish Handling and Auction Hall
for MFVs, Fishermen gear sheds etc. are being
taken up in each of the fishing
harbor.Preparatory works for Breakwater and
Approach Road & Internal Road works have
been Budagatlapalem &
Pudimadaka Fishing Harbors.

works such as

commenced at

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Development of 6 Fish Landing Centres
(FLCs): The State
administrative sanctioned for development of 6
Fish Landing Centers (FLCs) with an estimated
126.91 crores at Chintapalli,

Government accorded

cost of Rs

Vizianagaram District, Bheemili,
Visakhapatnam District, Rajayyapeta,
Anakapalli District, Dondawaka, Anakapalli

District, Uppalanka, Kakinada District, and
Rayadaruvu, Tirupathi District.

The Operational Ports-wise details of Cargo
handled and earned by State
Government during FY 2023-24 are shown in
Table 7.13

revenue

Table 7.13 Statement Showing the Physical Targets and Achievements Pertaining to Operational Ports

2024-25
Cargo in MMT Govt.Revenue in crores
SN Name of the Port Achievement .
Target (up to Nov Target Achievement
2024-25 2024-25 to Nov 2024
2024) (upto Nov )
1. | Krishnapatnam Port 50.50 37.786 77.87 57.49
2. | Gangavaram Port 36.00 16.201 32.76 14.751
3. | Kakinada Deep Water Port 17.62 11.15 150.0 101.42
4. | Kakinada Anchorage Port 4.00 2.326 60.00 46.08
5. | Rawa Port 2.00 0.443 3.00 2.310

Projected Growth / Investment for the
Periods 2030 & 2047:

Andhra Pradesh has the potential of generating
a US$20 billion Blue Economy by 2035. The
greatest advantage of the State is its tranquil &
deep water coasts, with connectivity through
rail and National Highway network, situated
near and along the Coast. As part of the plan to
ensure the comprehensive realization of coastal
hinterland potential, AP Maritime Board
(APMB) is undertaking development of 03
Greenfield ports at Ramayapatnam,
Machilipatnam &Mulapeta under Land-Lord
Model. State is also developing Kakinada

nn

Gateway Port under PPP (DBFOT) mode. A total
Investment of approx. Rs 16,000 crore is
underway for these 04 upcoming greenfield
ports, which will create an additional capacity
of 145 MTPA by 2030 and generated direct &
indirect employment of 75,000+ jobs. The state
has also envisaged construction of 11 fishing
harbors at an estimated cost of Rs 3,500 crore.

AP Maritime Board (APMB) has proposed to
undertake development of Phase-II of four (4)
Ports at Ramayapatnam, Machilipatnam,
Mulapeta& Kakinada Gate Way Port by 2047, at
an approx. investment of Rs 18,000 crore.
Phase-II of the proposed ports will create an



--- PAGE 162 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

additional capacity of 300 MTPA by 2047 and
generate direct & indirect employment of
1,00,000+ jobs.

Regular investments in the Ports & Fishing
Sector can have significant benefits for the
State, including increased economic growth, job

creation, improved transportation
infrastructure, increased revenue and foreign
exchange earnings, and port-led

industrialization. It will also attract new
industries and SEZs to the State, leading to
increased foreign direct investment and growth
in trade activities.

7.13 POST OFFICE

There are 10,672 post offices in the state, out of
which 57 are Head Post Offices, 8 Mukhya Dak
Ghars, 1,505 Sub Post Offices and 9,101 Branch
Post Offices. District-wise details of post offices
are shown in Annexure 7.22

7.14 TELECOMUNICATION

Andhra Pradesh has 460 Telephone exchanges
with 49,621 lakh land line connections, 413
public telephone connections (Local+STD)
catering to 45.36 lakh wireless subscribers (pre
& post). District wise telephone connections are
given in Annexure 7.23

7.15 BANKING

As at end of December 2024, the state has 8,388
Scheduled bank offices, with aggregate deposits
amounting to Rs 5,32,801.06 crores and total
bank credit of Rs.8,61,579.93 crores. The credit
deposit ratio of the banks in the state is
161.71% as against RBI’s norm of 60%. The
total priority sector advances to Adjusted Net
Bank Credit (ANBC) was Rs 4,86,272 crore
(59.96%) against RBI norm of 40%.
Agricultural advances to Adjusted Net Bank
Credit were Rs 3,28,894 crores (40.55%)
against RBI norm of 18%. On the other hand,

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Non-farm sector advances were Rs 1,57,378
crores which accounted for 19.40% of ANBC.
Other priority sector advances including export
credit are at Rs 43,643 crores forming 5.38% of
ANBC. Profile of banking institutions in Andhra
Pradesh as on 31-Dec-2024 is given in
Annexure 7.24.

7.16 TOURISM

Andhra Pradesh is well “a
known for its diverse a
landscape,

including ANDHRA PRADESH
sandy beaches, TOURISM
mountain cliffs, and a stunning coastline. The
state offers a range of experiences at beaches
like Kakinada, Suryalanka, and Mypadu, which
are known for their relaxing views, water
sports, and historical exploration. The state also
has attractions like the Gandikota Fort, national
parks and wildlife sanctuaries with diverse
fauna like tigers and Indian bison. It is known
for its rich cultural heritage in arts and crafts,
which makes it a compelling destination for
those looking to have authentic experiences of
the state’s natural beauty.

Tourism Synopsis

Tourism is a travel for predominantly
recreational or leisure purposes or the
provision of services to support this leisure
travel. It is vital for many countries, due to the
income generated by the consumption of goods
and services by tourists, the taxes levied on
businesses in the tourism industry, and the
opportunity for employment in the service
industries associated with tourism.

Andhra Pradesh has the distinction of being a
leading tourism destination in India and is
presently, the third most visited State in terms
of domestic tourism. Government of Andhra
Pradesh has accorded priority to Tourism and
has recognized its potential as a growth engine
that can aid overall economic development of
the state. The New Tourism Policy 2024-29 has
a definite policy for tourism with set goals and


--- PAGE 163 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

keeping in view of achieving Swarna Andhra
Vision @2047. The state has a variety of
attractions including beaches, hills, wildlife,
forests and temples. The state has rich cultural
heritage and is known for its history and
architecture. The state government has been
working towards developing Andhra Pradesh
as a preferred destination for both international
and domestic tourists.

Andhra Pradesh Tourism Authority (APTA)

The Andhra Pradesh Tourism Authority (APTA)
is the nodal agency that focuses on state’s

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

branding, promotion and investments in
tourism with a view to harness its multiplier
effect on revenue generation, employment and
economic growth. Government of Andhra
Pradesh has identified seven Anchor Hubs for
leading Tourism in the state, including
Visakhapatnam (Vizag), Tirupati, Araku Valley,
Rajahmundry, Amaravati, Srisailam, and
Gandikota. These hubs will be developed under
a “hub-and-spoke” model, thus facilitating
development of areas surrounding the
identified central locations.

TOURISM CLUSTERS IN ANDHRA PRADESH —- A SNAPSHOT

1. Baruva Geach & Beason
2 Srimakutam (vesevelll. Sckurmmem Ec Mukrelingem Temoies)
2. Vizianagaram (Thotepelll Reservoir, Ramenersyenem Temple)

28. Anobllam
26. Pulwendula

24. Kadapa (Ameen Peer Cemen,
Vorsmina, Siccmevetem)
:

Ganckots
22. Anantapur & Tadipati
21. Lepakent

ANTE RA PRADESH TOMES

Andhra Pradesh Tourism Policy 2024-29

Government of Andhra Pradesh has accorded
“Industry Status” to the tourism and hospitality
sector across all segments, recognizing its
importance as a key driver of economic growth,
employment generation, and
development. Through the AP Tourism Policy
2024-29, the State Government will provide
tailor-made benefits to Mega and Ultra Mega
projects.

regional

4. 8eethampets Ecotourism

6. Sobol Fort & Veenac

@. Araku Valley (Ttbe! Tourtsm, Cotes Plantations. Some
/ Caves, Wetertalls. Tetpud! Reservoir)

7. Vicakhapainam (eeches. Suddhist Monuments, Foss Hill

o Crurch, Simencnhaiem Temple, Etkoppeks. Anenmversem)

$. Maredumlll & Rampscohodavaram

& Rajammundry & Papikondatu

10. Makinada (eech Froet. Coninge. Uppede. Nersepur)
11. Monaceema Backwaters

Meate Caurch. Sheveni iend,

12. V@ayeweds (upe Terocle.
Usdeveill Caves, Kondapelll Fort)

16. Prakatam (Seeches & Temotes)
1€_ NeSiore (Seaches & Temples)
17_Netapaty £& ari Hari Kote

13. Tirupat, Tirumaia & 8rikatahact
1%. Cnttioor @ianipakam)



--- PAGE 164 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Policy Highlights

As part of its Non-Fiscal Incentives, the state
government aims to process all necessary
clearances in a timely manner for investments
made through an online portal under a single
desk system without the need for any physical
interaction. This will be facilitated by an
Investment Facilitation Cell that would provide
a one-stop solution investors for obtaining
necessary clearances and_ tracking their
investments. A dedicated Investment Tracker
will also be created to monitor and facilitate
investments. Establishment of Destination
Management Organisations (DMOs) is also
proposed to manage and promote anchor hubs
and thematic circuits. Improving the speed of
doing business will be a key focus for the state.
Other incentives under the policy include Fiscal
Incentives, Recurring Incentives and Special
Incentives.

Thematic Circuits: The Tourism Policy 2024-
29 focuses on developing luxury resorts,
amusement parks, MICE centers, and other
tourism projects to promote socio-economic
development. It emphasizes on responsible
tourism, which promotes’ creation of
employment opportunities for women and
youth. The policy was created after extensive
stakeholder interactions with the industry,
experts, and local communities to identify and
address any shortcomings of the earlier policy.
The policy seeks to elevate Andhra Pradesh’s
tourism landscape by introducing Thematic
Circuits, specialized travel pathways focused on
specific themes to provide tourists with richer
and more immersive experiences. Andhra
Pradesh aims to establish over 25 thematic
circuits to elevate its tourism landscape
including 2 Buddhist circuits, 10 Temple
circuits, 5 Beach circuits, 4 River Cruise circuits,
3 Eco-Tourism circuits, 2 Sea Cruise circuits and
Seaplane Circuits.

Buddhist Circuits: The State Government is
committed to preserve and promote the state’s

nn

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

rich Buddhist heritage. With 40 Buddhist
monuments and its historical significance as the
birthplace of Mahayana Buddhism, the state
aims to develop two Buddhist circuits. These
circuits will highlight and protect Andhra
Pradesh’s cultural and historical legacy, thus
positioning it as a key destination for Buddhist
tourism, particularly for visitors from Southeast
Asia, East Asia, and other predominantly
Buddhist nations.

Temple Circuits: Andhra Pradesh is home to
numerous ancient and significant temples that
draw pilgrims and tourists from across India.
Renowned for their spiritual importance,
historical legacy, and architectural grandeur,
these temples serve as the cornerstone of a
vibrant spiritual tourism experience, offering a
profound insight into the state’s deep-rooted
religious culture.

Beach Circuits: With a  974-kilometer
coastline—the third longest in India—Andhra
Pradesh is ideally positioned to develop a
vibrant beach tourism sector. This involves
visiting coastal regions for leisure, enjoyment,
and relaxation. The policy aims to establish five
(5) Beach Tourism Circuits to enhance the
coastal areas of Visakhapatnam, Srikakulam,
Kakinada, Nellore, and = Machilipatnam,
transforming these locations into hubs for
diverse and immersive beach tourism
experiences.


--- PAGE 165 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

River Circuits: River Circuit Tourism offers a
unique opportunity to explore riverside
destinations through carefully curated cruise
routes, combining elements of culture, history,
ecology, and relaxation. In Andhra Pradesh,
Godavari and Krishna rivers provide an ideal
setting for river cruises, showcasing the state’s
scenic landscapes, historical landmarks,
temples, and vibrant local culture. The policy
envisions the establishment of four (4) river
circuits to enhance tourism and attract a
greater number of visitors.

Ecotourism Circuits: Ecotourism is a
responsible approach to’ tourism _ that
emphasizes appreciating and understanding the
nature while committing to environmental
preservation. It promotes travel that conserves
biodiversity, minimizes pollution, and adopts
sustainable practices to reduce the ecological
footprint of human activities. Andhra Pradesh,
with its diverse natural landscapes, is uniquely
positioned to attract eco-conscious travelers.
The policy proposes the development of three
(3) Eco-Tourism Circuits namely, 1)
Srikakulam-Visakhapatnam 2) East Godavari-
Guntur and 3) Kurnool-Nellore Circuit.

Sea Cruise Circuits: Sea cruise tourism
provides a distinctive travel experience, linking
major coastal ports and cities while offering
tourists the opportunity to explore diverse
coastal destinations, including islands, seaside
towns, historic harbours, and _ natural
attractions. All of this is complemented by the
luxurious amenities available aboard over
modern cruise ships. Andhra Pradesh, with its

Sn

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

974-kilometer coastline and advantage of
international cruise terminal in Visakhapatnam,
is well-positioned to become a leading player in
sea cruise tourism. The action plan crafted in
the policy focuses on enhancing cruise tourism
infrastructure and services, attracting both
domestic and international cruise passengers.
Strategic partnerships with cruise operators
will ensure the availability of diverse and
engaging itineraries.

Seaplane Circuits: Seaplanes offer versatile air
transportation solutions, especially in regions
near large water bodies like seas, lakes, and
creeks, making them ideal for enhancing
tourism. The ability to access remote areas

without requiring expensive runway
infrastructure adds to their appeal. In a recent
milestone, Hon’ble Chief Minister of Andhra
Pradesh inaugurated a seaplane trial run,
showcasing the state’s commitment to
embracing innovative tourism initiatives. This
pilot run highlighted the potential of seaplanes
to enhance connectivity, attract tourists, and
offer unique aerial views of Andhra Pradesh’s

scenic landscapes.

MICE Tourism: This is a high potential area for
tourism in Andhra Pradesh. To promote
organizing Meetings, Incentives, Conferences,
and Exhibitions (MICE) tourism, the state
requires state-of-the-art conference and event
facilities designed to attract business travelers
and international events.

Homestays and Bed & Breakfasts: The policy
also encourages the development of homestays
and Bed & Breakfast (B&B) establishments,
particularly in Eco sensitive and rural areas, to
provide authentic, local experiences. Implement


--- PAGE 166 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

certification, categorization, and _ training
programs to enhance quality and ensure
uniform standards across these establishments.
World Class Infrastructure: The policy
emphasizes development of world-class
infrastructure to cater to the increasing
demands of domestic and international tourists.
This includes seamless connectivity across air,
road, rail, and waterways, as well as the
expansion of high-quality hospitality facilities,
ensuring a comprehensive and exceptional
travel experience.

Rural Tourism:The state has diverse Arts &
Crafts that provide livelihoods to many local/
regional communities. APTA aims to establish
experience centers at each location that shall
serve as the focal point for creation of
experiences around the art / craft. These
centers will have display areas with history of
the craft, experiential activity areas for the
visitors to try their hand, souvenir shops and
basic amenities.

Blue Flag Certification: In Andhra Pradesh, the
Rushikonda Beach in
Visakhapatnam has
been conferred the
coveted “Blue Flag
Beach”. A blue flag
beach tag is a
BLUE FLAG testimony to the
highest standards of safety, quality and
environmental sustainability followed at the
beach, which places the beach on_ the
international map. With the success at
Rushikonda Beach, Andhra Pradesh Tourism
has proposed 21 more beaches across the state
for blue flag certification, out of which 9 have
been considered for the certification.

Ease of Doing Business (EoDB): The Tourism
Department has redesigned the portal enabling
the Investors to access the ‘Single Desk Portal’
of the Industries Department. The Investors can
register their projects at
“https://www.apindustries.gov.in” and can

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

avail the benefits of obtaining all the (13) pre-
establishment clearances and (11) pre
operation clearances at a single portal. As part
of the new Tourism Policy 2024-29, the state
Government has set up the ‘Investor Facilitation
Cell (IFC)’ at Andhra Pradesh Tourism Head
Office at Vijayawada to facilitate and guide the
Investors willing to set up Tourism Units in the
State.

7.17ANDHRA PRADESH TOURISM
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
(APTDC)

The AP Tourism Development Corporation is a
fully owned undertaking of GoAP. It has taken
up various 3
projects all over
AP and is
providing services
to tourists visiting
the state. Key
objectives of the
Corporation include development of tourism

infrastructure, operation of hotels & catering
units, operation of guided & package tours,
leisure cruises, pleasure boating activities,
sound & light shows and rope way. For smooth
administration, the state has been divided into
7 divisions.

APTDC has registered a systematic growth both
in terms of revenue and tourist arrivals over the
years. In line with state’s tourism policy, APTDC
has focused on development of tourism
infrastructure that has led to promotion of new
tourism products and successful functioning of
tourist centres. During FY 2024-25, APTDC
generated a revenue of Rs 106.80 crore from
various sources including hotels, transport,
water fleet, sound & light, lease income, and
other sources.

To effectively implement the Tourism Mission
strategy and offer nine major Tourism themes,
the following key guiding principles have been
laid by the state:


--- PAGE 167 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

e Enabling a conducive environment for
setting up and_ operating tourism
infrastructure projects and service

e Incentive to encourage and promote private
investments

e Industry status for Tourism Infrastructure
Projects for specified purposes

e Comprehensive skills development and
capacity building in the Tourism Sector

e Marketing and Branding of the state as a
globally recognized tourism destination and

Kurnool Division
(Kurnool, Anantapur)

Tour Packages: APTDC runs a chain of hotels
and restaurants and_ providing quality
accommodation and food tourists at important
locations. 39 hotels with around 843 rooms and
1,782 bed strength in prime locations provide

homely ambience packages. The corporation
operates an impressive fleet of 23 buses that
connect important tourism locations within and
outside the state and 11 tour packages from
various locations. APTDC has also started a

Sn

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

facilitating investments through a dedicated
investment promotion team

Operations of APTDC: APTDC mainly operates
Hotels and _ Resorts, Catering, Bar and
restaurants, Tour Packages & On demand tours,
Boating & Water Fleet, Adventure activities,
Sound, Light, Laser Show and Ropeway & Public
Private Partnership (PPP) based Projects. It has
built hotels and resorts at various places, using
funds generated through its own operations as
well as funds received from Central / State
Govt.

Visakhapatnam Division (Vizag,
Srikakulam, Vizianagarm)

| Vijayawada Division
(Krishna, Guntur)

—_""

Nellore Division
(Nellore, Prakasam)

Restaurant with 500 seating capacity at
Tirumala and 20 new bars at various locations
across the state.

Boating & Water Fleet & Boating Control
ROMS: APTDC owns and operates a water fleet,

located at Rushikonda, Rajahmundry,
Singanapalli, Perantalapalli, Polavaram,
Gandipocham, Vijayawada, Nagarjuna Sagar,
Srisailam, Karanapalli, Dindi, Kadapa,
Pasarlapudi, Fishing Harbour, Vizag,

Gundlakamma, and Gargeyapuram. Multiple
private operators provide Papikondalu Cruise
activity on 35 cruises and 2 owned by APTDC.
Water sports services are also provided by
APTDC and other private players that are
authorized by the government / APTDC.


--- PAGE 168 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

Sound, Light, Laser Show and Ropeway: To
engage the tourists at heritage and religious
destination and to add new dimension to their
experience, APTDC has created sound & light
show, dynamic lighting system and ropeways at
Chandragiri, Belum Caves  (non-revenue
generating), Ettipotala, Borra Caves & Rope way
at Srisailam.

Achievements of APTDC

Development of Oberoi (Vilas) Resorts by

Oberoi Company

e At Peruru, Tirupati, Oberoi have made an
investment of Rs 150 crores over 20 acres.
SIPC/SIPB approvals have been obtained
and construction work has already started.
This project will generate employment for
1,500 persons

e At Annavaram, Visakhapatnam Oberoi have
made an investment of Rs 350 crores over
40 acres, generating employment for 5,500
persons. The project has _ obtained
SIPC/SIPB approval and construction is yet
to begin

e At Gandikota, Kadapa Oberoi have made an
investment of Rs 250 crores over 40 acres,
generating employment for 1,500 persons.
The project has obtained SIPC/SIPB
approval and construction is yet to begin

Other achievements include development of

Five Star Luxury Hotel by Hotel Hyatt, at Peruru

, Tirupati at an estimated cost of Rs 218 crores

on 3 acres of land, generating employment for

1,556 persons. Development of a Convention

Center & Hotel is also envisaged at Annavaram,

nn

Visakhapatnam by Mayfair Hotels at an
estimated investment of Rs 525 crores on 40
acres of land, generating employment for 1,000
persons. Both the projects have obtained
SIPC/SIPB approval and are ready for
commencement

Central Government sponsored Tourism
Development Schemes

Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0: The scheme
includes development of Borra Caves located in
Araku, ASR District with project cost of Rs 29.87
crore. It aims to enhance visitor amenities and
infrastructure inside the cave and in the
surrounding precinct area.

PRASHAD Scheme: The scheme _ includes
development of pilgrimage amenities at Sri
Varaha Lakshmi Narasimha Swami Vari
Devasthanam, Vishakhapatnam with a project
cost of Rs 54.04 crore. It also covers
development of pilgrim amenities in the temple
complex of Annavaram Temple, Kakinada
District with a project cost of Rs 25.32 crore.

SASCI Scheme: The scheme covers
development of visitor amenities and
infrastructure in Gandikota Fort and Gorge
areas in YSR Kadapa District at an estimated
cost of Rs 77.91 crore. It also covers
Transformation of Havelock Bridge as a tourist
attraction and upgradation of Pushkarghat in
Rajahmundry (also known as_ Akhanda
Godavari) at an estimated cost of Rs 94.44 crore


--- PAGE 169 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Challenge Based Destination Development
(CBDD): The programme includes
development of Ahobilam as Spiritual Tourism
Centre at Ahobilam, Nandhyal District and
development of NagarjunaSagar as Heritage
and Adventure
NagarjunaSagar, Palnad District at an estimated
cost of Rs 25.00 crore, each

Tourism Centre at

Public Private Partnership (PPP) Projects &
Leased Property of APTDC: To encourage
investment by the private sector players, GoAP
has identified land parcels across the state that
can be given on a lease basis. The State
Government is proposing to release a dedicated
land lease policy to decide the bidding process.
According to the policy, whenever an
investment proposal is submitted by the
investor for building of any tourism related
infrastructure, the department, after thorough
evaluation of the DPR, alienates the land from
the relevant government department and
invites tenders for the project.

Additionally, properties built by the
corporation but not giving good returns are also
being privatized and given to the interested
parties on a lease/revenue share basis. So far, a
total of 62 properties have been given under
Operation & Maintenance (O&M) and 14 land
lease projects on PPP are in existence.

Information & Reservation System: APTDC
has established Information & Reservation
Offices within and outside the State for
convenience of tourists visiting Andhra
Pradesh. These Information & Reservation
offices are located at Rajamahendravaram,
Paryatak Bhavan, Hyderabad, Kolkata, Chennai
and Bangalore. Additionally, Central
reservation offices are located at
Visakhapatnam, Vijayawada and Tirupati.

Bhavani Island Tourism Corporation (BITC):
Bhavani Island is a large river island near
Vijayawada in Krishna River. This island is a
unique gift of nature and is most appropriate to
be developed as a major tourist destination. It is

a

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

operated and maintained by Bhavani Island
Tourism Corporation (BITC). The recreational
activities on the island are provided to make
the Bhavani Island a major tourist destination
in Vijayawada.

7.18 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY,
ELECTRONICS &
COMMUNICATIONS

Andhra Pradesh provides the right climate for
growth of IT businesses. It is developing as one
of the preferred IT destinations in India and is
poised to become the’ benchmark in
Information & Communication Technology
(ICT) sector. The state is endowed with a high
quality state-of-the-art physical IT
infrastructure at par with international
standards, harnessed human resources, and
proactive business friendly policies of the
Government. The State Govt. is committed to
provide IT Services and an ecosystem for
Electronic manufacturing /assembling.

AP Electronics & Information Technology
Agency (APEITA), a nodal agency for
implementing the State's IT Policy and
Electronics Policy is responsible for Investment
promotion in IT and Electronics sectors to
attract investments and generate employment.
APEITA is responsible for conceptualizing and
implementing various e-governance initiatives
to make Government of Andhra Pradesh the
first fully digital Government. It enables
development of world-class IT Infrastructure
conducive for industry and defines standards
for data services, portals, software development
for government departments. The agency also
manages the state’s security audit system and
ensures skill development to improve industry
ready talent availability.

Communication Infrastructure

a) AP Software Defined Wide Area Network
(APSDWAN): Andhra Pradesh State Wide
Area Network (APSWAN) is the backbone


--- PAGE 170 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

b)

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

data, and video
throughout the State
connecting the areas of Secretariat, District
Collectorates, Mandal Headquarters etc. The
project was operationalized in Nov-2010. In
terms of vertical connectivity, the APSWAN
has redundant point-to-point links (34
Mbps) from BSNL and NKN up to District
Head Quarters (DHQ). All DHQs are
connected to corresponding Mandal Head
Quarters (MHQs) with 8 Mbps links. There
were more than 2,164 horizontal offices
connected to SWAN across the State. The
APSWAN SHQ setup was migrated from AP
Secretariat, Hyderabad to AP Secretariat,
Velagapudi, Amaravati during year
2017.The APSWAN was upgraded _ to
APSDWAN to improve network availability
and connectivity. The project
operationalized on May 1, 2021, and was
later expanded to new districts, revenue
divisional offices, and district police offices
in 2022. The project cost is Rs 57 crore per
5 years and bandwidth cost is Rs 12 crore
per annum.
Video Conference Facility (VCF): AP High
Definition (HD) Video Conferencing System
is a two-way Video Conferencing facility
which is installed at all Mandal Head
Quarters (MHQs) across AP. The VCF is
operational since 09-Dec-2013. Each
district is provided with MCU at
collectorate, and corresponding MROs have
been provided with
equipment. The project allows two types of
VC service offerings viz. Room based VC
and Software (App) based VC. APTS has
finalized the new operator for VC AMC & FM
project. It will cost Rs 5.3 crore per annum.
Steps are afoot to usher in contemporary
VCF which should leverage
contemporary communication — solutions
and the field level requirements in rural
office locations where bandwidth could be
potential issues.

network for
communications

waS

conference end

solutions

c)

d)

e)

Andhra Pradesh Secretariat Campus
Area Network (APSCAN): Andhra Pradesh
Secretariat Campus Area Network
(APSCAN) was established in year 2016. It
involves state-of-art-technology connecting
Six (6) buildings at IGC, Velagapudi
consisting of G+1 floors in each building.
APSCAN is one of the large campus area
networks, which connect more than 5,000
nodes.

The entire campus is Wi-Fi enabled with
centralized wireless controllers and AAA
solution. Two (2) Gbps shared internet is
available for the servers and users through
wired and wireless devices. In the year
2023, a new service provider was identified
for the project, who started operations from
16-Mar-2023. The project cost is Rs 5.43
crore per annum and Rs 80 lakhs for
bandwidth charges.

AP State Data Center (APSDC): AP State
Data Center was built under NeGP Scheme
(Gol) at Gachibowli, Hyderabad for the IT
needs of all the departments of the State
Government complying to Tier’ MII+
Standards (99.75% uptime). It is being
shared by both the states of Andhra
Pradesh and Telangana. The data center
provides support in terms of Infrastructure
for Power, (AC, UPS, and Generators etc.),
Network, Security, Management, Disaster
Recovery, Computers and Data Storage. In
2016, AP State Fibernet Limited finalized
establishing Non-IT
infrastructure and operations of a data

pricing for

center on lease basis at Pi Data Centers,
Mangalagiri for 3 years. The ITE&C
Department established APSDC, Amaravati
at Pi APTS
identified service providers for IT services,
with Go-Live declared in 2019. In 2020,
APTS entered into a non-IT contract
agreement with M/s Pi Data Centers,
renewed annually. In 2022, APTS identified
a new service provider for IT infrastructure.

Data Centers in 40 racks.

Currently, 400+ applications are hosted at
APSDC, Amaravati, with 12 Gbps shared

nn


--- PAGE 171 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

internet leased lines available. The project
cost is Rs 5.45 crore per annum and Rs 80
lakhs for bandwidth charges.

f) PM Gatishakti

Right of Way Rules: The Andhra Pradesh
Right of Way Guidelines, 2023 expired on
1stJanuary, 2025, and replaced by the
Telecommunications Right of Way Rules,
2024, which are now being implemented
based on instructions from Department of
Telecommunications, New Delhi.
Right of Way Portal: Andhra Pradesh State
will be using the Government of India's
Central Right of Way Portal (GatiShakti
Sanchar) to implement new RoW rules
digitally. Stakeholder departments have
been instructed to migrate their existing
RoW portal services to the GoI Central RoW
portal by January 1, 2025, in line with the
new RoW Rules of 2024. The Department of
Telecommunications has provided
necessary templates for this migration,
which is in progress.

g) GIS mapping of Street Furniture: APSAC has
integrated the State GIS_ infrastructure
mapping with BISAG/GatiShakti NMP
portal. Mapping has been completed for
APEPDCL Electrical Poles: 11KV - 11,98,405
Locations, 33KV - 1,67,382 _ locations,
APSPDCL Electrical Poles: 33KV - 2,37,505
locations, APCPDCL Electrical Poles 11KV-
17,723 locations, 33KV - 1,97,183 locations,
Urban Local Bodies (ULB) Electrical poles -
5,30,644, APSFL Phase I - 24,000 KM, BBNL
Phase II - 33,568 KM, APSRTC Bus depots
and stations - 474, Traffic signals - 14,000
Nos, Buildings data - 72,376 nos. and
Universal Service Obligation Fund locations
-5,011.

h) Gol projects - 4G Towers Land allocation
status: Under the Universal Service
Obligation Fund (USOF) project, the DoT
proposed to establish mobile tower
connectivity in Andhra Pradesh under three
(3) projects viz. “Aspirational districts”
project awarded to M/s Jio., “Left Wing

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Extremism (LWE)  Phase-II” project
awarded to M/s Airtel, “4G Saturation”
project awarded to M/s BSNL. Under these
projects, DoT proposed 2,088 Towers in
uncovered villages of AP State. The TSP
wise breakup of the proposed towers is
Airtel - 197, Jio - 521 and BSNL - 1370.
Nearly 98.22% of sites are handed over for
the establishment of the 4G Mobile towers
in the uncovered villages of AP. Airtel has
radiated 188 towers, Jio has radiated 488
towers, BSNL has radiated 798 towers.
USOF projects are totally funded by DoT,
MeitY, Gol.

Government initiatives to promote
Information Technology

Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) has
undertaken several initiatives for promoting
the State as a preferred investment destination
for the IT/ ITeS and Electronics manufacturing
sectors. SeveralIT Policies issued in Andhra
Pradesh aim at promoting investment and
creating jobs over the next five years (2024-
2029). Govt. is now working on developing
attractive policies to incentivize businesses to
set up operations in the state, with a target of
creating 10 lakh jobs. Government is also
prioritizing development of co-working and
neighborhood workspace, along with large-
scale infrastructure projects, to enable the
youth of Andhra Pradesh to work for
organizations worldwide from any location
within the state. This will attract global IT firms,
add substantial data center capacity (up to 1
GW), and establish Andhra Pradesh as a
premier
manufacturing in the country. This initiative
will help in positioning the state as a leader in
semiconductor and display manufacturing
besides promoting innovation, investments, and
research and development, while creating high-
value jobs, and building a strong advanced
manufacturing ecosystem. Amaravati,
Visakhapatnam, Tirupati and Vijayawada have
been envisaged as a major IT technology hubs

destination for electronics


--- PAGE 172 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

whereas, Visakhapatnam, Tirupati, and Satya
Sai have been envisaged for development of
Electronics Manufacturing Eco System.

APTS Ltd (Andhra Pradesh Technology
Services Limited)

APTS is a company fully owned by state
government and _ operates independently
without any financial support from budgetary
provisions of State Government. It is under the
administrative control of ITE&C department,
with following key areas of operation:

a) Procurement of IT and Hardware items to
ensure cost-effectiveness and quality control.
APTS enables procurement of Hardware,
Software, Networking products and services
exceeding Rs 10 lakhs. During FY 2024-25,
APTS undertook transactions of Rs 62.57 crores
towards procurements and selection of services
provided on behalf of user departments.

b) Implementation of Andhra Pradesh Cyber
Security Policy to ensure systematic and
coordinated effort in four major verticals: 1)
Securing the Critical
Infrastructure, 2) Capacity Building, 3) Cyber
Forensics and 4) Promotions. AP Cyber Security
Operation Centre (APCSOC) has _ been
established to monitor all the critical IT
infrastructure of GOAP 24/7 and gives advance
alerts on the Cyber-attacks, if any. The first
vertical ‘Securing the Critical Government
Infrastructure (CGI)’ was achieved through
continuous monitoring of CGI through APCSOC.
It also provisions the following services:

e Threat Monitoring, Analytics & Incident

Management Component

Government

e Security Infrastructure Device Management
e Threat Surface Management Services

APTS is empaneled with Indian Computer
Emergency Response Team (CERT-IN) as an
Information Security Auditing Organization, for
providing the Information Security Auditing
Services. APTS is the first CERT-IN Empanelled
organization in Andhra Pradesh. To conduct

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Security Audit, APTS has created Audit
professionals resource pool by hiring from the
market and training internal resources. APTS is
conducting audits on IT
Infrastructure/Departments including Web
Applications, Network, Mobile Applications, and
Processes.

Government has instructed APTS to conduct
mandatory cyber security audits of all
Secretariat Departments/ HoDs/  PSUs/
Societies and Institutions for all Critical
Information Infrastructure housed with them.
APTS has conducted audits for 270 GoAP
applications. Till date, 125 Cyber Security Audit
Certificates have been issued, 354 Red Team
Audits have been conducted for GoAP
applications and 6 Red Team Audits have been
closed. All government web applications are
also required to be onboarded on APCSOC. As
on date, 865 devices and all SDC applications
have been on-boarded.

(c) Services: APTS is’ responsible for
maintenance of AUA/KUA Services in the
UIDAI ecosystem to provide the ‘Aadhaar User
Authentication Services’ to the departments for
the implementation of the citizen centric
services, welfare schemes and __flag-ship
programmes of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
During FY 2024-25 (April 2024 to December
2024), APTS provided 16.5 crore transactions
to provide AUA/KUA services to 30
departments. It has also implemented ‘Aadhaar
Data Vault Services’ as per UIDAI regulation for
storage of Aadhaar Numbers.

Additionally, APTS is responsible for
maintenance of the e-Procurement Portal,
which facilitates Government departments for
procurement of works, products, services in a
speedy, efficient, and transparent manner.
GoAP has mandated that all tenders, with ECV
value of Rupees One (1) Lakh and above, should
be published through eProcurement portal only
for greater competition and transparency.
During FY 2024-25, 35,270 tenders with


--- PAGE 173 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Rs.35,485.51 crore of ECV value were
published.

The Konugolu Portal facilitates Government
departments to undertake online sales and fast
track decisions that are reliable, transparent &
profitable. The portal has the facility of
“Forward Auction”, wherein auctioneers try to
sell their products/ services and the buyer bid
on the Department's item (Land Parcels,
Sandalwood, logs, forest collections etc.,). The
price of the item increases by a fixed increment
amount during the auction and the highest bid
price quoted by the bidder during the auction is
the winner/ awardee. During FY 2024-25, total
227 e-Auctions have been conducted.

Government of Andhra Pradesh is using Digital
Signing Certificates (DSC) in various IT
projects including Treasury Application, e-
Office and e-Procurement platform for
procurement through an online portal. APTS
issues DSC to the required Government
Departments for online signature and e-
approvals, in compliance with IT Act, 2000.
During FY 2024-25, APTS issued 7,990 DSCs
with signing & encryptions.

d) Infrastructure projects managed by APTS:
APSDWAN backbone is used to connect all
Government offices maintained by APTS. The
SDWAN is spread over 668 locations across the
State covering AP Secretariat, 13 District Head
Quarter (DHQ) and 654 Mandal Head Quarter
(MHQ). APSDWAN covers 2,164 offices across
the state and_ provides departmental
connectivity to respective vertical segments
SHQ, DHQ, MHQ. The’ bandwidth and
connectivity of these offices is being maintained
by APTS.

APSCAN: AP Secretariat Campus Area Network
(APSCAN) Network covers offices of the Council
of Ministers, Secretaries to the Govt., Senior
Officers with 36 main departments supported
by approximately 814 sections. The network
includes Camp Office of Hon’ble Chief Minister

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

and AP Bhavan, New Delhi. All the systems and
the network are maintained by APTS.

Video Conferencing (VC) infrastructure is
provided to all Council of Ministers, Secretaries
to the Govt, Heads of the Departments,
Collectorates, SP Offices and 744 Mandal
Offices. During FY 2024-25, infrastructure
procured for the Video Conference Project
included Video Conference equipment, SDWAN
equipment Servers for e-Office and other IT
Infrastructure to newly formed 13 Districts.

Andhra Pradesh Innovation Society
(APIS)

APIS is a State Nodal Agency for spearheading
and driving the startup and_ innovation
ecosystem in Andhra Pradesh with a mission to
empower entrepreneurs, researchers, students,
and citizens to build a knowledge-driven
economy.

Snapshot for FY 2024-25

Andhra Pradesh has a total of 6,935 startups,
out of which 2,493 startups (36%) are
recognized by DPIIT. Among these startups,
1,203 are led by women. The state was ranked
No. 1 in the National States Startup Ranking
2022 by DPIIT, Gol, and held 9* position in the
India Innovation Index 2022. Andhra Pradesh is
the 7th largest state in India in terms of startup
infrastructure with 50 state-owned and private
incubators. There are 175 registered mentors
on the APIS Portal, 564 Entrepreneurship
Innovation Startup Cells across various in
higher educational institutions in the state and
590 Atal Tinkering Labs in schools. These
startups have generated 25,000 direct and
indirect employment opportunities and have
successfully raised Rs 480 crores of funds till
25th January 2025.

Top 5 sectors driving the startup ecosystem in
Andhra Pradesh include IT & ITES, with 386
startups, Construction & Infrastructure, with
248 startups, Agri &Agritech with 216 startups,
Food & Beverages, with 148 startups, and


--- PAGE 174 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Healthcare, Pharma & Life Sciences, with 156
startups. Additionally, Edutech, with 139
startups, is also a significant sector in the
startup ecosystem of AP.

Andhra Pradesh has several State/ Private
run Centers of Excellence (CoE’s)/
Accelerators including MeitY Centre of
Excellence IoT & AI, Visakhapatnam,
KALPATARU STPI (Industry 4.0),
Visakhapatnam, IIDTM 5G USE Case CoE,
Kurnool, Wadhwani Foundation & APIS
Accelerator, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
Medtech Zone (AMTZ), Visakhapatnam and CoE
on Maritime & Ship Building, Kakinada.

Govt. support to promote Startups in the
State: APIS offers affordable and subsidized
incubation support services in Visakhapatnam,
Kakinada, Tirupati, and Amaravati/Tadepalli,
with pricing as low as Rs 1,800 per seat. These
spaces have over 95,000 sq. ft. of state-of-the-
art facilities, critical for developing and scaling
up startup ventures. Apart from physical space,
APIS also provides comprehensive services like
Mentorship from industry experts, prototyping
support, market access along with funding
guidance and IP protection and legal counsel. In
total, 437 seats are available at four APIS
Incubation Centers across AP. As part of its
ongoing efforts to foster innovation and
entrepreneurship, APIS has — successfully
incubated 43 startups, with 279 seats allocated
at the four Incubation Centers. Currently, 158
seats are still vacant, to seize innovative and
growth-oriented startup incubation space.

APIS has also developed the AP Startup One
Portal, which acts as a centralized hub,
connecting startups, mentors, incubators, and
investors. The Startup One Portal integrates
with the Startup India portal for Single Sign-On.
It facilitates seamless collaboration and real-
time data sharing between the state and central
government for strengthening connectivity and
cohesiveness across the ecosystem.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Fostering Innovation: Challenges and
Hackathons: To build a culture of innovation,
APIS has developed a_ separate portal
https://apisinnovationchallenges.ap.gov.in/#
for the Government Departments, Autonomous
Organizations, Institutes,
Corporates & Industry to leverage Innovation
Challenges and Hackathons as a model for
public procurement. By engaging startups in
competitive problem-solving events, the state
aims to foster innovative solutions tailored to
its public sector needs. The approach enhances
collaboration and accelerates adoption of
cutting-edge technologies, thus strengthening
the state's startup ecosystem.

Educational

Central Government Schemes & programs:

Technology Incubation and Development of
Entrepreneurs (TIDE) 2.0: APIS has been
selected by Gol under TIDE Group 3 Centre
(G3C) to promote technology innovation and
entrepreneurship by providing necessary
support to startups. APIS shall incubate ideas /
ventures under Entrepreneur-in-Residence and
Grant programs. So far, APIS has received 5
tranches of the TIDE 2.0 scheme by MeitY.
During FY 2024-2025, APIS received Rs 34
lakhs, out of which Rs 17 lakhs was disbursed
to the startups, incubated in APIS under
Entrepreneur-in-residence and_ grants-in-aid
categories. APIS incubated Startups” -
‘GarudalyticsPvt. Ltd and AntarloTPvt.Ltd’
got selected and _ secured the _ scaleup
investment of Rs 88.00 lakhs.

Activities during FY 2024-25 (up to Dec 24)

e Accelerating Innovation: A 5-Day Master
class Series’ was conducted on EVs, Defense,
Aerospace & Drone Technologies sectors,
with participation of 300+ startups. The
program offered expert insights and
practical knowledge to help startups excel
in these dynamic industries

e WEN LIFT OFF
Programwasheld on 8th May 2024 jointly by
Wadhwani Foundation and APIS _ to

Acceleration


--- PAGE 175 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

empowers early-stage startups (prototype
or MVP stage). 50+ startups participated in
this program

AP Venture Horizons (2.0) 2024, a Global
Funding Connect for Startups, was held on
19% July 2024 in collaboration with Startup
Runway, Richardson City, Texas, USA. The
event connected 30+ startups and 20+
incubator heads’ with
industry experts

AP Incubators’ Round Table Conclave was
held on 26% June 2024 in partnership with
Wadhwani Foundation, bringing together
30+ startup founders, 25+ incubator
heads/directors to share insights and
enhance operational capacity

investors and

Stakeholder Consultation Meeting on New
Startup Policy was held on 20 August
2024, with participation of 40+ incubator
heads and 10+ industry stakeholders. The
meeting aimed to align discussion on
Andhra Pradesh's new startup policy which
can further help in driving the state’s
startup ecosystem

Leveraging the ONDC network for AP
Startups, APIS organized an event on 19%
August 2024 , in collaboration with the
Ministry of Commerce and Industry. The
event focused on onboarding products
through ONDC, developing tech solutions
for local needs etc. and witnessed 30+
startups

International Startup Festival (ISF) 2024 for
AP Incubators was held on 5t September
2024. The event was addressed by Sri J.A.
Choudary Garu, Founder of ISF and offered
exposure to over 300 CXOs, 100+ VC firms
Workshop on “Empowering Incubators:
Mastering Global
Sustainability’washeld on 01st October
2024 to enhance the operational success
and sustainability of incubators across
Andhra Pradesh. The workshop witnessed
participation of 40+ incubators

Amaravati Drone Summit 2024 -
Hackathon was organized in partnership

Success &

Ee

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

with Andhra Pradesh Drone Corporation,
CI], and DFI. The event shortlisted over
300+ applications, out of which 16 startups
were awarded cash prizes of Rs 24 lakh in
recognition of their exceptional
contributions to the Drone Sector.

An event for launch of Swarna Andhra
2047 vision document was held on 13th
December 2024. The transformative event
witnessed participation of 250+ startup
founders and co-founders from across
Andhra Pradesh, along with 30+ incubator
heads, and 10+ industry stakeholders. The
event was inaugurated by Hon'ble Chief
Minister of Andhra Pradesh and it focused
on the future of startups, innovation, and
the state’s entrepreneurial growth, with
emphasis on various industries such as
Artificial Intelligence, Agri & Aqua Tech,
Medtech& Pharma, Semiconductors, Drones
etc. Currently, startups are involved in areas
like robotics, renewable energy, and virtual
reality, among others.

Major Achievements made by the Startups
during 2024-25 (up to Dec2024)

Shakti Photon Solutions Private Limited
(DIPP132247) secured first prize in the
Green Mobility sector for developing a
green hydrogen electrolyzer at the Climafix
Summit held on 20% Sept 2024 at IIT
Madras Research Park. Additionally, the
company received a grant of Rs 35 lakh on
30th of December 2024 from MeitY for
scaling up technology

Visvodaya Living Labs Foundation, Kavali
got approval for the Development of Digital
Twin in Agriculture implementing AR and
VR Techniques from DoT, Gol under Digital
Sangam Initiative in the Month of
September 2024.

Cyber Privilege Private Limited received
Cyber Excellence Award (2024)
represented at global forums like
INTERPOL DFEG, Malaysia, INTERPOL New
Tech Forum in Web 4.0, Singapore. The


--- PAGE 176 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

company also secured grant of Rs 1.5 lakh
through TIDE 2.0 for cyber security
initiatives

e Sego Automobile Solutions Pvt. Ltd.
(DIPP178391) holds two Indian patents
(IPO: 374617 and 534282), a U.S. patent
(US20240109477A1), and a_ worldwide
patent (W02024069287), granted in April
2024.

e Blink Card (by Wave Card Private Limited)
has been recognized by Google for
development of an App ‘Google knowledge
panel’. The App was launched on 10-Dec-
2024. It has achieved 5t Rank in India,
among NFC Companies and Startups in
India in June 2024 and 55th Rank, among
Top 88 NFC Companies and Startups in June
2024 as recognized by F6S agency.

e Dr Safe - (HARN Syringe) got MSME Award
from State Govt. of Andhra Pradesh.

e Indian Ethnic wear Marketplace, is a
pioneers fashion categories and creations of
space for smaller manufacturers from
Assam. It displays more than 6,000
handloom sarees.

e ANTAR IoT received Award of Excellence in
category "most Promising startup " by VCCI.

APIS unites all startup ecosystem stakeholders,
directly connecting with over 2,000+ DPIIT
Startups, Incubators, and ecosystem
stakeholders by offering allied services such as
investor connections, mentorship, and market
access opportunities. APIS also supports 50
incubators in Andhra Pradesh by connecting
them with various central government schemes
and programs. APIS is poised to transform into
a powerhouse of opportunities for startups.

APEITA (now merged with the APEDB)

APEITA undertook groundwork to issue the

following policies:

e Andhra Pradesh Electronics Manufacturing
Policy (4.0) 2024-29, which aims to attract
investments in white goods and consumer
non-durable electronic goods sectors

27

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

e Andhra Pradesh Semiconductor & Display
Fab Policy (4.0) 2024-29, which is designed
to develop a comprehensive ecosystem for
semiconductor and display manufacturing.

e Andhra Pradesh Information Technology
(IT) & Global Capability Centers (GCC)
Policy (4.0) 2024-29, which focuses on
fostering IT growth and global capability
centers.

International Institute of Digital
Technologies (IIDT), Tirupati

IIDT, Tirupati is an initiative of GoAP to create
professional experts and entrepreneurs for
digital future. It envisions to make Andhra
Pradesh a preferred destination for digital
opportunities in India. HDT offers Post-
graduate (PG) programs of 11 month/ 780
Hours duration, Mid-term courses of 4 month /
240 Hours duration, short term courses of 120
Hours and Virtual Internship courses for
undergraduate students.

During Apr - Dec 2024, IIDT started Short term
Internship programs (2 Months Duration/ 8
weeks) from 1st week June 2024 for the
Undergraduate students (both Engineering and
Degree) in collaboration with Andhra Pradesh
State Council of Higher Education (APSCHE).
Approximately 10,945 students participated in
the Internship programs on __ various
technologies.

Capacity Building and IT Up _ Skilling

Initiatives by IIDT

I. IDT planned Internship Programs and
minor degrees in advanced digital
technologies in collaboration with APSCHE.
The programs aimed to _ enhance
employability skills and impart deep
knowledge in emerging areas which are
usually not being covered in undergraduate
degree credit framework

II. Long internship and learning program have
been organized top 100 Post Graduate
students, selected through — statewide


--- PAGE 177 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

assessments called GEST (Graduate
Employability Standardized Test)
conducted by APSCHE. This initiative will
support top talent who missed to grab
internship opportunities from the campus
III. Post Graduate Programs have been
organized in collaboration with Industry,
including Tie-ups with top IT & Digital-
based organizations, to co-design
curriculum for training and placement of
the students in the respective organizations.

IIDT skill enhancement programs in emerging
technologies will increase job opportunities for
students across the state of Andhra Pradesh.

Andhra Pradesh Space Applications
Centre (APSAC)

APSAC is an autonomous scientific organization
registered under AP Societies Registration Act,
2001. It is Andhra Pradesh’s nodal agency for
Remote Sensing, Photogrammetry, UAV Remote
Sensing, GIS and GPS applications. It aims at
providing scientific and technical support to the
government line departments for development
of the State. Few projects being implemented by
APSAC through line departments are listed
below:

PM Gati Shakti: PM Gati Shakti - National
Master Plan (NMP) aims to bring together all
relevant ministries and departments of
Government of India and States on a common
digital platform for more holistic and integrated
planning of infrastructure and logistics projects.
It aims to provide multimodal connectivity
between various economic zones for integrated
planning using GIS-based decision support
system. So far, APSAC has mapped about 274
layers relating to 27 departments in the PM
GatiShakti Portal. Further, two mobile
applications have been developed and hosted in
PM Gati Shakti Portal (with support of BiSAG-N)
to collect Individual Road Profile data
(RAHADHARI) and map all government owned

a

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

assets (STREET FURNITURE). The portals can
be accessed through the following links:

e URL of PM Gati Shakti Portal:
https://nmp.pmgatishakti.gov.in/stategatisha
kti/login,

e Rahadari:
https://apps.mgov.gov.in/details?appid=233
5,

e Asset Mapping:
https: //apsac.ap.gov.in/wpcontent/uploads
2019/08/AssetsMappingAP.apk

Andhra Pradesh Spatial Data Infrastructure
(APSSDI): State Spatial Data Infrastructure
project is being implemented by APSAC with
the support of Department of Science and
Technology (DST), Gol on 70:30 cost sharing
basis. The main objective of this project is to
standardize government’s geospatial data for
use across the platforms, to make the data
available for all line departments (G2G), Private
(G2B) and Citizen (G2C) as per the National
Geospatial Policy - 2022. APSSDI will leverage
Geospatial Technology in all the line
Departments of GoAP, in alignment with Gol
mandate. Total cost of the project is Rs 15.76
crores for a period of three years. So far, about
74 GIS Layers have been standardized as per
the ISO Standards, and the services have been
registered with National Data Registry to
facilitate use of information by different
stakeholders.

Agriculture Drought Assessment: APSAC uses
satellite data to provide near real-time support
to the Revenues (DM) Dept. for monitoring and
declaration of drought in Andhra Pradesh.
Remote  sensing-based indices such as
Vegetation Condition Index, generated on a
fortnightly basis for each mandal, are used as
inputs for the declaration of drought mandals.

By incorporating VCI analysis, Government of
Andhra Pradesh has declared 103 mandals in 7
districts as drought mandals, out of which 80
mandals are identified as severely affected and


--- PAGE 178 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

23 mandals as moderately affected during
Kharif season of 2023-24. Similarly, during Rabi
season of 2023-24, 87 mandals in 6 districts are
declared as drought mandals, out of which 63
mandals are severely affected and 24 are
moderately affected by drought.

Yield Estimation based on _ Technology
(YESTECH):This project has been initiated in
collaboration with ISRO and Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmer Welfare, Government of
India. It uses Geospatial Technology to estimate
satellite-based crop yield in Guntur and
Kakinada districts for crop insurance purposes
by the Agriculture Department, GoAP. This
approach has created transparency between
insurance companies and farmers by providing
highly accurate yield data with minimal human
interference. The total estimated cost of the
project is about Rs 10 lakhs. The project
outcome indicates that during the Kharif season
of 2023-24, crop yield in Guntur district ranges
from 629.6 to 5470 (kg/ha) in 125 villages,
while in Kakinada District it ranges from 453.3
to 5541.2 (kg/ha) in 333 villages.

APSAC has initiated the work related to
mapping of probable unauthorized sand mining
areas and estimation of sand volume from 2021
to May 2024 using Google Earth portal images.
So far, about 750 probable unauthorized areas
have been identified so far adjacent or nearby
458 authorized sand mining areas. Works
under this project are in progress.

AP Minerals Vehicle Tracking System
(APMVTS): APSAC has developed APMVTS
application using Open Stacks to provide
Realtime Monitoring and tracking of mineral
carrying vehicles using GPS and Cellular
technology from Source (Lessee) to Destination
(Delivery Location). As on date, around 50,000
vehicles carrying minerals are fitted with
AIS140 Vehicle Tracking Device (VTD). The
instruments helps in monitoring unauthorized
routes, stoppages enroute and destinations of
the mineral carrying vehicles. The estimated
cost of the project is about Rs 348 lakhs.

a

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Rural Water Supply Pipeline Mapping:
APSAC has developed a Mobile Application to
Geo-tag all the Water Supply Assets and further
generate Rural Water Supply (RWS) Pipeline
Diagrams in Geospatial Platform, for about
38,000 no. of schemes as part of the PM Gati
Shakti Program. The Water Supply Pipeline
data, which is one of the mandatory layers, is
being shared through web service to Gati Shakti
portal. This will help the department to identify
gap areas and facilitate infrastructure planning.
As part of the project, data of about 800 Water
Supply Schemes has been collected and mapped
so far.

Shoreline Change Mapping: Mapping of
changes in the shoreline has been carried out
along the coast of Andhra Pradesh (974 sq. km)
using satellite data from 1990 to 2021. The
objective of this project is to identify hot spots
of coastal erosion and accretion. The shoreline
change analysis indicates that 264.46 km (26%)
of the coast has got eroded, while 550.75 km
(54%) is undergoing accretion, and 203.09 km
(20%) is in stable condition. Maximum erosion
is observed along the coast of Krishna (59.5
km) and Kakinada (57.4 km) districts, while
maximum accretion is observed along the cost
of Anakapalli (59.4km), Srikakulam (66.6km)
and Bapatla (71.9km) districts. Ground truthing
& field verification work is under progress.

Land Use / Land Cover Mapping:The Land
Use/Land Cover mapping of the state has been
completed using 2018-19 satellite data under
the Space based Information Support for
Decentralized Planning - Update (SISDP-U)
project of Department of Space, Gol. This
mapping exercise is planned to be utilized for
preparation of developmental action plans at
the grassroots level. The extent of area covered
under major land use/land cover categories are
- built-up land (6,411.49 sq. km; 3.94%),
agriculture land (90,645.69 sq. km; 55.69%),
forest (34,304.15 sq. km; 21.08%), grasslands /
grazing lands (64 sq. km; 0.04%), wastelands
(21,172.09 sq. km; 13.01%), water bodies


--- PAGE 179 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
ECONOMIC INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

(9549.76 sq. km; 5.87%), and others (608.28 sq.
km; 0.37%). Decisions for updating Land use
/land cover for the period 2020-21 and 2025-
26 is proposed to be carried out in association
with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC),
Hyderabad from 2025.

Urban Tank/Lake/River and its Changes in
ULBs: The state has initiated temporal change
mapping using Geospatial data in Urban tanks
/lakes /rivers in all the 123 ULBs of Andhra
Pradesh. Changes in these water bodies in 24
ULBs has been completed using high resolution
satellite data of 2023. It is observed that 2,735
acres (10.7%) has been reduced out of 25,462
acres of the total tanks area. Ground truthing
and field verification are under progress.

Mapping of Gram_ Panchayat (GP)
Boundaries: To determine the boundaries of
Gram Panchayats, their mapping is being taken
up using data from revenue villages, cadastral
data, & survey numbers.

Training and Capacity Building: APSAC has
been sharing the Geospatial knowledge with

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Line Departments of the State, Academia, and
Research Organizations, etc. In FY 2023-24,
APSAC has signed MoUs with 2 Universities,
conducted 4 webinars on _ Geospatial
Technology & its Applications for GIS
professionals, faculty, researchers, etc., and
organized 4 workshops on PM Gati Shakti
National Master Plan for nodal officers of line
departments.

Awards/ Achievements in year 2024-25

APSAC_ received awards ffor _ providing
geospatial solutions in the State of Andhra
Pradesh for better resource management as
detailed below. These awards are:

e Digital Transformation Conclave & Award
for YES-TECH Project (Yield Estimation
Systems Based on Technology) in December
2024

Internet & Mobile Association of India award

for Smart Initiatives in Agriculture Remote

sensing in January 2025.


--- PAGE 180 ---
SOCIAL
INFRA-
STRUCTURE

Chapter

G



--- PAGE 181 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

8.SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

8.1 DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE OF
ANDHRA PRADESH

lobally, the emphasis is shifting towards

wellbeing of people and ease of living,

the importance of building effective
social infrastructure has become imperative for
registering substantial progress in human
development indices. Efforts are made to bring
improvement in social sector parameters like
education, healthcare, nutrition, water supply,
housing, social security, and other services
which results in a healthy ambience and happy
living.

8.1.1 Population

Andhra Pradesh is the tenth largest state in the
Country, in terms of population. As per the
2011 Census, the State accounts for 4.09
percentof the total population of the country.
The population of Andhra Pradesh more than
doubled in the last half century from 233 Lakhs
in 1961 to 495.77 Lakhs in 2011. Of this, 248.30
Lakhs are males, and 247.47 Lakhs are females.
District-wise population from 1961 to 2011
census is given in Annexure 8.1. AP Population
(Rural &Urban )from 1961 to 2011 is shown in
Figure 8.1.

100 38 146

100 110
74

1961 1971 1981 1991 2001 2011

—o—Rural —O—Urban —o—Total

Figure 8.1 AP Population (lakhs)

276.

8.1.2 Decadal Growth Rate

The decadal growth of population rose from
18.88 percent during 1961-71 to 21.13 percent
during 1981-91. Subsequently a_ significant
decline was observed in the rate of growth of
population and decline is even more prominent
at 9.21 percent during 2001-11 lower than the
All-India’s growth rate of 17.72 percent. The
Decadal Growth Rate of population in AP shown
in Figure. 8.2. The District-wise population is
shown at Annexure-8.1.

Decadal Growth Rate of
Population in Andhra Pradesh

oo
&S
(0)
LY
[o}
a
=
_—
>
°
—
o

Figure 8.2 AP Population Decadal Growth Rate

8.1.3 Sex Ratio

Sex ratio, the number of females per 1,000
males has shown a declining trend in the
Statetill 1991. The sex ratio in the State was up
from 983 in 2001 to 997 in 2011 and is higher
than all India figures of 943 in 2011. Sex ratio
continues to be favourable in Vizianagaram and
Srikakulam districts. The Districts of East
Godavari, Visakhapatnam, West Godavari, and
Guntur have registered a progressive sex ratio
moving from less than 1,000 category to more
than 1,000 from 2001 to 2011. District-wise
population (decadal variation) and sex ratio is
given in Annexure 8.2. TheSex Ratio in Andhra
Pradesh (1981 - 2011) is shown in Figure 8.3.


--- PAGE 182 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Sex Ratio in Andhra Pradesh (1981 -
2011)

5 997
a. 993
n
Ls
3 o 987
ES
2s 983 i
[2]
52 i
=O
o=
a
x
& 1981 1991 2001 2011

Year

Figure 8.3 Sex Ratio in AP

8.1.4 Density of Population
Density of population, another important

demographic indicator, is defined as the
number of persons living per sq. Km. The
density of population for Andhra Pradesh is 304
persons per square kilometre, as against 382
persons per square kilometre at all India level
in 2011. Krishna district has the highest density
at 518 while YSR Kadapa and Prakasam
districts have the lowest population density
with less than 200. The Density of Populaion of
AP shown in Figure 8.4.

67.35%
< 60.47%
S
~
& 44.09%
Ss
a
& 29.94% :
c
o
a
Es
: i
1980 1990 2000 2010

District/Region
Figure 8.4 Density of Population in AP

8.1.5 Urbanization
Urbanization has been regarded as an

important component for growth realisation.
The percentage of urban population to the total
population in the State is 29.47 percent in 2011
as compared to 24.13 percent in 2001. Among
all the districts, Visakhapatnam stood first with
47.45 percent of urban population followed by

277

Denna d Donne Danang Dene de>

Krishna district with 40.81 percent urban
population. Srikakulam with 16.16 percent of
urban population followed by Prakasam with
19.56 percent are the least urbanized districts.
District-wise percentage of urban population to
total population and density is given in
Annexure 8.3.Urbanization in AP (2011) shown
in Figure 8.5.

47.45

40.81
19.56
16.16 /

Visakhapatnam Krishna Srikakulam Prakasam

_
BS
~—
<
2
~
x
s
Qa
[e}
a
@
2
=
2

Figure 8.5 Urbanization in Sex Ratio in AP
8.1.6 Literacy Rate

The literacy rate of the State is 67.35 percent in
2011 as against 62.07 percent in 2001. The
literacy rate of the State is lower than of all
India literacy rate at 72.98% percent. The best
record in literacy so far at both the national and
state levels was during the nineties. A slow
growth in literacy rate was identified during the
last decade at state and national levels.

Literacy in Andhra Pradesh increased by over
37 percent from 29.94 percent in 1981 to 67.35
percent in 2011. Despite this fast rate of growth
in the last three decades, the literacy rate in
Andhra Pradesh is still lower than all India
average. The overall literacy rate has gone up
from 62.07 percent in 2001 to 67.35 percent in
2011; the male literacy rate has increased from
71.28 to 74.77 percent. Female literacy rate has
gone up from 52.72 percent in 2001 to 59.96
percent in 2011. District-wise details of male,
female, and total literacy rate from 1981 to
2011 are given in Annexure 8.4..Literacy Rate in
AP (1981-2011) shown in Figure 8.6.


--- PAGE 183 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

=
&
3)
~
Ly)
a
~
LS)
©
=
vo
4
o_l

2001

Figure 8.6. Literacy Rate in AP (1981-2011)

8.2 SCHOOL EDUCATION

Article 45 of the Constitution of India stipulates
that the universalization of elementary
education is a directive principle of state policy,
emphasizing the necessity of providing free and
compulsory education for all children aged 6 to
14 years. According to Article 21A and the
93rdConstitutional Amendment of 2009,
education has been’ recognized as a
fundamental right. This article outlines the
responsibility of the state to ensure free and
compulsory education for all children within
the age group of 6 to 14 years.

The Integrated Scheme on School Education
(SamagraShikshaAbhiyan) envisions ‘school’ as
a continuum that encompasses Pre-school,
Primary, Upper Primary, Secondary, and Senior
Secondary levels. The vision of the scheme is to
provide inclusive and  equitablequality
education from pre-school through the senior
secondary stage, in alignment with the
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) for
education.The government is committed to
achieving 100% literacy and for that
Government has initiated several schemes to
bring about both quantitative and qualitative
improvements. It provides educational facilities
for a school-aged population of 70.82 Lakhs
children, as indicated by Aadhaar-linked
enrollment.

The details regarding the types of schools and
the number of teachers employed are presented

a

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

in Table 8.1 Additionally, Table 8.2 illustrates
the number of schools and teachers categorized
by management for the year 2024-25.

Table 8.1 Type of Schools and Teachers

Sl. | Category of No. of No. of

No. | School Schools | Teachers
Primary 38222 97285
Upper Primary 7526 45591
High school 12824 170374
Total 58572) 313250

Source: U-DISE Plus provisional data 2024-25

Note: Kendriya and Navodaya _ Schools
information is not included

Table 8.2 Management-wise Schools & Teachers:
2024-25

SI.No. Category No. of | No. of
Schools] Teachers
Central Govt. 7 131

State Govt. and State) 44292) 184898
Govt sector

3 |Pvt.Aided 789 3266
4 (Pvt.Un-Aided 13484, 124955
Total 58572} 313250

8.2.1 Enrolment

Efforts are being made to make education
accessible to all by improving existing schools,
implementing programs like TallikiVandanam
and __ SarvepalliRadhakrishnanVidyarthiMitra,
and enhancing educational facilities for
underserved communities.

The enrollment in all types of schools during
the 2024-25 academic year in the state is 68.27
lakhs (excluding the enrollment of Kendriya
Vidyalayas and Navodaya Schools). Details of
enrollment are provided in Annexure 8.5

Dropout rates during 2023-24 for classes I to V
(0.18%), vi to viii (1.07%), ix to xii (10.09%)
and details are given in Annexure 8.6


--- PAGE 184 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

8.2.2 Teachers and Teacher Pupil Ratio:

To achieve the goal of universal enrollment,
retention, and improved education for children
in the state, government is making sustained
efforts to recruit teachers in all schools to
ensure a reasonable Teacher-Pupil Ratio (TPR).
Rational deployment of teachers, the creation of
new positions, and extensive recruitment
initiatives have helped to address imbalances in
the demand and supply of teachers.

During the 2024-2025 academic year, there are
97,285 teachers in primary schools, 45,591 in
primary schools with upper primary levels (I-
VII/VUI), and 1,70,374 in high schools. The
details of the teacher-pupil ratio in schools are
shown in Table 8.3.

Table 8.3Teacher Pupil Ratio in schools (in Nos)

Year Primary Upper High
Primary | Schools
2014-15 26 21 26
2015-16 22 19 26
2016-17 22 19 28
2017-18 23 19 28
2018-19 25 21 25
2019-20 25 20 26
2020-21 26 19 28
2021-22 26 19 25
2022-23 22 20 27
2023-24 21 21 25
2024-25 20 19 24
ThallikiVandanam

The Government proposes a new scheme to
provide financial assistance  Rs.15,000/-
annually for each school going student (to the
account of mothers) studying Classes I to XII in
both Government and Private schools in the
State. This initiative aims at reducing economic
barriers to education, ensuring that no child is
deprived of schooling due to poverty. The
scheme seeks to increase school enrolment and
retention rates, ultimately improving the Gross

es 27°

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Enrolment Ratio (GER). Guidelines will be
prepared, and the scheme will be implemented
from the coming academic year.

Andhra Pradesh Model School Society

A.P. Model Schools were established in 2013,
following the KendriyaVidyalaya template, to
provide quality education in Educationally
Backward Blocks (E.B.B). Currently, 164 Model
Schools are operational under the Andhra
Pradesh Model School Society (APMSS), with an
initial enrollment of 95,484 students.

Enrollment in APMS: There are 82,000 seats
available in Secondary Education and 52,160
seats for Intermediate Courses, which consist of
four groups: MPC, BIPC, MEC, and CEC. In total,
there are 1,34,160 seats available across 164
Model Schools, which are operating at a 99%
occupancy rate. These schools achieved a 93%
pass percentage in both SSC and Intermediate
examinations during academic year 2023-24

Best Teacher Awards

State Awards to the Best Teachers selected for
this honor on the occasion of Teachers’ Day,
celebrated on 5thSeptember 2024. A total of 69
teachers have been chosen for the State Best
Teacher Awards for 2024. The awardees will
receive a gold-coated silver medal, a shawl, a
cash reward of Rs. 20,000, a merit certificate
and a memento.

Two teachers from Andhra Pradesh were
awarded the National Meritorious Teacher
Awardby Government of India.

Reorganization of clusters

To strengthen localized decision-making, the
School Education Department has reorganized
2,809 clusters as primary governance units
Decentralized
ThroughCluster Reorganization, Headmasters

under a Administration.

have been empowered with greater authority to
ensure efficient resource allocation and clear
accountability in the education system.

Curricular reforms


--- PAGE 185 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

As part of Curriculum Reforms, misconception
posters have been introduced for Classes 1-5,
and NIPUN Lakshyas have strengthened
foundational literacy and numeracy in Classes
1-2. SCERT has revised the Hindi textbooks for
Classes 9-10 align with updated standards. To
reduce the academic load, textbooks have been
cut to 16 for Classes 1-5 and 58 for Classes 6-
10, with lessons now organized semester-wise.
Additionally, first and third Saturdays are
observed as "No Bag Days" for a balanced
learning experience.

In a significant step to promote ethical values,
Govt decided to introduce to Value Education in
all schools and Value Education Booklets have
been introduced for primary and secondary
Subhashitalu,
SatakaPadyalu, and moral stories curated by
Brahma Shri ChagantiKoteswara Rao Garu,
books on constitutional values and gender
equality etc.

students. These feature

Restructuring of Schools

To improve’ educational outcomes, the
government is restructuring the school
education system by upgrading schools in Gram
Panchayats with over 60 students into Model
PrimarySchools. These schools are being
equipped with 5 teachers, ensuring adequate
teaching time, better lesson planning, improved
teacher-student engagement, and enhanced
overall quality of education.Govt has further
decided to upgrade nearly 600 upper primary
schools into High schools wherein the
enrollment of classes IV to VIII is 60 to reduce
the dropout rate in secondary education and it
is great move to meet the directives of New
Education Policy,2020.

Vidya Shakti

Government of AP. School Education
Department had anMoU with IIT Madras to
organize remedial classes for classes 3 to 12
through zoom sessions.Pilot phase1 started on
3rdDecember,2024 in 74 schools of erstwhile
Chittoor and Guntur districts including

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Government Junior Colleges.Pilot Phase 2
started on 3rd January,2025 in 100 schools and
the classes are being conducted for classes
6th,7th,8th, 9th ,11th and12th.

Objectives and Purpose: Vidya Shakti aims to
improve learning outcomes in schools, reduce
dropout rates, enhance learning outcomes in
subjects with focus on foundational content of
subjects such as Mathematics, Science, and
English. Develop skills through interactive
learning tools and promote digital inclusion by
bringing education to students in remote and
rural areas through digital platforms.

The program places special emphasis on
Students in Grades 3 to 8 focusing on
Mathematics, Science, and English, with each
subject taught twice a week. Training teachers
to adopt digital platforms and modern
pedagogical methods for effective teaching.

Mode of Delivery: The program uses a hybrid
digital model to provide online classes to
students across the stateovercoming physical
and resource-based barriers. Online classes
delivered via Zoom meetings by bilingual
teachers trained by IITM Pravarthakusing tools
like PHET, O - Labs, Circuits.com, and
Worldwall.net foreasy understanding. These
simulations are used to help students visualize
concepts and perform virtual
experiments,fostering deeper comprehension.
Recorded content is also available on a
dedicated YouTube channel for students who
miss sessions.

Vidya Shakti App: Orientation given to all
schools Heads and Coordinators on usage of
theVidya Shakti App for uploading attendance
and photo daily.All schools start using the App.

Scale Up: It is decided to extend this project to
all the school complexes in the state from the
academic year 2025-26 onwards.


--- PAGE 186 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

8.3  SAMAGRA SHIKSHA

SamagraShiksha is implemented as a centrally
sponsored scheme by the Department of School
Education & Literacy, Government of India,
through a Single State Implementation Society
(SIS) at the state level, with a 60% central and
40% state fund-sharing pattern. The vision of
the scheme is to ensure inclusive and equitable
quality education from pre-school to the senior
secondary stage, in alignment with the
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) for
education.

The SamagraShiksha Scheme has _ been
extended up to 2025-26 with several new
features. Additionally, 86 recommendations
from the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020
have been incorporated under SamagraShiksha.

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has
established SamagraShiksha by integrating
three schemes: Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA),
Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA),
and Teacher Education (TE). The integrated
scheme, "SamagraShiksha," aims to provide
equitable and inclusive quality education.

Focused Interventions of the Scheme

Universal Access including Infrastructure
Development & Retention

SamagraShiksha, A.P, aims to ensure universal
access to education for all children aged 4 to 18
years, covering all levels of school education
from pre-school to senior secondary across the
state. In line with this goal, the following
initiatives are being implemented.

Providing Infrastructure Facilities in Govt.
Schools

424 physical units have been completed, and
4,679 units are in progress, with all works
scheduled for completion within the next 12
months.

The budget provided by the Government of
India was used to fill gaps in basic

22

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

infrastructure such as classrooms, toilets for
boys and _ girls, electrification, repairs,
compound walls, and drinking water facilities.
During this period, 352 KGBV schools were
upgraded to junior colleges with additional
infrastructure facilities such as classrooms,
labs, libraries, dormitories, and toilets to
accommodate the increased strength of college
students. These facilities were sanctioned by
the Government of India.

Mana Badi Mana Bhavishyathu (MBMB): The
State Government provided funds to create
infrastructure facilities under the Mana Badi
Mana Bhavishyathu( MBMB ) Phase-I program,
covering 15,713 schools with a budget of
%3,466.00 crores and completed in 2021,
delivering nine components of basic facilities.

MBMB Phase-II program is being also
implementedwith a budget of =7,670.00 crores.
It continues to cover the nine components from
Phase-I, with the addition of constructing extra
classrooms as the 10th component. The
program is currently in progress and _ is
scheduled for completion in 2025.

Mainstreaming of Out of School Children

Children aged 6-14 years who are not admitted
to any school or never enrolled are classified as
Out of School Children (OoSC). As per NCPCR
norms the children who are absent for more
than 30 consecutive days from school are also
considered as OoSC. The RTE Act specifically
provides an opportunity to admit children aged
6-14 years into government schools in their
age-appropriate classes.

A.P. SamagraShiksha has adopted two
approaches to mainstream Out of School
Children:

i) Direct enrollment into KGBVs,
Residential Schools, Regular Schools,
Bhavitha (IERC), or Non-Bhavitha (Non-
IERC) Centres

ii) Special training through NRSTCs, RSTCs,
or Seasonal Hostels.


--- PAGE 187 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Strategies for mainstream Out of School
Children

Direct Enrolment Drive: A door-to-door
survey was conducted from 12th June to 12th
July, 2024, to identify out-of-school children in
the state. 84,640 children were identified as of
July 12, 2024 and mainstreamed into schools.
Regular weekly reviews were conducted with
District Educational Officers (DEOs), Additional
Project Coordinators (APCs) and ALSCOs to
reduce the number of drop-out children and
mainstream them into schools.

Non-Residential Special Training Centres
(NRSTCs): Currently, 45 centres are
functioning (40 in ASR district, 4 in Anakapalli
and 1 in Kakinada) accommodating 1,037
children, who will be mainstreamed into age-
appropriate classes byMarch 2025.

Seasonal hostels: An amount of Rs. 604.00
lakhs were approved forSeasonal hostels to
accommodate migrant children whose parents
are migrate for seasonal work. Seasonal hostels
were approved for 6,040 students.83 seasonal
hostels are functioning in 2024-25 at Krishna
(24), Kurnool (34) & NTR (25) Districts for
Migrant Children

Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose Awasiya
Vidyalays & Hostels (NSCBAVs)

These institutions cater to urban-deprived
children, including orphans, single-parent
children, street children, rag-pickers, semi-
orphans, beggars, children of HIV-affected
parents, children of sex workers, and children
from nomadic families. A.P. SamagraShiksha
provides accommodation, food, cosmetics,
stipends, vocational training, and _ career
guidance to these children.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

There are 3 NSCBAVs and 14 hostels operating
with an approved budget of Rs. 6.72 crores out
of which Rs. 6.01 crores have been released so
far. The approved capacity is 1435 children and
the current enrollment is 1334 (357 in Schools
and 977 in Hostels)

Transport Allowance

Transport allowance will be provided to
children aged 6-18 years in areas where there
are no schools viz. Primary Schools (Classes I-
V) within a radius of 1 km, Upper Primary
Schools (Classes VI-VUI) in 3 km radius and
Secondary Schools (Classes IX-X) in5 km
radius. Out of 28,961 eligible children, 22,558
are receiving the transport allowance at Rs. 600
per month for 10 months per child for 2024-25.
An amount of Rs. 13.53 crores were released for
2024-25.

GENDER AND EQUITY

To promote gender equality, supportive
educational interventions are implemented in
the schools viz., Rani Lakshmibai Atma Raksha
Prashikshan (Self Defence), Sanitary Pad
Vending & Incinerator machines for elementary
and secondary school students, Adolescent
awareness programme, Career guidance
Programme for students of Secondary and
Senior Secondary level apart from
strengthening Pre-Primary Education.


--- PAGE 188 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Rani Lakshmibai Atma Raksha Prashikshan
- Self Defence

The Government of AP is committed to
empowering girls through self-defense training
and career guidance which are necessary to
develop confidence among the girls and able to
defend themselves to face any kind of situation.
To achieve this goal, the Rani Laxmi Bai
AtmaRakshaPrashikshan program — equips
nearly 1.3 million girl students from classes 6 to
12 with self-defense skills.

Adolescent Awareness Programme

The Adolescent Awareness Programmes are
conducted for 8,23,138 students across 9,675
schools, with an expenditure of Rs.483.75 lakhs.
The program aims to educate and raise
awareness among students in the adolescent
age group (grades 9 to 12). Students are
educated and provided gender awareness,
menstrual health and hygiene, child marriages,
child abuse, nutrition, relationships, child
trafficking, goal setting, and career guidance
which will foster self-respect, career building,
and life skills among the children.

Career Guidance

The Career Guidance Program is designed for
students at the secondary and senior secondary
stages to develop and foster the knowledge,
skills, and attitude necessary for their future.
The program deploys a sustained training and
coaching initiative for personal development
and career readiness for children and
adolescents in schools.

The "Education Mobility & Career Success"
initiative is a career education program
spearhead by A.P. SamagraShiksha, in
partnership with the University of Melbourne,
Rotary International, and Global Education
Solutions. This program focuses on developing
career competencies, transferable skills, and
personalized career education for students in
Classes 8-12 across Andhra Pradesh.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

In Phase 1, the program reached 41,000
students across 100 schools and 19
Government Junior Colleges (GJCs) in five
districts viz. Vishakapatnam, Vizianagaram,
Guntur, Prakasam, and Nellore. Digital tools
such as Mykensho were introduced to aid in
career guidance and education.

In Phase 2, district-level teacher training was
initiated to build capacity for career counseling.
Workshops on psychometric testing and career
guidance were held with expert support. The
initiative continues to expand, focusing on
teacher capacity-building and _ integrating
psychometric tools for personalized career
counseling.

Over 500 career cards were created to provide
students and educators in both English and
Telugu with detailed insights into various
professions. These resources are accessible on
the SamagraShiksha website, ensuring wide
dissemination. More than 19,000 educators
have completed a Career Certificate Course
through the DIKSHA platform, equipping them
to guide students effectively.

A state-level residential training program was
conducted to equip counsellors with the
knowledge, skills, and strategies needed to
address career guidance and adolescent mental
health challenges. The recruitment of
counsellors, facilitated in collaboration with
EDCIL, New Delhi, includes specialized training
by experts from NIMHANS, AIIMS, and Meri
Trac to enhance their effectiveness in these key
areas.

Kasturba Gandhi BalikaVidyalaya (KGBVs)

Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya (KGBV)
scheme was launched by Gol in 2004-05 with
an aim to mainstream the dropout girls by
setting up Residential Schools at the Upper
Primary level for girls, predominantly orphans,
semi orphans, OoSC, differently abled children,
SC, ST, OBC and minority communities wherein
female literacy is low. The scheme aims to
increase the quality of education for girls,


--- PAGE 189 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

create girl friendly environment in schools and
create awareness among the community
members for girl child education.

KGBVs were sanctioned under Sarva
ShikshaAbhiyan called as KGBV Type III and
Girls Hostels were sanctioned under Rashtriya
Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) called as
KGBV Type - IV under the new Integrated
Centrally Sponsored Scheme SamagraShiksha.

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Currently, 352 (Type III) KGBVs are functioning
in 21 districts of AP with the enrolment of
89689 which includes 18 KGBVs for Minorities.
89.32% passed in SSC and 76.12% have passed
in Senior Inter.

Type-IV KGBVs: There are 147 type-IV KGBVs
are functioning in 18 districts in Andhra
Pradesh.42 type IV KGBV are made to be
functional in this academic year with an
enrolment of 14032.

Table 8.4 Details of enrolment in KGBV during 2024-25

Type of KGBV | Classes SC ST OBC Minority | Others | Total
Ill 6 to 12% 26,654 | 11,877 | 43,193 | 2173 5792 89,689
IV 9t to 12th 3173 648 8830 233 1148 14,032

Capacity building program for 249 ANMs
working in all KGBVs was conducted in
coordination with AIIMS, Mangalagiri.

Vocational Education

Aiming to enhance the employability of youth
and maintain their competitiveness,
APSamagraShiksha, through
Education, fill the gap between educated and
employable and reducing the dropout rate at
secondary level.

Vocational

The CSSVHSE program is implemented in 494
Schools with 818 Vocational Trainers and 629
schools with 1151 Vocational Trainers under

PM SHRI scheme under different management
schools across Andhra Pradesh. The scheme is
offering 10 trades with 27 Job roles for the
academic year 2024-25 which impacts more
than 2 Lakh students of classes 9th to 12th. The
Vocational Education is implemented through
Vocational Training Partners (VTP) who are
selected through a _ transparent process
facilitated by NSDC, New Delhi for Vocational
Education trades.

nn

Inclusive Education

The School Education Department in Andhra
Pradesh is ensuring that every child has access
to quality education, regardless of their abilities
or disabilities. The State Government is
providing with facilities as identification and
enrollment of CwSN in Schools, Medical
assessment camps, providing aids and
appliances, teaching, and learning materials,
Student allowances, therapeutic services and
home-based education to CwSN and awareness
programs etc.

Present Scenario

a) Conducted Enrolment Drive for
identification of Children with Special
Needs by Special Educators and enrolled
14538 identified CWSN in Government and
Government aided schools.

b) A total of 679 Inclusive Education Resource
Centers (Bhavitha) is actively providing a
range of specialized services for Children
with Special Needs (CWSN). These services
include auditory training, vision
stimulation, orientation and _ mobility
support, Braille instruction, early childhood



--- PAGE 190 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

intervention, parental counselling,
physiotherapy, and _ school readiness
programs. Currently, 11,800 CwSN benefit
from these centers across the state.

c) 1335 Resource persons for CwSN have been
working at 679 Bhavitha centers in the state
for improving daily living skills and
preparing school readiness among Children
with Special Needs. Apart from performing
these services, the resource persons were
responsible for identification of CwSN and
enroll them in schools.

d) District Level Orientation Program was
conducted to all 1358 MEO-I&II on creating
awareness and effective implementation of
Inclusive Education activities in field level.

e) Physiotherapy services have been provided
to Children with Special Needs by
Physiotherapists for improving mobility
skills among them. There are 13,200 CwSN
were benefitted by this activity.

f) Conducted 5 Day Webinar from 14th to
18th October 2024 on dyslexia awareness
week for all stakeholders in coordination
with NCERT for improving knowledge on
Dyslexia and Specific Learning Disabilities.

g) Medical Assessment and verification were
conducted for providing aids and
appliances across the State.
Basavataarakam Indo American cancer
Hospital, Hyderabad conducted screening
camps, 274 surgeries were done during
2023-2024 and 2024-25 academic years.

h) Transportation allowance paid to 15738
CwSN, Escort allowance to 13035, Stipend
to 30,560 CwSN girls.

Achievements

¢ SamagraShiksha, Government of Andhra
Pradesh got National award on "Best State
in Implementation of the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Act and Other
Empowerment Schemes for Persons with
Disabilities” for the academic year 2024-25
issued by Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment Department of

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities
(Divyangjan).

* The State Level Mega Inclusive Yoga Event
conducted on 21st June 2024 (10th
International Day of Yoga) in Vijayawada
with 1000 students (600 Children with
Special Needs and 400 regular students) has
earned a place in International Genius Book
of Records and Miracles World Records.

Innovative Activities

¢ Digital accessible Examinations for CwSN:
13 Children with Special Needs (one -
Cerebral palsy, one ~-_ orthopaedic
impairment and 11 - Visually Challenged)
appeared for the SSC examination, by using
computers, without taking the help of
scribe/reader under vigilant supervisors
during March 2024 and all of them passed
with good percentage.

* State Level Adventure Sports: Conducted
State Level Adventure Sports meet from
7thJune to 11th June 2024 at Rural
Development Trust (RDT), Ananthapur for
Children with Special needs and School
Assistants in Special Education in
coordination with Special Olympic Bharat.

RTE Entitlements

To improve student participation in
government schools, particularly among those
from socially and economically weaker sections,
the Govt. of AP has introduced several
initiatives, including the
"SarvepalliRadhakrishnaVidyarthi Mithra"
scheme to increase the Gross Enrolment Ratio
(GER) and reduce dropout rates in government
schools.

Supply of Student Kits: The Govt. of AP has
supplied student kits comprising three pairs of
uniform cloth, textbooks, workbooks, belts,
notebooks, a pair of shoes, two pairs of socks, a
dictionary, and a bag to 35,69,506 students
studying in classes I to X in all government-
managed schools in the state for the academic


--- PAGE 191 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

year 2024-25, with a total budget of Rs. 944.53
crores.

The textbooks, notebooks, and bags have also
been supplied to 2,00,753 students studying in
classes XI and XII in government junior colleges,
Kasturba Gandhi BalikaVidyalayas, AP Model
Schools, AP
Institutions, and High School Plus, with an
expenditure of Rs. 28.64 crores.

Residential Educational

Student kit items (i-e., textbooks, notebooks,
bags, uniforms, belts, and dictionaries) were
also supplied to approximately 13,328 students
affected by floods in NTR, Krishna, Guntur, and
Bapatla districts in September 2024.

Sravepalli Radha Krishnan Vidyarthi Mitra - I
(2025-26): Under this scheme, theGovernment
has decided to supply student kit items with an
outlay of Rs. 953.71 crores for classes I to X and
Rs. 34.40 crores for classes XI and XII for the
academic year 2025-26. The student kits will be
distributed to students on the reopening day of
schools i.e. 12.06.2025.

Admission to students under Right to
Education Act 12 (1) (c)

Under the Act, Government Is providing 25
percent of admissions to the DG & Weaker
Sections in Private Unaided Schools and
reimburse the private management schools
with a fee per child of Rs. 8000/- in Urban
Areas, Rs.6500/- in Rural Areas and Rs.5100/-
in Tribal/Scheduled Areas. A total number of
49168 eligible disadvantaged and weaker
Sections were admitted in Private unaided
schools under section 12(1) C of RTE Act from
2022-23 to 2024-25.

Quality Initiatives

The activities associated with quality initiatives
aim to enhance the quality of education
concerning students, teachers, schools, the
teaching-learning process, teaching materials,
community participation, textbooks, uniforms,
learning enhancement programs, _ sports,
libraries, and assessments.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

NIPUN BHARAT (FLN) Early Childhood Care
and Education

The NIPUN Bharat initiative, under the National
Education Policy (NEP) 2020, aims to ensure
Foundational Literacy and Numeracy (FLN) for
all children by 2027. The Govt. has actively
aligned its efforts with the mission, targeting
38,000 school teachers and 55,607 Anganwadi
Centers catering to Pre-Primary 1 (PP1), Pre-
Primary 2 (PP2), Grade 1, and Grade 2 children.
These interventions address the  socio-
economic challenges of early education and
build a robust foundation for lifelong learning.

Current Initiatives

* Capacity Building and Training: 38,000
early-grade teachers and 55,607 Anganwadi
workers to be trained in Comprehensive
ECCE modules (60-day and 120-day)
developed by SCERT and SamagraShiksha,
with contextualized learning approaches.

* VidyaPravesh Program:a 90-day
preparatory curriculum implemented
across schools in the state with regular
teacher demonstrations.

¢ JaduiPitara Adoption: Contextualized with
56 items aligned for learning
outcomesdistributed to — all schools,
complemented by video demonstrations for
effective utilization.

* Model Foundation Schools: 41 schools
established, equipped with thematic wall
paintings, indoor/outdoor play materials,
and JaduiPitara kits.

Socio-Economic Impact: Conducted School
Readiness Melas with active participation from
parents and local committees which promotes
awareness of early childhood education's
importance in socio-economically diverse
communities. Enhanced teacher competencies
to contribute to long-term socio-economic
upliftment and facilitates employability and
skill development in rural and underprivileged
areas.


--- PAGE 192 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Initiatives taken for development of Science
and Mathematics teaching:

* The Govt. has established 300 STEM LABS
which is a huge initiative done exclusively
with Public Private Partnership to promote
experiential learning.

¢ Students are encouraged to explore their
new ideas and build innovative projects
through more than 500 Atal Tinkering Labs.

¢ Establishing of dedicated spaces is planned
within secondary and senior secondary
schools equipped with modern tools and
resources in 2,331 Labs. These labs aim to
transform the educational landscape of the
state and contribute to its socio-economic
development.

¢ Science Museums are renovated in Nellore,
Ananthapuram, Kadapa, Eluru, and Chittoor
districts to act as science curiosity centres
to significantly enhance the quality of
education, reduce the
educational divide, and prepare students to
be future-ready.

urban-rural

* Teaching at Right Level (TaRL) program:
Conducted Baseline test on 24th and 25th of
September 2024 to all students studying
3rd, 4th, and 5th classes in all managements
in the ALP.

* Kala Utsav 2024-25: As per NCERT
guidelines Mandal Level, District level and
State level Kala Utsav were conducted in
December 2024 on 6 Themes wherein 225
students participated in state level and the
winners participated in National level Kala
Utsav held from 5th to 8th January, 2025 at
Bhopal.

¢ Library Grant: State has procured and
supplied class appropriate books to all
Elementary, Secondary and Sr. Secondary
Schools from NBT, Publication Division, CIIL
and NCERT with the objective to inculcate
reading habit among the students.

> The Govt. has allotted funds of Rs.5000
for primary schools and Rs. 13000 for
upper primary schools, Rs.15000 for

EE

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

secondary Schools and Rs.20, 000 for Sr.
Secondary Schools.

> The government is going to supply
3,22,76,051 age-appropriate and class-
appropriate books to 44,774
government schools in 2025.

> Students won a prize of Rs.1, 00,000 in
the Varadhi Foundation competition.

> State has achieved Positive impact on
students’ reading habits and literacy
rates

Mother Tongue’ Based
Education (MTBMLE):

Multi-lingual

¢ AP is implementing the Mother Tongue
Based Multilingual Education (MTBMLE) at
Primary Schools among the tribal students
in coordination with Tribal Welfare
Department in 8 districts covering 6 tribal
languages in the state.

* The Govt. has identified the issues among
tribal students such as dropout rate, gap in
language and communication among
teachers and students. To address these
challenges, the government has initiated the
engagement and training of native speakers,
along with the printing and distribution of
tribal primers.

¢ 2, 22,768 Tribal Primers were Printed and
distribution to PP 1, PP 2, and Class 1
Students for 2024-25. The program is being
implemented during the years 2020-21 to
2024-25 depending on the PAB approved
budget in SamagraShiksha.

¢ 31,824 students are direct beneficiaries in
1127 schools for the year 2024-25.

Personalised Adaptive Learning (PAL):

Andhra Pradesh has become the first state to
implement PAL at such a scale in 2019. This
innovative initiative has been designed to cater
to the learning levels of each student
individually. Through interactive exercises and


--- PAGE 193 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

assessments, the programme evaluates each
student's understanding of mathematical
concepts and adapts the learning material
accordingly. This adaptive approach ensures
that students are challenged at an appropriate
level, helping them to progress.

The programme is being conducted in 524
secondary schools across 18 districts of Andhra
Pradesh for Maths, English and Telugu subjects
for classes 6-9. Each PAL LAB is provided 30
Tablet devices loaded with content.

As the Program envisioned positive learning
outcomes, the AP Government is scaling up the
program to 700 Residential schools across the
state in alignment to its vision of higher
learning outcomes benefitting 3 lakh Students.
Data-driven remediation in PAL is supported by
Dashboards and Reports accessible to teachers’
leverages real-time assessment and feedback to
identify gaps in students at the right time.

Teacher Education

As part of National Policy on Education 1986,
Government Teacher Training Institutions
(TTIs) were upgraded into DIETS District
Institutes of Education and Training in 3 Phases
under the scheme of re-structuring and re-
organization of teacher education. There are 13
DIETS functioning in Andhra Pradesh under
Govt. sector.

DIETs as Centres of Excellence: According to
Gol guidelines, DIETs are expected to undertake
research work in_ collaboration with
neighbouring Higher Education Institutions
(HEIs). The Government has selected three
DIETs (Kurnool, Srikakulam and Vizianagaram)
in Phase 1 and three DIETs (Guntur,
Visakhapatnam&SPSR Nellore) in Phase 2 to be
developed as Centres of Excellence during
2024-25.

Further, the government aims to transform all
13 DIETs in the state into vibrant institutions
within a span of five years, recommending an
allocation of Rs.15.00 crores per DIET. This

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

investment is intended to achieve the objectives
of DIETs, such as promoting research, skill
education, and training for in-service and pre-
service teachers.

SIEMAT (State Institute of Educational
management and Training)

SIEMAT was established in 2005 in Andhra
Pradesh and functioning with the departments
of Educational Management, Educational policy
& Planning and School Leadership Academy
and Research and Evaluation. SIEMAT conducts
Trainings, workshops, seminars, community
Mobilisation, Preparation of Annual work plan
and Budget, works related to Educational
Management of Administrative wing etc.

School Leadership Academy, SIEMAT

The School Leadership Academy (SLA) under
the State Institute of Educational Management
and Training (SIEMAT) in Andhra Pradesh is an
initiative aimed at enhancing the leadership
and management capabilities of school leaders.
This program is designed to ensure that
headmasters, principals, and other educational
leaders are equipped with the necessary skills
and knowledge to improve school performance
and student outcomes.

Activities of the School Leadership Academy
(SLA)

* Online video recordings and live interviews
were conducted by SLA, AP, to highlight
best practices among school leaders,
including DIETs.

¢ Aseparate YouTube channel was created to
upload the activities of the School
Leadership Academy, and all videos were
uploaded to the NCSL-NIEPA website.

* Training for Master Facilitators and school
heads is being conducted under the SALT
project.

* The state conducted a School Leadership
Master Facilitator Training Program at the
state level, aiming to build the capacity of


--- PAGE 194 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

around 45,614 school heads across all levels
in a phased manner.

Milestones Achieved by SIEMAT during
2023-24

* A diagnostic test was conducted in 26
districts, involving 45,614 school heads ina
controlled environment. Provided 8 days of
training provided for Master Facilitators
(MFs).

¢ Training to all 45,614 headmasters will be
held in a phased manner.

¢ A state-level committee was constituted to
follow up on the IIMA training programs in
schools. Five batches of school heads were
trained at IIMA, with 50 participants per
batch.

* A five-day exposure visit and capacity-
building workshop for the SIEMAT team
was held in Bagar (PSL), Rajasthan.

¢ VidyaAmritMahotsav, a NCERT-led national
festival to promote and _ appreciate
innovative pedagogy by teachers and school
leaders, was held and AP secured 1st place.

Major Flagship Programs Undertaken by
SIEMAT

* Provided training of e-Khel Pathasala - PE
and Community Coaching Program to
contribute to the professional development
of Physical Education Teachers in India.

* The state has implemented the Ek Bharat
Shreshtha Bharat (EBSB) program in all
management schools, paired with Punjab,
involving a total of 200 schools in Andhra
Pradesh.

* Vidyanjali: A program enabling community
members, volunteers, organizations,
institutions, and NRIs to interact directly
with government schools. Total On boarded
Schools of AP are 42,420 schools and
17,000 volunteers as of January 8, 2025.

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

¢ Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav: The Meri
MatiMeraDesh activity was conducted in
every school, wherein every student
participates in 5 activities along with
teachers, parents and community members.

* Project Veer Gatha: Nearly 13 lakh
students participated in the Veer Gatha 4.0
program in 2024-2025 and won two
prestigious national-level prizes. Winners
will receive Rs. 10,000 as prize money and
will participate in Republic Day celebrations
with the Prime Minister of India.

* PreranaUtsav is a transformative one-week
experiential learning program held in
March-April 2024, designed to empower
the youth of the country.

Digital Initiatives: DIKSHA (Digital
infrastructure for Knowledge Sharing)

DIKSHA Andhra Pradesh has demonstrated
remarkable progress in fostering digital
learning and innovative pedagogical practices.
4.91 lakh users have been registered on the
platform and a total of 21.13 crore learning
sessions were recorded with 246.33 crore
learning minutes were achieved

Energized Textbooks

All 391 textbooks for classes 1 to 10, including
those in minor media languages (Urdu, Odia,
Tamil, Kannada) have been integrated with QR
codes for all lessons. High-quality e-content,
including images, videos, animations, and other
resources are linked to these QR _ codes,
allowing students to scan them and access
visual content for improved conceptual
understanding. In addition to the textbooks,
many training modules, teacher handbooks, and
pictorial dictionaries have also _ been
incorporated with QR codes.

Live Streaming through DIKSHA YouTube
Channel: The state DIKSHA team in AP has
created a YouTube Channel
(https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCC_WW

oPgBZ1RkZ3pbQEgx7Q) with 86.9k


--- PAGE 195 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

subscribers. The channel is being used to live
stream all the DIKSHA programs and sessions.

A total of 266 live sessions have been
conducted with 129 videos were uploaded to
provide supplementary learning resources.

Digital Textbooks: The soft copies (PDFs)
oftextbooks prescribed by the AP SCERT for
students in AP have been uploaded and made
available for use by students, parents, and
teachers freely.

E-Content Creation: The state ranks as second
largest in e-content creation, with 26,553
content pieces developed, the platform
recorded 17.45 crore learning sessions and
519.6 crore playtime minutes. In Agastya
International Foundation, 245 content pieces
focusing on design thinking, health, and other
subjects were added.

UNICEF: A five-module career guidance course
for teachers was rolled out and the Telugu
version of the course is currently under
development.

NISHTHA 3.0 & 4.0 Rerun: Enhanced
enrollments and participation in NCERT’s
NISHTHA rerun courses. Online courses on IFP
usage and TOEFL subjects were launched.

Innovative Programs: The State has launched
school enrollment program VidyaPravesham in
collaboration with Shikshalokam involving
teachers, block officials, parents, and
community members. Andhra Pradesh secured
top national position with 1,00,758 teacher
contributions to innovative pedagogy in
VidyaAmritMahotsav.

Science and Technology Initiatives

¢ Atal Tinkering Labs (ATL): The objective of
this scheme is to foster curiosity, creativity,
and imagination in young minds; and
inculcate skills such as design mind set,
computational thinking, adaptive learning,
physical computing etc. Weekly live

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

sessions are being conducted to emphasize
Science and Technology concepts.

* Collaborations: Partnered with Leadership
for Equity to provide Teach Tool content
and partnered with PRATHAM to upload
FLN assessments, teacher training modules,
and TLM material.

Misconception Posters: Misconception
Posters are used to aid teachers in the
classroom and to know’ where _ the
misconceptions lie and how to address
them.144 misconception posters were created
under Spell-1 (2023-24) and 108 additional
posters were created, addressing common
student misconceptions in Spell-2 (2024-25)
Usage.These posters were uploaded to the
DIKSHA portal to improve conceptual
understanding.

Future Goals: Expand e-content creation to
underserved areas, roll out the Telugu version
of the Career Guidance course by mid-2025,
Increase teacher engagement through
innovative training modules and Strengthen
collaborations with NGOs and _ educational
organizations for resource development.

PMJANMAN (Pradhan MantriJanjati Adivasi
Nyaya MahaAbhiyan)

The scheme aims to reach the unreached by
Empowering Particularly Vulnerable Tribal
Group or PVTG (previously known as a
Primitive tribal group) children and community
with knowledge and skills for better future.
This is achieved by enhancing accessibility to
quality education keeping in spirit the objective
of National Education Policy 2020 thus
increasing enrolment and retention rates
amongst PVTG children thereby Ensuring
equity and celebrating diversity.

Sharing of funds as per existing norms of
Samagra Shiksha

A separate budget line is opened at the central
level (Recurring + non-recurring) for PM
JANMAN.


--- PAGE 196 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Under this scheme for 100 bedded hostels
sanctioned with unit cost of Rs.275.00 Lakhs
and 50 bedded hostel sanctioned with unit cost
of Rs.230.00 Lakhs.

4 Hostels Approved for the year 2023-24 in
Srikakulam (50 Bedded - 2) and Nandyal (100
Bedded-1 & 50 Bedded-1) with an amount
Rs.965.00 Lakhs with Central share 60% and
State share 40% and laid the foundation stone.
Construction of Hostels is under the process.

4 Hostels Approved for the year 2024-25 in
Srikakulam(50 Bedded-1), Nandyala(50
Bedded-1) and Manyam (50 Bedded - 2) with
an Amount Rs.920.00 Lakhs with Central share
60% and State share 40%.

PM SHRI (Pradhan Mantri Schools for Rising
India):

The PM SHRI (Pradhan Mantri Schools for
Rising India) scheme is a central government
initiative aimed at transforming selected
schools into centers of excellence. These
schools will provide education that nurtures
lifelong learners, promoting the ability to learn,
unlearn, and relearn. The goal is to create
engaged, productive, and contributing citizens
who will build an equitable, inclusive, and
plural society, as envisioned by the National
Education Policy 2020.

Progress and Milestones: 662 PMSHRI
schools have been opened under Phase 1, which
includes 13 Primary, 20 UP and 629 Secondary
and Secondary Schools (SE &Sr). Under Phase
2, 193 PMSHRI schools have been opened
which includes 22 Primary, 6 UP and 165
Secondary and Secondary Schools (SE &Sr).

Training and Orientation & Infrastructure

¢ All school heads in PM SHRI schools were
trained on the School Innovation Council
Portal. All teachers and _ district-level
officers received training on PM SHRI
components.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

¢* SamagraShiksha provided library books to
all PM SHRI schools, including materials
from NBT, CIIL, and the Publication
Division.

* Sports kits and science lab equipment were
distributed to enhance extracurricular and
academic learning.

* 323 Chemistry labs were developed across
schools; 634 playgrounds were established.

¢ 55 schools were covered under MBNN
(Mana Badi Nadu - Nedu).

School Quality and Monitoring: Out of 662
PM SHRI schools, 592 have completed the SQAF
data entry in the PMSHRI Portal. The Gol has
provided a 3-day residential training to 50
Resource Persons from May 20-22, 2024, at Dr.
MCR HRDI, Hyderabad. District-level training
was provided to the remaining PM SHRI school
heads on 19* June, 2024.

Vocational Education in PMSHRI Schools

* Vocational Component: 629 secondary
and higher secondary schools were
approved for vocational education with 10
trades and 25 job roles for the academic
year 2024-25.

¢ Lab Equipment: Equipment for Apparel
and Electronics trades has been supplied to
133 schools. Equipment for  IT-ITeS,
Apparel, Electronics, and Agriculture will be
delivered after QC inspection.

¢ Induction Training: A 5-day induction
training program was conducted for all
Vocational Trainers and Master Trainers in
Vocational Education Pedagogy. Vocational
trainers have joined all designated schools.

Financial Support and Monitoring

Grants have been released to each PM SHRI
school @ Rs. 50,000 to Rs. 1.5 lakh. To ensures
effective fund utilization and the govt. has
developed a mobile application. The state has
developed a Mobile Application App to track the


--- PAGE 197 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

progress of works and the utilization of funds in
PM SHRI schools. This app _ enhances
transparency, ensures effective fund utilization,
and promotes accountability.

Minority Education

The main objective is to reduce the dropout
ratio and empower Muslim Minority Children.
A state-level enrolment drive program has been
conducted from 10th to 29th June 2024 named
“TALEEM HAR GHAR TAK. 8,054 Children
Enrolled in all categories of Urdu Medium
Schools. Books were distributed to 38,138
Children (Elementary Level 8,214 and
Secondary Level 29,924).

Community Mobilization

The School Management Committees (SMCs)
play a very key role in the school development
involving in all the activities like monitoring
school functioning, infrastructure/ Civil works
oversee the implementation of RTE provisions,
maintain accountability/ transparency in school
functioning, track student and_ teachers’
attendance, ensure mid-day meals, and raise
awareness among the community., ensure
effective use of grants etc. Out of the total
45171 schools, 45069 Schools were
reconstituted School Management Committees
(SMCs).

Mega Parent-Teacher Meeting (MPTM)

¢* The Mega Parent-Teacher Meeting (MPTM)
is a key initiative aimed at strengthening
the relationship between parents, teachers,
and the school. It helped parents in
understanding their children's academic
and behavioral levels, as well as their
awareness of societal issues.

* Conducted a Mega Parent-Teacher Meeting
on 7th Dec 2024 in 45,087 schools,
involving 25,46,725 parents, 1,88,537
Teachers, 30,34,577 Students, 3,44,831 SMC
Members, 27,395 alumni, 22,200
philanthropists,4,57,318 Public and 36,876
Officials.

nn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

¢ This initiative is first of its kind in the
country that has fostered community
engagement. The ‘Mana-Badi’ magazine also
launched to boost student creativity and
teacher resources.

SMC Trainings

¢ Training of SMC members are proposed to
be conducted in cascade model at 4 levels
i.e, State, District, Mandal, and School
levels.

¢ A two-day training program was conducted
at State Level on 7-8th October 2024 and
imparted training to 415 Master Resource
Persons and One-day training programs
were conducted at District, Mandal as well
as School level during December, 2024 and
January, 2025.

DOKKA SEETHAMMA MADHYAHNA
BADI BHOJANAM (MID-DAY MEAL
SCHEME)

The Government of AP has renamed the MDM
scheme as Dokka Seethamma Madhyahna Badi
Bhojanam. It is a Flagship Program of the Govt.
of AP is dovetailed with the Pradhan
MantriPoshan Shakti Nirman (PM POSHAN)
scheme of Government of India. Hot cooked
mid-day meals are_ provided on _ all
schoolworking days to all children studying in
Classes(I-X) in all Govt. Schools, Govt. Aided
schools, Special Training centers and
Madarasas andMagtabs.

Objectives

The vision of the scheme is to provide adequate,
balanced, tasty, and quality nutritional support
to the students in a professional and scientific
way under better and hygienic surroundings
through constant & continuous monitoring to
avoid classroom hunger & malnutrition,
Increasing School enrolment and attendance
and thereby to achieve the ultimate objective of
best learning outcomes of the students.


--- PAGE 198 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

During 2024-25, under PM Poshan scheme
27.97 lakh students ie., 85.34% are covered
against the target of 32.77 lakh students. 17
varieties of items every week with more
nutritional value than recommended dietary
allowances (RDAs) is being served to the
children.

¢ Five eggs per week are served to the
children.

* Three peanut jaggarychikki per week is
being served to the children.

¢ Ragi java is also being served on non chikki
days ie. 3 days in a week supply made by
the Satya Sai Central Trust at free of Cost.

* Fortified Sortex rice is supplied to schools
for MDM.

Budget: Under MDM-PM Poshan, an amount of

Rs.1854 crores have been released during

2024-25(Rs. 1167.82 crores by State and Rs.

686.20 crores by Gol). Out of which an amount

of Rs. 1097.07 crores were incurred up to

December, 2024 for MDM programme. (Govt.

of India provides grants only for I to VIII classes

(60% share) and bear entire cost of Food

grains, Transportation and MME cost for these

classes.)

Cook cum Helpers: At present 88,296 Cook
cum Helpers are engaged in schools based on
the strength. The StateGovt. has been enhanced
the Honorarium of Cook cum Helpers from Rs.
1,000/- to Rs. 3,000/-. Out of this, Rs. 2,400/- is
borne by the State Government. Monitoring PM
POSHAN (MDM) - Mobile App

Integrated Monitoring of Mid-Day Meal &
School Sanitation App (IMMS App) has been
developed for monitoring of the scheme along
with dashboard to monitor the daily
attendance, meals
attendance. Online bills confirmation of cooking

consumption, daily

cost, Cook Cum Helpers Honorarium are auto
generated basing on meals consumption of the
students.

Thithi Bojan (Shubdin) is popularized through
MDM Official website and posters for better

Sn

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

Community involvement by providing meals &
refreshments to Schools.

Toilet Maintenance Fund (TMF)

The Government of Andhra Pradesh have setup
the Toilet Maintenance Fund (TMF) for
maintaining cleanliness of the toilets, urinals,
wash basins and other associated items of the
toilet complexes in all the Government schools,
Junior Colleges, and residential institutions. It is
a unique concept and first of its kind in India
and the largest fund created exclusively for
maintenance of toilets in Government schools/
Junior Colleges.

¢ During 2024-25 an amount of
Rs.404.26crores is earmarked for this
program.

* 48,302 Ayahs are engaged for cleaning of
toilets and school premises with an
honorarium of Rs.6000 per month.

¢ 5,388 Night Watchmen have been engaged
@ one NW per High School in all the 5,388
High Schools (non-residential) with an
honorarium of Rs.6,000/- p.m from Toilet
Maintenance Fund (TMF).

SCHOOL INFRASTRUCTURE

The Government has accorded administrative
sanction for improving Infrastructure facilities
with initially 9 Components i.e Construction of
Toilets with Running Water, Drinking Water
facility, Electrification with Fans and
TubeLights, Furniture for students and staff,
painting to School, Major and Minor Repairs,
Green Chalk Board, English Lab and Compound
Walls in 15715 schools under Phase-I and
works were taken up in 15713 schoolsincurring
expenditure of Rs. 3859.12 Crores.

Under Phase-II, the Government has accorded
sanction for improving Infrastructure facilities
with 11 Components and construction of
Additional Classrooms in 22344 schools and
other educational institutions with a total
financial out lay of Rs. 8000 crores. The total


--- PAGE 199 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<>

Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

assets created under School Infrastructure shown in Table.8.5.
Table 8.5 Details for School Infrastructure
Phase-!I Phase-II
aad Component Schools Quantity Schools Quantity
Covered Covered

1 Drinking water supply system 12,405 12,958 12,493 12,234
2 Green chalk boards 14,890 95,858 21,439 50,642
3 IFPs 4800 30,913 5280 28,821
4 Furniture (Dual Desks) 13,994 5,83,194 12,644 344
5 Smart TVs 10,961 10,961 10,403 10,403
6 New Toilets Construction 14,546 14,546 15,885 15,885
7 New Kitchen shed 0 0 15,885 15,885
8 Additional Classrooms 8520 25,137

Achievements and programmes of SCERT

Curriculum Development and Textbook
Design: Textbooks for the academic year 2025-
26 were redesigned in such a way to reduce the
burden of carrying large number of books to the
school every day. Number of textbooks were
reduced from 110 to 77. Books were made
more attractive and provision for note making
was given in the textbook itself.

SCERT (State Council of Educational Research
and Training) is planning to develop booklets
on the value education, constitutional values,
and gender equality. Already consultations
were made with eminent personalities in these
fields.

Curriculum revision: Planned to revise the
entire curriculum from class 1 to 10, that
benefit the students of the AP to mold
themselves into global citizens.

Assessment reforms: Planned to redesign the
assessments to enhance the competencies of
the students to meet the global standards.
Planned to design an assessment booklet for the

1

students so as to capture the evidence for the
improvement in the learning outcomes.

8.4 INTERMEDIATE EDUCATION

The plus two stage (Intermediate) education
was introduced in Andhra Pradesh under
10+2+3 pattern from 1969-70. Intermediate
education is a crucial step in shaping the future

of our youth. This critical phase bridges school
and higher education, laying the foundation for
personal growth, skills, and career readiness.

475 Government Junior Colleges, 44 Aided
Junior Colleges and 2535 Private Un-Aided
Junior Colleges and 729 other Government
colleges functioning the
administrative control of the Director of
Intermediate Education and Secretary, Board of
District wise no of
Government and Aided Junior Colleges in the

are under

Intermediate Education.

state is shown in Annexure 8.7

10,72,311 students

Intermediate Education

are pursuing _ their
in the State (All
Managements) for the academic year 2024-25.



--- PAGE 200 ---
SOCIO ECONOMIC SURVEY 2024-25
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE

<>----<>----<>----<>---<> Canna pamne de Damned Dement >

The enrolment of students for the year 2024-25 is given below in Table. 8.6

Table 8.6 Enrolment of students for the year 2024-25

Govt.+ Aided+ Other Govt.| Private Junior Colleges Total
2024-25 No. of No. of
°.0 Enrolment °.0 Enrolment | Colleges | Enrolment
Colleges Colleges
1st Year 1248 1,38,416 2535 4,23,043 3783 5,61,459
2nd Year 1248 1,15,729 2535 3,95,123 3783 5,10,852
Total 2,54,145 8,18,166 10,72,311

5,02,080 students have appeared for 1st Year
IPE & ASE, 2024 under General and Vocational
stream, of which, 397613 students have passed
and achieved 78.14%. Under General and
Vocational stream 507040 students have
appeared for 2nd Year IPE & ASE, 2024. Out of
which, 432469 students have passed achieving
84.38% pass result. The pass percentage in
Govt Junior Colleges (GJC) is 38% for 1st Year
and 58% in 2nd Year Intermediate.

Supply of free student kits

Government has issued orders for supply of
free student’s kit i.e, Textbooks, Notebooks,
and bags to the Intermediate students of 475
Government Junior Colleges and _ other
Government managed Junior Colleges.
Accordingly, the SPD, SamagraShikshaAbhiyan
has supplied Student Kits to Intermediate
Students for 2024-25 towards Textbooks,
Notebooks, and bags.

Mid-Day Meal program’ or _ Dokka
Seethamma Madhyanam Bhojana Padhakam

The Government of Andhra Pradesh has
resolved to introduce the Dokka Seethamma
Madhyanam Badi Bhojanam (Mid-Day Meal
Scheme) in 475 Government Junior Colleges
across the State. The initiative aims to improve
the nutritional status of students, increase
attendance rates, and enhance academic
performance by fostering a healthy learning
environment for pursuing
intermediate education in these colleges. The

students

es 225

programme has been launched on 04.01.2025
at GJC, Payakapuram, NTR District by the
Hon’ble Minister for HRD and IT E&C and
remaining 474 GJCs by the Hon’ble Ministers/
MLAs/MLCs in the State.

Mana Badi-Mana Bavishyattu (MBNN)

Under Infrastructure Improvement Programme
Rs.169.69 Crores spent for the works
construction of Toilets with running water,
Electrification with Fans and Tube lights,
Drinking water Systems, Furniture (Dual
Desks), Painting to entire campus, Green Chalk
Boards, Major & Minor repairs and construction
of Compound Walls covering 447 Government
Junior Colleges across the State.

Best Teacher Awards

Government honours the Best of Teachers at
plus two stages with Best Teacher Awards on
5thSeptember every year in commemoration of
the birthday of Dr.Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan,
Former President of India. 26 Junior Lecturers
received awards.

Academic Guidance and Monitoring Cell

Regional/District level AGMC: One Academic
Guidance and Monitoring Cell (AGMC) has been
set up at district and regional level.

Centralized Internal Assessment

Centralized question papers are provided to
GJCs' for all internal exams. Junior Lecturers
upload marks to the BIE portal, and
