--- PAGE 1 ---
www.apteachers.in
5 %
SOCIAL STUDIES
Class VII
Editors
Sri C.N. Subramanyam, Eklavya, M.P. Prof. G. Omkarnath, Dept. of Economics,
University of Hyderabad.
Prof. I. Laxmi, Dept.of History,
Prof. S. Padmaja, Dept.of Geography,
Osmania University, Andhra Pradesh.
Osmania University, Andhra Pradesh.
Dr. M.V. Srinivasan, Asst. Prof.
Dr. K. Narayana Reddy,
DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi.
Asst.Prof. Dept.of Geography,
Dr. M.V.S. V. Prasad, Asst. Prof. Osmania University, Andhra Pradesh.
DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi.
Sri K. Suresh,
Manchi Pustakam, Andhra Pradesh.
Dr. C. Dayakar Reddy, Asso. Prof.
University College for Women, Sri Rammurthy Sharma,
Andhra Pradesh. Dept. of Education, Govt. of Punjab.
Smt K. Bhagya Lakshmi, Sri Alex. M.George,
Manchi Pustakam, Andhra Pradesh. Eklavya, M.P.
Text Book Development Committee
Sri. Vadrevu China Veerabhadrudu, I.A.S
Commissioner of School Education,
Amaravathi, Andhra Pradesh
Dr. B. Pratap Reddy,
Director, SCERT
Amaravathi, Andhra Pradesh
Sri. D. Madhusudhana Rao,
Director, Govt. Textbook Press
Amaravathi, Andhra Pradesh.
Published by Government of Andhra Pradesh, Amaravati.
% 5
Respect the Law Grow by Education
Get the Rights Behave Humbly
i

--- PAGE 2 ---
www.apteachers.in
© Government of Andhra Pradesh, Amaravathi.
First Published 2012
New Impressions - 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016,2017,2018,2019, 2020
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by
any means without the prior permission in writing of the
publisher, nor be otherwise circulated in any form of
binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this condition
being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
The copy right holder of this book is the Director of
School Education, Amaravathi, Andhra Pradesh.
We have used some photographs which are under
creative common licence. They are acknowledge at the
end of the book.
This Book has been printed on 70 G.S.M. S.S. Map litho,
Title Page 200 G.S.M. White Art Card
Free Distribution by Government of Andhra Pradesh
Printed in India
at the Andhra Pradesh Govt. Text Book Press,
Guntur, Amaravathi, Andhra Pradesh.
ii

--- PAGE 3 ---
www.apteachers.in
5 %
Writers
Writers
Sri K. Laxminarayana, Lecturer DIET, Angalur, Krishna Dist.
Sri M. Narasimha Reddy, GHM ZPHS Peddajamgampally, Y.S.R.Kadapa.
Sri K. Subramanyam, Lecturer, DIET, Kurnool.
Sri M. Papaiah, Lecturer, SCERT, Andhra Pradesh.
Sri Korivi Srinivasa Rao, S.A. MPUPS, P.R.Pally, Tekkali, Srikakulam.
Sri Ch. Radha Krishna, S.A. ZPHS Venkatapuram, Srikakulam.
Sri T. Rama Krishna, S.A. ZPHS Deva Penugonda, West Godavari.
Smt B. Sarala, S.A. ZPGHS Indukurupet, Nellore.
Sri A.R. Ramesh Rao, S.A. ZPHS Roddam, Anantapur.
Sri K. Suresh, S.A., Z.P.H.S. (Boys),Srikalahasti, Chittoor District.
Sri K.S.V. Krishna Reddy, H.M.,Z.P.H.S., Ganti, East Godavari.
Academic Support
Dr. B.V.N. Swamy. Dr. Racharla Ganapathi.
Sri P. Srinivasulu. Sri K. Kumara Swamy.
Sri Ayachithula Laxman Rao. Sri P.V. Krishna Rao.
Smt S. Suvarna Devi.
Co-ordinators
Prof. J. Raghavulu, Sri M. Papaiah, Lecturer,
SCERT, Andhra Pradesh. SCERT, Andhra Pradesh.
Dr. T.V.S. Ramesh, Coordinator,
SCERT, Andhra Pradesh.
QR Codes Team
Prof. M.S.S.Lakshmi Watts, Dept. of Maths and Science. SCERT - Andhra Pradesh
Nagella Allwyn Joseph, Lecturer, SCERT - Andhra Pradesh
D. Srinivas, IT-Coordinator, CSE - Andhra Pradesh
Pokuri Srinivasa Rao , APeKX Coordinator, CSE - Andhra Pradesh
Gulla Santosh, Consultant, CSE - Andhra Pradesh
Illustrators
Sri Kurella Srinivas. Sri B. Kishore Kumar.
DTP & Design
Rajaboyam Madhusudhana Rao, Purama Naveen,
% 5
Computer Operator, C&T Dept., Computer Operator, C&T Dept.,
SCERT, Andhra Pradesh. SCERT, Andhra Pradesh.
iii

--- PAGE 4 ---
www.apteachers.in
Letter to students
“As my mother lies down too tired to move after a full day of work in the fields and at home,
I sit beside her and wonder,why is life so difficult for women? If I set out of my home I find so
many different people – people who speak such different languages and follow such different
customs, I wonder who they are and why there are such different kinds of people.
I read newspapers and find out that so many of our farmers who grow our food with such
effort are committing suicide out of desperation. I wonder, what has made them so desperate
and feel so hopeless. As I walk in the streets of a town, I see such large and beautiful buildings
and roads and temples, mosques and churches. I wonder who built them and at what cost. I also
see slums in which thousands live in conditions most unfortunate and I wonder, why don’t they
have a good place to live in cities with such beautiful buildings.
My elders too discuss some of these problems and talk of voting and electing the right people
to rule and I wonder who rules us and how do they rule us? My grandparents tell me tales of
olden days when there were kings and queens and of times when gods and saints walked among
us people. I wonder if such things were really possible.
I have so many questions that I often wonder if anyone has answers to them at all. Perhaps no
one person knows all the answers and perhaps no one may know the answers to some of the
questions. Perhaps I need to find out myself. How can I find out? Who will help me?”
Dear Friends,
The questions that are arising in your minds are some of the most important questions
which everyone needs to find some answers. They are not at all easy to answer for most of them
do not have any one definite answer. In fact many questions will be answered differently by
different people. So perhaps you too will have your own answer after you have studied the
problem carefully. Social Sciences try to understand the society we live in – by asking questions
and working out methods for answering them. It also seeks to help us to understand why different
people answer the questions differently- for example if you ask anyone, why are there very few
girls in colleges compared to schools, you will get different answers from different kinds of
people. If you ask why the slums are not cleaned like the colonies of the rich, you will again get
very different answers. Why do people answer these questions differently? Social Sciences try
to understand this problem too.
Social Sciences do not merely compile different answers to a problem. They try to bring
a rigorous method to study them. They try to understand the problem by seeing how it developed
– and how and why it has changed; they try to see if it is similar all over the earth or it changes in
different parts of the world; and they try to understand the different points of view about it. Have
there been fewer girls in colleges in the past? Is it that all over the world there are fewer girls in
colleges? Why? What prevents girls from attending colleges? What do parents who don’t send
their daughters say? What do parents who send their daughters say? What do the girls say?
What do the teachers say? Social Scientists put together all these before answering the main
question. But no Social Scientist can give you the final or definite answer and it is you who have
to decide which answer you find more convincing and useful for you to act.
iv – Editors

--- PAGE 5 ---
www.apteachers.in
About this book
This book is a part of your Social Science Curriculum or a part of various things
you would be doing to study the society around you. However, remember that it is only
one small part of that curriculum. The Social Science Curriculum requires you to analyse
and share in the classroom what you know. It requires you above all to ask questions –
think why things are the way they are. It also requires you and your friends to go out of
the classroom to the market, to the Panchyat or municipality office, to the village fields,
to temples and mosques and museums and find out various things. You will have to meet
and discuss with a number of people, farmers, shopkeepers, officials, priests, and so on.
This book will introduce you to a range of problems and enable you to study them
and arrive at your own understanding of them. So, the most important thing about this
book is that it does not have answers. In fact, this book is not really complete. It can only
be completed when you and your friends and teachers bring their own questions and
experiences and discuss everything threadbare in the class. You may disagree with many
things in this book - do not be afraid to say so - only give your reasons. Your friends may
disagree with you, but try to understand why they have a different view. Finally arrive at
your own answers. You may not even be sure of your answer - you may want to find out
more before you make up your mind. In that case list your questions carefully and request
your friends, teachers or elders to help you to find out.
This book will help you to study different aspects of our social life - about diversity
of land and people, about how people get their livelihoods, how people provide for their
common needs and manage them, how all people in our society are not equal and how
people try to bring about equality, how people worship different gods in different ways,
and finally how they communicate with each other and build a culture which is shared by
them.
To understand some of these matters you may have to study about the earth - the
hills, plains and rivers and seas; to understand others you may have to know what happened
hundreds or even thousands of years ago; but most of all you may have to go out and talk
to different kinds of people around you.
As you study this book in the class room, you will come across many questions -
do stop and try to answer those questions or do the activity suggested before you proceed
ahead. It is not so important to finish the lesson fast as it is to discuss the questions and
do the activities.
Many lessons will suggest projects which may take a few days to do. These projects
will enable you to develop skills of social science enquiry and analysis and presentation
- these are more important than remembering what is written in the lessons.
Please remember that you don't have to memorise what is given in the lesson, but
think about them and form your own opinion about them.
“ENERGIZING TEXTBOOKS” a novel strategy which is introduced this year
textbooks has been emerged as a brainchild from Department of School Education,
Andhra Pradesh to give useful and additional information to the students and teachers by
bringing digital technology into the textbooks. I hope this will lead to enhance the
achievement levels of students by empowering teachers.
DIRECTOR
SCERT, Andhra Pradesh
v

--- PAGE 6 ---
www.apteachers.in
The first page of the Constitution that clearly
states that all Indians are entitled to equality
of status and opportunity.
vi

--- PAGE 7 ---
www.apteachers.in
CONTENTS
S.No Content Page No Periods Month
Theme - I: Diversity on the Earth
1-6 5 June
1. Reading Maps of Different kinds
7-21 12 July
2. Rain and Rivers
22-29 7 Aug
3. Tanks and Ground Water
30-39 6 Aug
4. Oceans and Fishing
40-54 8 Sept
5. Europe 55-66 8 Oct
6. Africa
Theme - II: Production Exchange and Livelihoods
67-75 8 Nov
7. Handicrafts and Handlooms
76-83 7 Nov
8. Industrial Revolution
84-92 8 Dec
9. Production in a Factory - A Paper Mill
93-98 6 Dec
10. Importance of Transport System
Theme -III: Political Systems and Governance
11. New Kings and Kingdoms 99-107 6 July
12. The Kakatiyas - Emergence of a Regional Kingdom 108-114 7 Aug
13. The Kings of Vijayanagara 115-121 5 Sept
14. Mughal Empire 122-129 5 Oct
15. Establishment of British Empire in India 130-141 7 Nov
16. Making of Laws in the State Assembly 142-151 7 Jan
17. Implementation of Laws in the District 152-158 5 Jan
Theme - IV: Social Organisation and Inequities
159-164 6 Feb
18. Caste Discrimination and the Struggle for Equalities
165-172 5 Feb
19. Livelihood and Struggles of Urban Workers
Theme - V: Religion and Society
173-179 5 February
20. Folk - Religion
180-188 6 March
21. Devotional Paths to the Divine
Theme -VI: Culture and Communication
22. Rulers and Buildings 189-200 8 March
Revision & Annual Exams April
vii

--- PAGE 8 ---
www.apteachers.in
OUR NATIONAL ANTHEM
- Rabindranath Tagore
Jana gana mana adhinayaka Jaya he
Bharatha bhagya-vidhata
Punjab Sindh Gujaratha Maratha
Dravida Utkala Banga.
Vindhya Himachala Jamuna Ganga
Uchchala Jaladhi taranga,
Tava shubha name jage
Tava shubha asisha mage
Gahe tava jaya gatha
Jana gana mangala-dayaka jaya he,
Bharatha bhagya –vidhatha,
Jaya he, jaha he, jaya he,
Jaya jaya jaya jaya he
PLEDGE
- Pydimarri Venkata Subba Rao
“India is my country; all Indians are my brothers and sisters.
I love my country, and I am proud of its rich and varied heritage.
I shall always strive to be worthy of it.
I shall give my parents, teachers and all elders respect,
and treat everyone with courtesy. I shall be kind to animals.
To my country and my people, I pledge my devotion.
In their well-being and prosperity alone lies my happiness.”
Useful Student’s Teacher’s
Corner Corner
Web Links
viii

--- PAGE 9 ---
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Reading Maps of Different Kinds 1
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
1
Reading Maps of
Different Kinds
The world we live in is so full of variety – mountains, hills, sea
coasts, deserts, forests, snow-covered regions.... Why is there so
much variation? How does this affect the lives of people who live in
those parts? To study and understand these questions we need to
take the help of maps of different kinds. Some maps tell us about
how high or low the places are, some tell us about how much it rains
there or how hot or cold it gets there, some tell us about crops that grow there or the
kinds of forests there. By studying them, we can know many things.
Fig 1.1 Evergreen forest in Western
Fig 1.2 Ramakrishna beach
ghats of Karnataka
Vishakapatnam
Fig 1.3 An Oasis in the Sahara Fig 1.4 Ice covered continent -
desert of Libya in Africa Antarctica

--- PAGE 10 ---
www.apteachers.in
Bring copies of School Atlas and see how many different kinds of maps are there. Make
a list of maps you would like to read and understand. Last year, we learnt to read some
simple maps. This year we learn to read maps that show heights. But let us first revise what
we learnt last year.
 Hang a political map of India in the class. Look at the map carefully and answer
the following questions:
i. Krishna reddy went to Bhopal from Hyderabad. In which direction did he travel?
ii. Ashok went to Chennai from Lucknow. In which direction did he travel?
iii. Regina went to Bhubaneshwar from Mumbai. In which direction did she
travel?
iv. Weprechu went to Jaipur from Kohima. In which direction did he travel?
 Make such questions and ask each other.
 Look at the symbols shown on the map. Now try to find out the boundary of
Andhra Pradesh. Trace your finger along the boundary.
 Draw the symbol for the boundary of a state and the symbol for the boundary of
India (international boundary) in your notebook.
 Can you make a list of states which lie to the north, south, west of Andhra
Pradesh? What lies to the east of the state?
 In class VI, you have learnt to measure distances between places with the help of the
‘scale’ given in the map. Now try to find out the distance between Hyderabad and
various state capitals like Jaipur, Imphal, Gandhinagar and Tiruvananthapuram.
Symbols
Point, Line, Area: We use symbols to show any physical object on the map. You have
seen some of them in class VI.
If we are asked to show Delhi in India map, we will mark a point ( ) and label it as Delhi.
To show the river Godavari, we draw a line ( ) along its course.For the
Railway line we will draw a track line ( ) to represent it. In Andhra Pradesh map
if we want to show the area of Krishna or Guntur district, we demarcate its boundary and
mark it with some colour or pattern, which is known as a real symbol. Thus, all physical
objects are shown on the map with the help of a point, line or an area symbol.
Look at a few maps in textbooks of 6, 7, 8 classes and fill the following table:
Point Symbol Line Symbol Area Symbol
1. Delhi 1. Godavari 1. Post Office
2. 2. 2.
3. 3. 3.
2 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 11 ---
www.apteachers.in
Map-1 : States and Capitals
Srinagar
N
Scale
Shimla
1 centimeter = 200 kilometers
Chandigarh
Dehra Dun
New Delhi
Itanagar
Gangtok
Jaipur
Dispur
Lucknow Kohima
Shillong
Patna
Imphal
Gandhinagar Agartala
Ranchi
Aizwal
Bhopal
Kolkata
Raipur
Bhuvaneswar
Mumbai
Hyderabad
Panaji
B Index
e
n
g
a The extgernal
lu
ru boundaries of
Chennai
Boun
I
d
n
a
d
r
i
i
a
es of
stagtes and India
Lakshadweep Andaman Nicobar Islands
Thiruvananthapuram Capital of states
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Reading Maps of Different Kinds 3

--- PAGE 12 ---
www.apteachers.in
Physical Maps
You will find some maps in your atlas called ‘Physical Maps’. In
these maps, you will usually find different parts of the land coloured in
green, yellow or brown. Actually, they show the variety of landforms
(plains, mountains, plateaus, etc.) and depict the heights of places.
How can we represent the heights of land on flat paper? Of course,
we can make a drawing like the one below:
As you can see this is a
Nimpur
Temple picture and not a map. Here
the height of the hills hide
what is behind them. A map
has to show all places
without hiding them. Can
you think of a way in which
we can draw a map of this
place?
River
One way in which we can
show heights on maps is
through the use of colour.
Fig 1.5 Drawing of “Nimpur” Village Let us see how this is done.
Measuring Heights on Land
All heights on the land are calculated from the sea level.
Since all seas in the world are connected to each other, the
sea level (the top surface) all over the world is taken to be
roughly the same. Look at the picture of Nimpur village
below to understand this idea.
You can see from the picture that Nimpur village is fifty
meters above the sea level.
 How many meters above sea level is the temple? Gentle Slope
 How many meters above sea level is the top of the
hill?
Temple
Nimpur Village
Steep Slope
Fig 1.6 Heights in Nimpur Village
4 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 13 ---
www.apteachers.in
Showing Heights on a Map
Look at the map of Nimpur village area
given here (Fig 1.7).
Can you see that the map shows three
height zones in the map – firstly areas
which are between 0 meter height and 50
meter height, areas which are between 51
meters and 100 meters and then finally
areas which are between 101 meters and
150 meters. Thus, any place which falls in
any of the height zone 51-100 meters will
have a height which is above 50 meters but
below 100 meters. Heights are shown in
different shades of colours.
0 to 50 51 to 100 101 to 150
Meters Meters Meters
 Look at the map of Nimpur
showing heights. What is the Fig 1.7 Figure of Nimpur Village showing heights
colour given to the area adjacent to
Contour Lines
the sea?
 What is the colour given to the A contour is a line joining the places with
highest region in this map? equal heights. On the map of Nimpur you
would have seen that there is a line passing
Now look at the Physical Map of Andhra
through the village, this is the 50 meter
Pradesh in your atlas or wall map. Find out
contour line. All places on this line will
the range of heights and colours for the
have the same height of 50 meters. Contour
places given below by reading the index and
lines will be in irregular shape depending
fill the table below.
upon the land form. These cannot cut with
Table -1:
each other. The distance between two
Place Height Colour Zone contour lines will depend upon the
landscape. If the land has a steep climb
Vijayawada From.... to .... meters
then the contour lines will be near to
Visakhapatnam From.... to .... meters
each other. If the slope of the land is
Ananthapuramu From.... to .... meters
gentle, then the contour lines will be
Chittoor From.... to .... meters quite far from each other.
Kurnool From.... to .... meters Uses of Maps showing Heights
Nellore From.... to .... meters
These maps help us to understand the
Make such questions and give them to each other.
nature of the terrain, where the
 Find out the height of few Indian cities. mountains are, where the valleys are,
 Find out the height of few cities around the world etc. If you look at the physical map of
by using your atlas. Andhra Pradesh, you can identify the
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Reading Maps of Different Kinds 5

--- PAGE 14 ---
www.apteachers.in
coastal plains that run along the coast of Mean Sea Level
the Bay of Bengal. If you travel westwards
There are high tides and low tides on
from the coast, you will reach hills which
the level of the sea, and they never stand
form the “escarpments” to the plateau
still. As a result of this phenomenon, the
region. The plateau region itself is cut by
many rivers like the Krishna and the level of the sea keeps on either rising or
Godavari, which form deep and broad falling. Which of these heights do we
valleys in them. take as the sea level or 0 meter height?
Maps showing heights In order to solve this problem the level
are very essential when
of the sea is carefully measured at
roads or dams have to be
frequent intervals and the mean level of
constructed. If we have to
the sea is calculated. Over a period,
lay roads in an undulating
scientists observed the high and low
region between two
places such maps help us levels of the sea and they have come to
in deciding the route to be taken by the one calculated average level, which is
road. Similarly, when dams are planned it known as Mean Sea Level (M.S.L.).
is necessary to know how much land will
be submerged by the water of the dam. If you live near a Railway station, find
out the height of that place with the
 Look at figure 1.6 & 1.7 and tell help of display board. The height is
whether Nimpur would be mentioned as “________ M.S.L.”.
submerged if sea waters were to Note it down in your note book.
flood up to 30 meters?
Look at figure 1.8 and answer the
following questions:
 Mark the direction of flow of the
river.
 The height of the lowest land is
between ____ meters and _____
meters.
0 to 20 Meters 31 to 40 Meters
 There are two high points in this
21 to 30 Meters 41 to 50 Meters
map. What are their heights?
Fig 1.8
Improve your learning
1. Why are the levels of all the seas equal in the world? AS
1
2. How is the sea level measured? AS
1
3. What are the uses of maps showing heights? AS
1
4. What differences do you find between the life style of people living on high altitudes and low
altitudes? AS
1
5. How are maps helpful to people? AS
6
6. Read the para ‘Contour Lines’ of page 5 and comment on it. AS
2
7. Observe the physical map of Andhra Pradesh and list out the dirstricts which are above 150
M.S.L.? AS
5
6 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 15 ---
2
Sun, Clouds and Rainfall
After the unbearable heat of April, May
and June, comes the rainy season, which
lasts for a few months. Do you know what
causes rains? Where do the rain bearing
clouds come from? Discuss whatever you
know or think about these things in the
class.
Evaporation
Pranavi woke up early in the morning.
She needed to take bath in hot water, so
she heated water in a dish over fire. As
the water heated up, water vapour touched
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rain and Rivers 7
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
Rain and Rivers
All life on the earth is very
crucially dependent upon water. As you
know over 71% of the earth’s surface
is covered with water. We depend upon
water for growing crops. But we do not
get water uniformly over the year. It is
also not available uniformly all over the
earth. Nor is the quality of water the
same everywhere.
Discuss in the class in which months
you get rains, in which part of the village
water. In the following chapters we will
or town you have more water or less
study about the diversity in water
water, where you get good drinking
availability and its consequences.
water and where you get salty or hard
PART - I
the lid and with the help
of outside cool air, vapour
became water drops and
stuck to the lid of the dish.
When she removed the
lid, some of the water
drops fell down into the dish. By observing
this, she realised that the water
evaporates and latter it becomes
condensed into water by cooling.
The story of rain begins with water
vapour. What is water vapour? When you
dry your wet clothes in the open, you see

--- PAGE 16 ---
www.apteachers.in
that the water disappears after a while and Formation of Clouds and Rain
the clothes dry. Similarly, if you keep some
When water vapour rises with hot air and
water in a plate, it dries up in a couple of
reaches high up in the sky, it gets cooled.
days. Actually, water in the cloth or in the
This is because it gets cooler as we rise
plate becomes water vapour and mixes with
above the surface of the earth. With the
the air through a process called
cooling, water vapour is transformed into
‘evaporation’. So even when water is not
tiny water droplets. These droplets gather
boiling there is evaporation.
around minute dust or smoke particles in
There are several water bodies on the
the air and gradually increase in size. These
earth’s surface – oceans, rivers, lakes etc.
small drops of water gather to form the
There is constant evaporation of water from
clouds.
these water bodies. In fact, wherever there
is moisture, like on wet cloth, there is
evaporation. There is evaporation from our
bodies, from trees, plants and soil! The
process of evaporation speeds up with the
increase in temperature.
 In which season would be more
evaporation, summer or winter?
 When will the evaporation be more,
during the day or night?
 Look at figure 2.1 and make a list of
all places from which evaporation
takes place.
 Where do you think maximum
evaporation would take place – from
plants, rivers, oceans or soils?
 Make a diagram to
explain how vapour
is transformed into
clouds in the box
given above. Label
your diagram with
these terms – earth,
sky, rising vapour,
cold, dust particles,
water droplets,
clouds….
Fig 2.1 Evaporation
8 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 17 ---
www.apteachers.in
As the clouds continue to rise upwards,
Some Important Terms
it gets cooler and more droplets are
formed. The droplets get together to form Evaporation: Change of water
into vapour is known as
bigger drops. As they get heavier, it gets
evaporation. The process in which
more and more difficult for them to
water vapour changes into water is
remain in the air and so they begin to fall
called condensation. Clouds are
as rain drops.
tiny droplets of water hanging in the
air above.
 Why do you think it is necessary
for the clouds to rise in order to Water Cycle :
cause rain?
The process of water evaporating
 Have you ever observed dew?
from the seas, forming clouds in the
Where is it formed? sky, coming down as rain, flowing
down the slopes on land in the form
 In which part of the day will you
of rivers and finally joining the sea,
find fog?
is called the water cycle.
 In which season do you have more
Precipitation: Different forms of
foggy days?
condensation of water vapour is
 Have you ever seen snow fall? How known as precipitation. This may take
is it different from rain fall? place in the form of dew, fog, rain,
snow, or hail.
 Have you ever experienced the hail
Humidity: The amount of invisible
storm?
water vapour present in the
atmosphere is known as humidity.
When temperature and humidity are
high, we feel
uncomfortable.
We perspire and
the sweat does not
evaporate quickly.
We feel sticky
and such weather
is called sultry.
Winds and Clouds
Since evaporation takes place all over
the earth’s surface, clouds are also being
formed all over. However, it is on the
surface of the oceans that maximum
evaporation and cloud formation takes
place. After all, oceans are vast water
bodies extending upto thousands of
Fig 2.2 Water cycle
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rain and Rivers 9

--- PAGE 18 ---
www.apteachers.in
kilometres. As a result, it also rains very heavily on the oceans. Clouds also travel inland
for thousands of kilometres to bring rain to us. Do you know what brings them deep inland?
From which direction does the wind blow during the rainy season?
These winds come all the way from the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal and they transport
the rain clouds. They are called ‘Monsoon winds’. They are also called ‘south- west monsoon
winds’ as they blow from that direction. These winds blow only in the summer.
Map 1: Monsoon
winds in India
Areas of Heavy Rainfall
Wind direction
Arunachal
Pradesh
Sikkim
Nagaland
Meghalaya Manipur
Mijoram
Tripura
1 0 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 19 ---
www.apteachers.in
There are two arms of the monsoon moisture in the clouds falls down in rain in
winds: one blows from the Arabian Sea and the Western Ghats and only dry clouds and
the other from the Bay of Bengal. The winds reach Rayalaseema.
arrows in Map 1 show us the direction of
The mountain ranges like the Western
winds.
Ghats in the path of rain-bearing wind cause
 Towards which parts of the country them to rise. Rising air cools down and
will the winds take the clouds on water vapour condenses faster. Further
the Bay of Bengal? ascent leads to rainfall. This type of rainfall
 Towards which parts of the country is common in the mountainous regions.
will the winds take the clouds on However, when the clouds descend on the
the Arabian Sea? other side of the mountain range (as it
 From which direction will the happens when they reach Rayalaseema)
winds blow to bring monsoon rains they become dry and give very little rain.
to West Bengal, Lucknow and The south west monsoon however,
Delhi?
brings much rain to the Telangana districts as
 From which direction will the the winds again rise over the Eastern Ghats.
winds blow to bring monsoon rains In the months from May to October
to Mumbai, Hyderabad, and
cyclones form in the Bay of Bengal causing
Bengaluru?
widespread rains in coastal and inland
Andhra Pradesh. Rain caused by whirling
Rainfall in Andhra Pradesh storms is called cyclonic rain. These
cyclones are formed in the sea due to
 In which months does it rain most intense heating up in summer. In a cyclone,
in your place? List three rainiest winds blow in from every side towards the
months. centre of it. The whirling air rises up and
 Name the three driest months. causes rain. The centre of the cyclonic
 Do you have ‘normal’ rainfall every storm moves fast with the wind and hits the
year or does it vary every year? coastal areas causing heavy rains and winds.
While these bring rains to the coastal
 Have you ever experienced
regions, they also cause much destruction. The
drought?
direction of the winds reverses after October
 Have you ever experienced floods?
as the winds begin to blow from the Bay of
Bengal south Westwards. This causes
When the south west Monsoon sets
heavy rains in October-December months
around the beginning of June, the winds
in coastal Andhra Pradesh
carrying the clouds also reach Andhra
and moderate rains in
Pradesh. As you can see from Map 1, these
Rayalaseema and
winds reach Rayalaseema districts of
Telangana districts. This is
Chittoor and Kurnool first. However they
called north east monsoon
bring very little rain as most of the
or the return monsoon.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rain and Rivers 11

--- PAGE 20 ---
www.apteachers.in
Map-2 Distribution of annual rainfall
in Andhra Pradesh
100 cm and above (moderate rainfall)
between 60 and 99 cm (Low rainfall)
below 60 cm (Very low rainfall)
(cid:138) Look at the map given above showing rainfall received in different parts of Andhra
Pradesh:
i. Does your district receive moderate or low rainfall?
ii. Which town has the least/highest rainfall – Ongole, Anantapuramu, Srikakulam,
Machilipatnam, Rajahmundry?
iii. Make some more questions and ask each other.
(cid:138) Look at the physical map of India in your Atlas and identify Western Ghats and
Eastern Ghats. Fill in the blanks in the following sentences.
(cid:138) Western Ghats are spread across the following states
(cid:138) Eastern Ghats are spread across the following states _____
(cid:138) In which region do Western and Eastern Ghats intersect ?
(cid:138) First, create rough outlines of India in a note book; then draw Western Ghats and
Eastern Ghats; After that, roughly mark the areas that are in Rayalaseema and
Telangana; Finally, label them with months in which it rains.
1 2 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 21 ---
www.apteachers.in
Rain gauge
An instrument by which the rainfall is measured is known as
‘raingauge’. The amount of rainfall for a unit area is measured in
centimeters. How do we measure the amount of rainfall? How do we find
out if Anantapur has more rain or Guntur?
Make your own Rain gauge
Collect the above items to
Cut the top of the bottle like this.
make a rain (pic 1).
This ensures the top of the bottle and
bottom of the bottle has the same
circumference (pic 2).
5
4
3
2
1
0
Turn top of the bottle Fill the bottle with sand
upside down like this, and and water till the spot
fix it to the bottle. (pic 3). where you have marked
zero. (pic 4).
If the bottom of your bottle is flat you need
Real rain guage
not fill too much water
Now ensure that you keep this bottle in an open place. Make sure that there are no walls
or trees that can block the rain water from falling into the bottle. You can use a scale to
measure the water. If you leave the bottle in the open for a few days, you can know how
much it rained in a week, a month.
When it rains the water level in the bottle rises. Measure the height of water with the
help of a scale and you will get the rainfall in Centimetres for your area during the period
you had kept the in the open.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rain and Rivers 13

--- PAGE 22 ---
www.apteachers.in
PART -II
Flow of Rivers
Study the figure below and answer
What happens to the water that falls on
these questions:
the earth? Some of it percolates into the
soil, some flows on the surface of the land  Mark the flow of the river with
and the rest becomes water vapour and arrows.
mixes with air. You will read about the water
 Mark the slope of the land with
that percolates down into the soil in the
arrows.
next chapter. In this part, we will discuss
 Does the river flow in the same
the water which flows on the surface of the
direction as that of the slope of the
land.
land?
Rivers
Transformation of a Stream into a
Have you seen rain water flowing in
Broad River
small streamlets on sloping land? Water
flows in small streams from the mountain At its source, a river usually is in the
slopes during the rainy season. However,
form of a thin stream. As it flows further,
these streams dry up after some time.
it gets bigger and broader. This happens
Nevertheless, water cuts channels on the
because many small streams join it as the
mountains.
stream flows. Rivers or streams which join
When it rains again,
a larger river are called ‘tributaries’.
water flows down the
As the river becomes bigger and
same channels. In this
broader, its flow gets slower. It starts
way river courses and
depositing the silt and sand it has carried,
river valleys are formed.
on its bed and banks. This causes the
This process is shown in
formation of plains. Do you remember the
figure 2.3.
Slope
village on plains you read about last year?
Slope
Rivers
Rivers
Fig 2.3 Slope and
the formation of
Rivers
1 4 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 23 ---
www.apteachers.in
As it nears the sea, the river gets even Godavari. However, we also have a large
slower and is no longer able to carry the number of rivers that have water only
silt and sand. It deposits them on its own during the rainy season. Why is this so?
course, which then gets filled up. When Rivers like the Krishna and the Godavari
flood waters come again, they have to cut start from the Western Ghats, which
through new channels to reach the sea. Thus receive heavy rains. The rain water slowly
towards the end of its journey to the sea a percolates into the ground and flows into
river forms a delta. In our state, we have the river all through the year. On the other
two main deltas of the Godavari and the hand, many rivers which start from the dry
Krishna rivers. Look for them in the map. regions of Rayalaseema like the Penna are
We have two large rivers flowing fed by scanty rains. Others, which start in
through our state - the Krishna and the the Eastern Ghats, receive only moderate
rains and the water flows rapidly into the
sea. That is why they go dry during the non-
rainy season.
Map -3 Rivers of Andhra Pradesh
Musi
Dindi
Krishna River
Thungabhadra
Penna River
Bay of Bengal
(cid:138) Look at a map 3 and prepare a list
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rain and Rivers 15

--- PAGE 24 ---
www.apteachers.in
rains and the water flows rapidly into the sea. That is why they go dry during the non-rainy
season.
 Look at a map 3 and prepare a list of rivers that rise from:
Western Ghats Rayalaseema Eastern Ghats
 What do you think is the direction of slope in Andhra Pradesh – from north to
south, east to west or west to east?
 List out the streams of your district and write in which river do they join.
Flood-Plains and Floods
Figure 2.5 depicts a flood situation.
A river does not contain the same
Look at it carefully and answer the
amount of water all the year around. While
following questions:
the river is full during the rainy season, it
usually shrinks during the dry season. Look  Has the river water covered the
at figures 2.4 and 2.5. You can see that the
entire flood-plain or confined to
river trough is very wide and it has high
the tiny stream that was flowing in
banks. This valley is filled with sand and
the dry season?
gravel. The river flows as a small stream
amidst them. You will notice that there are
 Is the water confined to the flood-
no trees here. This is because every year
when it rains heavily, this valley is filled plain or overflown the banks of the
with water allowing no permanent trees or river?
plants to grow here. This treeless bed is
called the flood-plain of the river. All  In what way have the floods
major rivers have their flood plains. affected the villages, agricultural
You must have heard that during the rainy fields and trees?
seasons some parts of the
 How are floods beneficial to
country get flooded due
to excess rainfall. You agricultural fields?
may have read about
floods occurring in rivers
like Krishna, Godavari,
Brahmaputra or the
Ganga.
1 6 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 25 ---
www.apteachers.in
Main
Flood Plains River
stream Water level during flood
Pebbles and bank
Sand
deposit
Fig 2.4 Flood Plains
Fig 2.5 Flood
Floods have become a major problem damage. If the surface of the land is
in our country in recent years. Some part covered with vegetation, then soil erosion
of the country or the other is flooded every is greatly reduced.
year during the rainy season. This causes Let us take the case of the Ganga. Earlier
severe damage to people, crops and there were dense forests on the Himalayas
livestock. Let us find out if we have from where the Ganga and its tributaries
contributed to this in any way. originate. In the recent years, there has
Vegetation cover on the land (trees, been a large scale felling of trees and hence
plants, grass, etc.) obstructs the run off of the forest cover in the Himalayas has been
rainwater and slows down the speed of its reduced considerably. As a result, whenever
flow. This slowing down helps the rainwater there is a heavy rainfall, the rainwater
to percolate into the soil. Floods are often rapidly flows down the slopes of the
caused by sudden increase in the volume mountains and fills up the floodplain of the
of water reaching a river. Vegetation allows river. The waters also bring a very large
the water to flow slowly into the river, thus quantity of silt and deposit it on the
preventing sudden flooding. It also helps riverbed. This results in frequent floods,
to increase the amount of water which goes which cause heavy damage to life and
into the soil. property along the river.
Vegetation also helps to prevent floods All this tells us the importance of
in another way. It reduces the erosion of protecting our forests and increasing the
soil by rainwater. If there is little or no vegetative cover over other lands.
vegetation, rainwater cuts and carries with
it a lot of topsoil. This soil is deposited on  Can you explain how forests and
vegetation help in preventing
the riverbed, which reduces the depth of the
floods?
river. This results in the reduction of
capacity of the river to carry water. Thus,  Can forests and vegetation help in
with even a little rain, the rivers are flooded reducing droughts?
and they overflow their banks, causing
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rain and Rivers 17

--- PAGE 26 ---
www.apteachers.in
Facing the challenge in Cyclones and
Floods
Our state has a long coast line and it is
frequently faced with very destructive
cyclones. When heavy winds blow from the
sea, heavy rains lash the lands, and high
waves make the sea very unsafe. These
usually occur between June and December.
The worst cyclone hit the state in November
1977, perhaps, the worst cyclonic storm to
hit the Indian shores. Six - metre high tidal
waves swept across villages in coastal
Andhra Pradesh, killing 9941 people. At
least 100 villages were washed away by the
cyclonic storms and the ensuing floods.
Seen from air, it seemed like a sheet of
water drawn over the affected areas floating
in the swirling waters. About 100 people
who left their homes to seek shelter in a
Fig 2.6 Cyclone cloud in Bay of Bengal
building in Bapatla town died when the
building collapsed. Most lives were lost in Diviseema, Krishna District. Recently in 2014
‘Hud Hud’ cyclone created a huge destruction in Vishakapatnam.
Formation of cyclones may seem natural over which human beings have no control.
However, the impact of these disasters are heightened or lessened due to how our society
is organised and prepared. For example, if you see who lives in the most vulnerable part of
the land which is most affected by cyclones, you will find that it is the poorest people who
live there with least resources to defend themselves. The sea coasts are lined with the huts
of poor fisher folk and the low lands of the towns and villages, which get flooded, are
usually inhabited by the slums of the poor. The people who live in high cement concrete
buildings are able to store food, water etc. for many days. Thus, we can see that disasters
affect the poorest most.
Usually immediately after the flood waters recede, all sources of water are polluted and
become unsafe for drinking. But, especially the poor, are forced to use the polluted water
and face the risk of several diseases like cholera, dysentery, jaundice etc. Only those with
resources are able to arrange for safe bottled water to drink. Since roads are damaged and
it rains heavily, bringing in relief to worst affected areas is not easy. Here people are forced
to rely on their own resources to save themselves.
While the immediate damage of the cyclones is also heavy – like loss of lives, crops,
houses etc. more importantly they also cause long term damages.
1 8 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 27 ---
www.apteachers.in
For example, the life savings of most of the poor stored in the houses in the form of food,
tools, cattle, small shops, vehicles, boats, nets, etc. are destroyed. To go back to their work they
need to buy all these again. Many families may lose their working members. Daily wage workers
face loss of work for several weeks till normalcy returns and therefore loss of livelihood. Farmers
too not only face loss of crops but also permanent damage to their lands.
How can people meet the challenge of disasters like cyclones and floods?
This can be done through long term planning by governments and close cooperation
between the people and government agencies.Today, with the installation of early warning
systems by the government, it is possible to predict the possibilities of natural disasters
like cyclones and floods. Governments thus put in place these systems and inform people
about the possibility of disasters.
Governments are also responsible for providing for long term security of all people by
building strong roads which are not easily destroyed, safe pucca houses for those living in
vulnerable areas like sea coast or along the rivers or in low lands. Food, water and medical
emergency teams should be kept ready whenever there is a forecast of cyclone.
How can the people prepare for disasters?
1. Cyclones and floods are a seasonal phenomenon. During the cyclone, listen to radio
or TV weather reports. In case of a cyclone/flood warning, ensure that everyone is
alerted. This is usually done through loudspeakers or by going from door to door.
2. Keep an emergency kit ready at home. These kits should contain important papers,
some food, some money and emergency telephone numbers.
3. The nearest available place where refuge could be sought in case of a cyclone should
be identified in advance.
4. Wherever necessary, the the walls of the house, roofing, doors and windows should be
strengthened.
5. When you get a cyclone warning, store adequate drinking water and food grains in
waterproof bags.
6. Do not venture outside, especially into the sea during and after the warning has
been sounded.
7. Close doors and windows and stay indoors.
8. Move to a pucca building if you feel your house is not strong enough..
9. If the cyclone strikes while you are in a vehicle, stop but keep away from the sea-
shore, trees, electric poles and other objects that may be uprooted during the gale.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rain and Rivers 19

--- PAGE 28 ---
www.apteachers.in
10. If the cyclone wind suddenly drops, do not go out, as it could be the eye of the
cyclone. Wait till the all clear declaration is made officially.
11. Listen to Radio/TV for updates on the situation.
12. Even after ‘all clear’ has been sounded, take necessary precautions while moving
to or out of your house. There may be partially uprooted trees or poles.
13. Look out for snakes that may have come out of their holes. Do not enter flood
waters. They may be too deep.
14. As a student group, you can play a very significant role in spreading awareness
about the above precautions.
If you need to Evacuate:
1. Pack clothing, essential medication, valuables, personal papers, etc. in water-proof
bags, to be taken to the safe shelter.
2. Put furniture, clothing, appliances on beds or tables (electrical items highest).
3. Turn off power.
4. Whether you leave or stay, put sandbags in the toilet bowl and cover all drain holes to
prevent sewage back-flow.
5. Lock your house and take the recommended or known evacuation routes from your
area to the safe-shelter.
6. Do not get into water of unknown depth and current.
During Floods:
1. Drink boiled water.
2. Keep your food covered and don’t eat too much.
3. Use raw tea, rice water, tender coconut water etc. during diarrhoea.
4. Do not let children remain on empty stomach.
5. Use bleaching powder and lime to disinfect the surroundings.
6. Avoid entering floodwaters. If you have to enter, wear proper protection for your feet
and check depth and current with a stick. Stay away from water over knee-deep depth.
7. Do not eat food that got wet in the flood waters.
8. Boil tap water before drinking in rural areas. Use halogen tablets to purify water
before drinking (ask Village Health Worker for details).
9. Be careful of snakes. Snakebites are common during floods.
Key words:
1.Rivers and Tributaries 2. Condensation 3. Annual rainfall
4. Flood plain 5. Cyclone 6. Monsoon 7. Hail
8. Famine
2 0 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 29 ---
www.apteachers.in
Improve your learning
1. Explain how water changes into water vapour and how clouds are formed from it? AS
1
2. Where do evaporation and cloud formation take place on a large scale? AS
1
3. How do the clouds reach deep inland? AS
1
4. Where does it rain maximum? Choose the right option : AS
1
a) sea coasts that are in the direction of the winds
b) mountains that are in the direction of the winds
c) lands far away from the seas.
5. Fill in the blanks choosing the correct options (bank, tributaries, flood-plain, river valley): AS
1
a) A river flows through the ………….
b) Streams or rivers joining a larger river are called the …….. of the main river.
c) The entire valley of a river which is filled with water during the floods is
called the …………………….. of the river.
6. The Godavari flows from the west to the east. Why? AS
1
7. Describe the main stages of the water cycle. AS
1
8. There may be streams and rivers flowing near your village or town. Find out about them and
fill in the table below: AS
3
No. Name Source Which river Which sea
does it join? does it meet?
9. Do the rivers in your area contain water throughout the year? Find out from your elders if they
had more water in earlier times. AS
3
10. How can the people be prepared to face the disasters? AS
4
11. Collect the pictures showing cyclones and floods and prepare an album. AS
3
12. Make a poster on the floods devastation. AS
6
Project Work :
Observe in your village/locality where water is being wasted, furnish the details in a table,
discuss the reasons, suggest the ways how water can be saved.
Sl.No. The place where water is Reason Way to prevent/
being wasted save water
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rain and Rivers 21

--- PAGE 30 ---
PART - I
Tanks (Cheruvulu)
For thousands of years
The tanks were sometimes built by a
our ancestors have tried to
king, sometimes by a military leader or
use run-off rain-water by
nayaka or often by the people of the village
building tanks. We have
themselves. Usually every village preserved
evidence of tanks built and
the memory of those who were responsible
used for agriculture from
the times of the Megaliths. You will be for building the tank through stories or
reading about the Kakatiya and Vijayanagara temples or festivals. In building the tank,
kings and nayakas who built a large number everyone in the village contributed for
of tanks in Telangana and Rayalaseema. This expenses and labour. All people of the
enabled the extension of agriculture into
village together maintained the tank by
these areas. To this day most of the villages
repairing the tank bund (wall) or removing silt
in these regions have at least one or two
from the tank bed. They also took care so
major tanks.
that no one dirtied or stopped the water
How were the tanks built?
flowing into the tank. They also appointed
The tanks were usually built by building a person to regulate the use of the water from
a strong wall of stones and mud across a the tank. This particular person is called
small stream in such a way that with a wall ‘Neerati’ or ‘Neeru Katte manishi’
on just one side a large lake could be
formed. Look at the picture below:
2 2 Diversity on the Earth
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
3
Tanks and Ground Water
Fig 3.1(a) Tank and fields

--- PAGE 31 ---
www.apteachers.in
How did the Tanks Help? tanks, desilting etc. have not been done
regularly. People also have gradually taken
The tanks helped the people not only in over the tank land for building houses or
giving them and their animals drinking for agriculture. As a result, in almost every
water, but also in irrigating their fields in such part of the state we see the sad state of dry
a way that even in drought years they could tanks lying uncared for. Instead of caring
raise at least some crop. The tanks also for the tanks, we have been digging deeper
and deeper tube wells at great expense. But
helped to increase the water level in the wells
they only benefit a few, and in the long run,
nearby.
deplete water resources. On the other hand,
After the rains have stopped and the tank
tanks build resources for all.
water decreased, the tank bed could be used
for raising some crops.
Project
Most important thing is that the tanks
 Prepare a report with the following
helped to prevent the run-off of rain-water
details about the tank in your
and the erosion of top soils. Every year
village or town.
people would collect tank silt and apply to
their fields to fertilise the soil.  Prepare a sketch map of the tank
We should remember that no one person and its nearby areas.
owned the tanks and they belonged to all  Find out from where the water
people of the village. Thus, they benefitted comes into the tank and where the
not one or two people but all the villagers. excess water goes.
Decline of Tanks in Our Times  Find out the name of the river or
stream across which it has been
During the last twenty or thirty years the
built or the names of the hills near
tanks have been neglected and have been
which it has been built.
allowed to break down. Repairs to the
 Find out what the tank bund is made
of and who maintains it.
 Find out who built the tank and
when it was built.
 If there are any stories about the tank,
write them down
 Prepare an illustration of the tank
various things around it or get
photographs of the tank.
 Find out what crops are grown, who
controls the water, and how it is
regulated.
Fig 3.1(b) Pakala Cheruvu - Chittoor
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Tanks and Ground Water 23

--- PAGE 32 ---
www.apteachers.in
PART - II
Groundwater
go beneath them, these are called
Rainwater not only impervious rocks. Most of the rocks
flows down the streams underlying the soil in our state are of this
or rivers but also slowly kind. A small portion of the state which is
goes down into the soil. next to rivers has deep layers of sand, soil
This water accumulates
and pebbles. Water also accumulates in
below the ground in the
these layers.
gaps between rocks,
The layer of water which accumulates
pebbles, sand etc. This is the groundwater,
under the ground among rocks is called
which we reach through wells and tube
aquifer. The thickness of the aquifer
wells.
determines the availability of groundwater
Rocks which have cracks or pores
in the area.
(minute holes) in them and can contain
water are called pervious rocks. In Andhra Visit the wells in your area and try to
Pradesh, we have few districts like find out how many feet below the ground
Prakasam where such rocks like sandstones is the water level. Find out if there is any
are found. Some rocks like granite, Kadapa
rock underneath and if so what kind of rock
limestone, are very compact and do not
it is. Also find out who owns the well, when
have pores in them. Water cannot enter into
it was dug and how much money was
them. Groundwater usually accumulates
spent. Add up all the information about the
above such rocks. Since the water cannot
wells and prepare a small booklet.
 Do you think
groundwater would
accumulate if there
were no impervious
rocks?
 What would happen
if the pervious rock
is below the
impervious rock?
Where will the
ground water
accumulate?
Fig 3.2. Rocks and Water below the ground level
2 4 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 33 ---
www.apteachers.in
Water Table or Groundwater Water level is never stable. It goes
Level deeper in summer months and comes up
after the monsoons.
Look at the wells in figure 3.3 below
Look at figure 3.3 and answer the
carefully, the water level is the same in all
following questions:
these wells. This is the water level in the
i. The groundwater level is .......
wells after the rains. You can see that in all
meters below the ground level.
these wells, water is available at the depth
ii. In summer, if water level goes down
of 5 meters, this means that if you were to
to 10 meters below the ground
dig a new well in the same region you would
level which of the four wells will
strike water at the same depth. This is the
go dry?
level of groundwater, which is also called the
iii.Which well will have maximum
water table.
water available?
Fig 3.3. Ground water level
Rocks and Groundwater in drill machines, reach the deep cracks and
draw water from them.
Andhra Pradesh
Most of the rocks under the soil in Look at the figure 3.4 and answer
Andhra Pradesh consist of granites, which the following questions:
are hard and impervious. However, the top  Can you find how water entered the
portion of these rocks (about 20 meters) level below the impervious rock
are broken (weathered) and they carry water. and reached the crack in the rock
Many of these rocks also have deep cracks below?
going down to 50 or 100 meters depth.
 During summer, which well will go
These cracks too contain water. Normally,
dry first? Give reasons.
with ordinary wells that we dig, we tap the
 Will there be water in the well even
water present in the top weathered layer.
if there is no crack in the rock?
Tube wells, which are dug with the help of
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Tanks and Ground Water 25

--- PAGE 34 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 3.4. Rocks and Water below the ground level
In many mandals, the Recharging Groundwater
predominant rocks are not
Water flows swiftly on naked ground,
granites but rocks of the
which has no cover of trees or grasses, as
Kadapa type of limestones.
They are also hard but are there is nothing to stop the flow. However,
greatly broken and have a if the flow of the rain water is checked by
lot of gaps between them allowing water vegetation or bunds, then there is a greater
to accumulate in them. In these rocks, water possibility of it percolating into the soil
is usually available between three to fifteen to join the groundwater. Grasses are planted
meters below the ground level. Wells are on the hill slopes from where a stream
therefore dug upto 16 meters deep.
starts and small check dams are also built
The area adjacent to the great rivers like across streams to store water for a longer
the Krishna and the Godavari have deep time. All this helps to increase or recharge
layers of sand and silt. The water level here groundwater.
depends upon the water in the river. Usually
However, it is seen in most parts of our
there is plenty of water. It is nearly five to
state that we are extracting more water than
seven meters below the ground in these
the recharging rate. This means that we are
areas and it is very easy to dig wells in them.
over using the groundwater. The amount of
water that percolates into the soil has also
 Can you recall the wells and tube
declined due to the cutting down of forests.
wells in Penamakuru and
Consequently, there is a rapid fall in the
Salakamcheruvu villages you
water table or water level by half to two
studied in class VI?
meters every year.
2 6 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 35 ---
www.apteachers.in
If we draw more water than what  Are there any watershed
percolates down, the groundwater will development projects in your area?
decrease over time. Finally, there may be Try to visit the site and study how
little groundwater left for us. This has been this is done. Try to draw a sketch-
happening during the last few years. map of the project area.
Quality of Groundwater
 Can you think of ways in which
ground water can be used less Groundwater is usually mixed with many
without wastage? minerals. Sometimes the water is salty and
sometimes it is sweet.
In our part of the country, it rains only
 Collect the water from various
for about three to four months. For the rest
places like dug well or bore well,
of the year we are dependent upon
lake or pond. Can you explain why
groundwater. Rivers, wells and ponds all get
the taste of the water taken from
their water from these groundwater
some dug wells is sweet, while that
sources.
of others is salty or brackish?
Water quickly flows into streams and
This difference is because of the
into rivers. However if the flow of the
minerals which are dissolved in the
rainwater were to be checked by vegetation groundwater. These minerals come from
or bunds, then there would be a greater the rocks and soils underneath. Hence,
depending upon the minerals which mix
possibility of the water percolating into the
with the water, the taste and nature of water
soil to join the groundwater.
changes. In our state many mandals in
Prakasam, Kadapa and Ananthapur there is
This is why vegetation like trees, grasses
excess quantity of certain minerals like
and bunds are used to enhance groundwater.
sodium, Fluoride,
Over the last few years, great efforts have Chloride, Iron, Nitrate,
been made to ‘harvest’ rainwater by these etc. Drinking such water
is not good for our
means. These measures are usually taken
health and can cause
for a stream or a river. Such efforts are
diseases, which affect
called ‘watershed development projects’. our bones, teeth etc.
Under these projects, trees and grasses are (Fig 3.5). In such
situations, the drinking water should be
planted on the hill slopes from where a
properly treated to remove the excess
stream starts. Also, small bunds are built
minerals. Read the additional information
across streams to stop the flow of water. about florosis in your biology textbook.
Small check dams are also built across Many times water is polluted due to the
excessive use of fertilisers, pesticides or
streams to store water for a longer time.
poor drainage. Unless we take preventive
All this helps to increase or ‘recharge’
steps, soon most of the well or river water
groundwater. will become unsafe for drinking or even
bathing.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Tanks and Ground Water 27

--- PAGE 36 ---
www.apteachers.in
used equitably so that all families
– including those who do not have
any land get water? Draw up such
plans and discuss them in the class.
Today’s generation has received water
from the past as a sacred asset. We should
give it to the future generation just as we
received it. We should also develop ways
of using and conserving water in a
restrained manner. Otherwise, future
generations will fight destructive wars over
water and we will be responsible for it.
Fig 3.5 Person affected by excessive
fluoride in drinking water
Use of Groundwater
Groundwater like the rivers, is the
common resource of all people and not just
of those who have land over aquifers.
However, at present it is being used only
by those who have such lands.
Those who own land over aquifers tend
to over-use the water, which decreases
water table for all neighbouring people.
Some of them dig deeper tube wells, which
cause further decline in water level. As a
result the wells in the neighbourhood are  What does the above logo reveal?
going dry. Unless we use the ground water
Key words :
as a common resource and in a restrained
manner, can we ensure that everyone is able 1. Pervious rocks
to benefit from them? In fact, after a few 2. Impervious rocks
years even those who dig deeper tube wells
3. Vegetation
will not have any water left to pump.
4. Aquifers
 Can you think of a way in which the 5. Megalithic age
groundwater in your village can be 6. Water table
2 8 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 37 ---
www.apteachers.in
Improve your learning
1. Correct the incorrect sentences: AS
1
a. Water flows from the plains to the plateau.
b. There is a thick deposit of sand and gravel in the plains.
c. Groundwater will never dry.
d. It is easy to dig wells in Rajahmundry.
2. The wells shown in this figure are situated on the plains of the Godavari. But there seems to be a
mistake in the figure. Can you correct it? AS
1
Soil
3. In which of these places do you expect maximum percolation to take place? AS
1
Soil
Soil Metaled Road
Weathered Rock Weathered Rock Weathered Rock
Weathered Rock
4. When the owners of some wells in Pallerla started using high-powered motors to draw water
from the wells, the owners of other wells noticed that their wells were drying up. Discuss the
possible solution to the problem. AS
4
5. In areas where there is a shortage of groundwater, should there be any restrictions on digging tube wells?
Why? AS
4
6. Think about the ways to restore the groundwater in your area. AS
4
7. Observe the picture 3.1(a) and compare with your locality. AS
1
8. Draw the map of your village and locate the water resources of your village in it. AS
5
9. Read the third para of page 57 and write a comment on it. AS
1
Project Work : Collecte the following information about tanks/kuntas.
Sl.No. Name of tank/ Ayacut (in acres) other uses reasons for benefits if
kunta previously at present of tanks not repairing repaired
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Tanks and Ground Water 29

--- PAGE 38 ---
 Is the water found in your village/
town saline or potable? Is it
different in different parts of the
village/town?
 How do you call different water
bodies? Do large or small
waterbodies have different names?
 In a map of the world or on the
globe, find the names of five seas
and five oceans. Run your hand over
the areas they cover.
3 0 Diversity on the Earth
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
4
Oceans and Fishing
PART - I
The earth is known as a watery planet as it is the only planet
containing water in abundance. It is estimated that about 71% of the
earth‘s surface is occupied by seas and oceans. What is your image
of a sea or an ocean? What have you seen or heard about seas and
oceans? An extension of saline water on earth is called sea. Large
sea areas are called oceans. Oceans are huge bodies of water
generally separated by continents.
It will be interesting to learn what lies
under the water. The surface of water does
not tell us about what lies under it. You may
have had the opportunity to notice or feel
what the bed of a river or stream or pond is
like.
 Please share what you have seen or
felt about what lies under the
surface of waterbodies.
 How many meters deep are the
water bodies you have seen?
Ocean Relief
The floor of the ocean
Continental Shelf
is just like the surface of
Sea level the earth. The bottom of
Continental Slope
the sea is not a flat surface.
Deep sea plain It consists of hills,
mountains, plateaus,
Trench
plains, trenches etc. Many
trenches on the ocean
floor are so deep that even
if the Mount Everest is
Fig 4.1 Relief features of an Ocean placed in them, it will
drown completely. A

--- PAGE 39 ---
www.apteachers.in
major part of ocean floor
is about 3-6 kms below
the sea level.
Figure 4.1 is a sketch
of the kind of land forms
that can be found under
the surface of an ocean.
And in fig 4.2 are the
relief features of what
lies below the surface of
the oceans around our
country.
In the figure 4.2 do
notice the land mass of
India and then go over to
Fig 4.2 Relief features of Indian Ocean
the floor of the Bay of
Bengal, the Arabian Sea and the Indian
big streams. These streams which flow
Ocean. Try to point out what may look like
constantly in a definite direction on the
hills, plains and trenches on the ocean floor.
surface of the ocean are called ocean
The waters of the oceans are never still. currents. The ocean currents are of two
There are different kinds of movements in types - the warm currents and the cold
them. currents. The warm currents flow from the
equatorial region towards the poles. The
 Have you experienced the different
cold currents flow from the poles to the
movements of water in a river? You
equatorial regions. These are mainly caused
may be aware of waves, currents
by the prevailing winds, differences in
and the coming and receding of
temperature and salinity of the ocean water.
floods. Discuss these experiences
3) Tides: Tides are the rhythmic rise
in the class.
and fall in the level of the water in the
oceans every day. All places on the coast
Ocean waters have three kinds of
experience some hours of low tide and
movements. They are:
some hours of high tide. Tides do not rise
1) Waves: When the water on the to the same height every day. When the tide
surface of the ocean rises and falls, they is high, water comes up to the coast for
are called waves. They are formed when some distance. Then as low tide begins, the
gentle winds scrape across the ocean water moves back from the land. The tides
surface. The faster the wind, the bigger will are of great help to fishing. Tides at some
be the waves. places take away the mud brought down by
rivers and prevent silting.
2) Currents: In the oceans, water is
found to move from one part to another in
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Oceans and Fishing 31

--- PAGE 40 ---
www.apteachers.in
PART - II
Fishing Village on the Coastal
i) Identify the water bodies in the
Plains
image.
Ocean water is always ii) Identify the land that is used for
saline. It contains several activities other than agriculture in
mineral salts dissolved in
this village. If so, for what purpose?
it. The oceans are the main
source for rainfall.
Oceans are the store Fishing
houses of fish and other
seafoods. They are the It is four in the morning. Appalakonda’s
main source of salts. Oceans provide wife Dhanamma, wakes him up and gives
natural highways for international trade. Let
him some rice gruel to eat by 5.00 am after
us visit Bhavanapadu, a fishing village near
which Appalakonda is ready to go out to
the coast of Andhra Pradesh and study the
the sea. His friends wait for him on the
life of people living near the ocean.
beach. All of them are poor fishermen. They
 Find the districts that lie on the don’t own any boats or nets. They work on
coastline of Andhra Pradesh. Tata Rao’s mechanical boat. They are
 Find the district in which altogether 20 members on a boat. Tata Rao
Bhavanapadu village is located. too joins them and works along with them.
 Look at the image of Bhavanapadu The boat has already been made ready the
village (Fig 4.4) and find the
day before, with all the necessary things
following:
properly loaded.
Fig 4.3 Bhavanapadu village settlement
3 2 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 41 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 4.4 Aerial view of Bhavanapadu village settlement
Before launching into the sea they check the twenty members are on the boat. They
the engine, the rope puller, the additional go up to 15-20 kilometers in the sea.
Dhanamma, wife of Appalakonda attends
stock of diesel and also put their food
to domestic work after he leaves for work
packages down. They pray to the goddess
and finishes by 9 am. Then, she goes to
in whom they have a strong faith.
work in the salt pans. Sometimes she also
Tata Rao owns this boat, which he attends to agricultural work. As they don’t
purchased from Markonda in Odisha. It possess any agricultural land or salt pans,
cost him around Rupees 6 lakhs. He their family depends on the daily wages
they get. While labouring in the salt pans,
borrowed the money from private money
Dhanamma eagerly waits for her husband’s
lenders at a high rate of interest. He couldn’t
phone call. She remains anxious about her
get a bank loan, as he had no fixed assets.
husband’s safety and also about the catch.
Even for daily fishing expenses, he has to
If there is a good catch, they will get more
get advances from middlemen. He has to invest money for the household.
a minimum of Rupees. 5,000/- per trip for
The fishermen return any time between
diesel, wages and other things. Because he
1 pm and 8 pm or sometimes even late in
has borrowed money from the middle man,
the night. On the day we were there, they
Tata Rao has to sell the day’s catch of fish
came back at 3 pm with a good catch of a
to the middleman at the rate he fixes. By
variety of fish known as “para”.
this time, the boat is ready for sail and all
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Oceans and Fishing 33

--- PAGE 42 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 4.5
Fig 4.6
Fig 4.5 Anchored Boat with
neatly packed net heap,
Fig 4.6 Engine of the boat,
lunch carriers, diesel cans and
picture of the goddess
Some middlemen temporarily store the Besides the big fishing business
fish, segregate them and carry them in cold discussed till now, small business in fishing
container tanks to faraway places like also takes place in the village. Karrateppa
Kolkata, Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, is a country made boat which goes up to
Kerala and so on. These people get four 5 Km into the sea and brings small catches
times more money than the catcher does. of fish. It can be carried by the wives of the
Observe the following pictures of the fishermen known as Berakatthelu. They
Potaiah adda (4.9), the local middleman. sell this fish in nearby towns like Naupada,
Tekkali, Pundi and Palasa.
Compared to the Karrateppa, there is
 What enables the middlemen in the far more risk of life in Marapadava
fish business to earn much more (mechanised boat) because it goes far into
money than the fishermen? sea and it is difficult to swim over to shore
in times of trouble. What is worse, there is
 For what purpose are the thermocol
no first aid in the big boats, nor any life
boxes shown in the photo lined up
jacket. Fishing is a risky and brave
in the middleman’s adda?
occupation.
Fig 4.7
Fig 4.7 Unloaded
fish being carried to
Auction hall.
Fig 4.8 Fish spread in
the Auction hall,
Middlemen are
already there.
Fig 4.8
3 4 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 43 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 4.9 Middleman’s adda
Fig 4.10 Loading at the middle man’s adda to sell at the big
storage tanks.
cities.
Nets Nets are of different types based on
different sizes of the Kannulu (Rings) and
After reaching home in the afternoon
the layers of the net. Recently a net known
Appalakonda took his lunch, came to the
as Ring Net which helps in getting a better
cyclone shelter with the broken nets, and
catch is being increasingly used by the
started repairing them. It is an activity seen
fishermen. This has helped to reduce
at every common place of Bhavanapadu.
migration from the village. Earlier there
The fishermen have a special tool kit for
were nets made of cotton thread. Now
repairing the nets which consists of
cotton nets have almost been replaced by
Nulukarralu (net repairing fork) (Fig
plastic, nylon and other synthetic
4.12), Nulukanda (Thread) and a flattened
materials. A net lasts for 4-5 years. Nets
stick that determines the net ring size.
are purchased by weight and the type of
rings they contain. Nets cost around
Fig 4.11 ‘Berakatthelu’,
waiting for their turn to
load fish in their Thattalu
to sell at nearby towns.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Oceans and Fishing 35

--- PAGE 44 ---
www.apteachers.in
A B
C D E
Fig 4.12 (A) Repairing nets, (B) Fisherman stitches (C) Nulukarralu.
(D) Floating beads-Lead, (E) Floating beads-Plastic.
Rupees 250-300 per Kg. Ring nets weight There are no landlords in the village. A
around 500 kgs. The fishermen of this area large number of cultivators of
usually buy nets from Barhampur (Odisha). Bhavanapadu are small farmers. They don’t
grow any commercial crops. Some of them
Agriculture and Animal rear cows and buffaloes. There are two
poultries in this village running on profit.
Husbandry
Rice production is not sufficient for their
Fishing is not the only needs, so they get rice from the ration
occupation of the people shops through their ‘white cards’ and
in Bhavanapadu village. sometimes buy it from the market.
They cultivate the land to
grow crops and also rear
Salinity and Drinking Water
animals and birds.
The water in the village is saline. If one
The village soil is mainly loamy and rice
is the principal crop grown on it. Only a digs upto 8 or 10 feet near the beach, one
few acres of land are irrigated. can get potable water. But in summer, these
Bhavanapadu lies at the tail end of
wells dry up. And it takes a long time for
Vamshadhara canal. Water comes to
the water to fill up again. If you wait for an
Bhavanapadu only after the fulfilment of the
hour, you may get another pot of water. So
needs of the nearby village, Marripadu.
women have to wait long to fetch water or
Hence, most of the agriculture in
they walk upto 2 km to collect fresh water.
Bhavanapadu depends on the rain.
3 6 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 45 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 4.13 Fig 4.13, 4.14 Salt pan leveling
work known as ‘Adugetha’, which
makes the pan impervious
Fig 4.15 An old woman fetching
water from a faraway place
Fig 4.14
The government has sanctioned a nets. The most important festival is Gowri
protective water project that pumps water Purnima. They spend common good fund
from the nearest village known as of the village on these festivals. Observe the
Suryamanipuram. It gave relief for some Fig. 4.16. Most of the men like Appalakonda
time. But cleaning of overhead water tank and wear tattoos like this.
frequent repair of pumping motor is a There is an open stage, where the dramas,
hurdle. For some time a youth organisation burrakathas, harikathas and record
helped in keeping the water project active. dances are performed. All these activities
But this has stopped functioning now. are led by the caste headmen called Pillas.
They determine customs and traditions of
Social Life
the people. They even resolve disputes and
A large number of people of
impose fines. The money collected goes
Bhavanapadu worship Gangamma, Gowri, and
to common good fund.
Shiva. They perform puja to their boats and
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Oceans and Fishing 37

--- PAGE 46 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 4.16 Why do you think people
wear tattoos? What is the symbol
on Appalakonda’s hand? What
does it signify?
 Would there be any
health problems by
wearing tatoos. Discuss
in your classroom.
Key words :
1. Tool kit 2. Kannulu 3. Burra Katha
4. Mechanical Boat 5. Salinity
Improve your learning
1. Does Bhavanapadu look like the place you live in? What differences and similarities can you
think of? Compare them on the following aspects? AS
1
a. Sources of livelihood b. Types of employment
c. Water sources d. Agriculture practices
2. How many types of ocean movements are there? Which of them is useful to the fishermen? AS
1
3. What is the difference between fishing with mechanical boats and that of Karrateppa? AS
1
4. Write the process of getting a mechanical boat ready for fishing. AS
1
5. What does the tool kit of fishermen contain? AS
1
6. What are the similarities that you find between the surface of the earth and the bottom of the
sea? AS
1
7. Collect information about the aquifers of your village / town and fill in the table.Analyse
the benefits. AS
3
S.No. Name of the aquifer Uses Limitations
3 8 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 47 ---
www.apteachers.in
8. Make an album that reflects the life of fishermen. AS
3
9. Locate the coastal districts of Andhra Pradesh and write them down. AS
5
10.What solutions do you show to the fishermen for not depending on the middlemen for
money? AS
4
11.Across the last 4 chapters, we studied many different aspects of water. Here is more information
about the availability of water on our Earth. Look at them carefully and explain the availability
of water resources on the Earth. AS
3
Distribution of fresh water Distribution of water on earth Distribution of fresh
surface water
Ice caps and Glaciers 68.7% Saline water (Oceans) 97% Lakes 87%
Groundwater 30.1% Fresh water 3%
Swamps 11%
Surface water 0.3%
Rivers 2%
Other 0.9%
12.How do you support the statement ‘The life of fishermen is tied up with seas’. AS
6
13.Read the the first para of page 32 and comment on it. AS
2
Batuke O Kadali Merise ee Chepalu
Kadale Naa Batuku Dorike Nee poota
Tooge ee Alalu Chindula gangamma
Saage Naa Kalalu || Batuke|| Vandana mayamma
Kopam enadoo choopaku mapaina
||Batuke||
Read some writings which reference the life style of fisherman. Eg: Samajam-Musalodu, Aatu-
Potu (Janjhavathi Kathalu)
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Oceans and Fishing 39

--- PAGE 48 ---
4 0 Diversity on the Earth
RETPAHC
Europe
Industrial Revolution took place first in Europe. As factory based
production became predominant in the countries of Western
Europe, they also tried to establish control over other countries and
continents. this lesson, we will try to find out about how the people
of Europe have been using their distinct natural environment and
resources.
Location of Europe ancient times the people of Europe did not
know about other continents like America
In order to find out the location of
or Australia. They only knew about Europe,
Europe and to see how far it is from India
western parts of Asia and northern parts of
you will need an atlas or a globe. To begin
Africa. You can see that all these regions
with, look at Map 1 in which Europe has
are situated around the Mediterranean Sea.
been shaded. Identify the boundaries of
That is why Europeans thought that this sea
Europe. There is an ocean to its north.
was in the centre of the world and named it
Identify its name on the map. This ocean is
so. It has been known by this name ever
frozen for most of the year.
since.
 Name the ocean to the west of  Name the mountains to the east of
Europe. Europe.
This ocean separates the two continents Arctic Ocean
Europe and North America. About 500 years
ago, the people of Europe discovered the
s
n
sea route to America and millions of Europe r a l nt ai Asia
Uu
Europeans migrated to the continent of o
M Pacific
America and settled down there.
Ocean
 Look in the atlas and find the name Africa
of the sea just south of Europe.
Equator
Indian
This sea separates Europe in the north
Ocean Australia
from Africa in the south. The name of this
sea means ‘middle of the world’. Do you
know why it is called by this name? In Map 1: Location of Europe
naecO
citnaltA
www.apteachers.in
5

--- PAGE 49 ---
www.apteachers.in
These mountains are not very high and
they form the eastern boundary of Europe.
To the east of these mountains is Asia while
Europe is to their west. In fact, Asia and
Europe are one continuous landmass. This
landmass is therefore called Eurasia.
 Now you are familiar with the
location of Europe. You can look
at the countries of Europe. Look
at Map 2 to find out their names.
Have you heard of some of these
Fig 5.1 Budapest, capital of Hungary
countries before?
by the river Danube in Eastern Europe
 Map 3 has been left blank for your
The Caucasian Mountains, which lie
use. Write the names of the
between the Caspian Sea and the Black Sea,
countries of Europe on this map
form the southern boundary of Europe.
and colour them. See that no
They, too, are very high and covered with
two neighbouring countries have
snow all the year round.
the same colour.
There are no large plateaus in Europe.
Mountains, Plains and Rivers
There are only some small plateaus in
Let us learn more about the mountains, France, Germany and Spain. There are vast
plains and rivers of Europe with the help plains in Europe. The Eastern Europe is a
of Map 4. Europe has several high snow- vast plain, which stretches across several
covered mountains. Look for the Alps and countries like Russia, Ukraine, Poland,
the Pyrenees in the map. The Alps, the most Bylorussia, etc. These plains experience
important mountain ranges of Europe, are heavy snowfall and bitter cold in winters.
covered with snow all the year round. When the snow melts in summer, small
streams start flowing. These join to form
 The Alps stretch across several mighty rivers. It is from these plains that
countries. Find out the names of rivers like the Dnieper and the Volga(the
these countries by comparing Maps longest river in Europe) originate.
2 and 4. European rivers are used not only for
 Write the names of two rivers irrigating the fields but also as major
starting from the Alps. waterways; ships and barrages ply on these
rivers and transport people and goods from
 Name the countries across whose
place to place. Since these rivers flow
borders the Pyrenees stretch.
across several countries, they also
 Name the mountains stretching the
facilitate international trade and transport.
Eastern Europe.
In this respect, the Rhine is one of the most
 Identify the other mountains in
important rivers as it flows through several
Europe and prepare a table.
countries and empties itself into the North
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Europe 41

--- PAGE 50 ---
4 2 Diversity on the Earth
DNALECI
SWEDEN
YAWRON
KRAMNED
DNALNIF
ANIOTSE
AISSUR
AIVTAL AINAUHTIL
AISSUR
SURALEB
S
D
N
A
L
R
E
H
T
E
N
DNALOP
YNAMREG
ENIARKU
MUIGLEB
MOLDOVA
.PER
HCEHC
ECNARF
AIKOVOLS
AIRTSUA
YRAGNUH
AINAMOR AIRAGLUB
YEKRUT
YEKRUT
DNALREZTIWS
ITALY
NIAPS
P
O
R
T U
G
A
L
naecO
citcrA
nrehtroN
aeS
DNALERI
DETINU
MODGNIK
aeS
kcalB
Asia
Atlantic Ocean
eporuE
:2
paM
lacitiloP
naipsaC
aeS
aeS
naenaretideM
acirfA
ORGENETOM
www.apteachers.in

--- PAGE 51 ---
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Europe 43
:3
paM
EPORUE
paM
ecitcarP
www.apteachers.in

--- PAGE 52 ---
ATLANTIC OCEAN
4 4 Diversity on the Earth
NAECO
CITRA
htroN
aeS
ACIRFA
a
e S
c
itla B
fo
yaB
yacsiB
aeS
kcalB
naegA
aeS
ns
ai
nt
u
o
M
al
Ur
s
e
g n a R
n
a iv a
n
id
n
a c S
susacuaC
Carpathian
mts s
p
Al
s
ri c
t
ai
n
a n n u Di m o
splA
stm
R
ula
Vist
R
O der R
a
n u b e atic Se a
R D A dri
e
b El nes
ni n R pe
e
A
n
hi
R
R
e
n
ei R
S
Pennine Range
L o
i r e
P
yre n
n
e
t
e
a
s
i
ns
u
o m
R oP
Volga R
R
n
o
D
R
r
e
p
ni
D
R
anivD
W
a
n vi
Di
N
AISA
aeS
naenarretideM
a
e
S
n
a
pi
s
a
C
eporuE
:4
paM
lacisyhP
www.apteachers.in

--- PAGE 53 ---
www.apteachers.in
Sea. There are several major industrial and Peninsulas, Islands and Bays
mining cities on the open sea and thus linked
The sea coast of Europe is very jagged.
to intercontinental trade. Unlike the Rhine,
In several places, it appears that the sea has
the Volga drains into the Caspian Sea, which
cut deep into the land as in the case of the
is a vast lake. Transport to the open sea
Baltic Sea. Elsewhere, it would appear that
through this river-way is not possible.
a part of the land has stretched far into the
Thus, the cities on the Volga are not linked
sea as in the case of Italy.
to transcontinental trade through
Italy is surrounded on three sides by the
waterways.
sea. Land masses that are surrounded by the
 Study Maps 2 and 4 to answer the sea on three sides and connected to the
following questions: mainland on the fourth side are called
 Names of countries through which ‘peninsulas’. Norway and Sweden are also
the Rhine flows: 1……. 2…..… part of a peninsula. You can check this out
3….…. 4…..… 5..…… in the map. This peninsula is called the
Scandinavian Peninsula.
 Names of countries through which
the Danube flows: 1……. 2…..…
3….…. 4…..… 5..……
 Names of two mountain ranges on Land
the border of the Hungarian plains.
1……… ................ 2………… a y
B
 Names of countries which ring the
Black Sea. 1……. 2…..… 3….…. ns
ul a Island
ni
4…..… 5..…… P e
 Names of oceans or seas into which
Sea
the following rivers empty
themselves:
River Ocean/Sea Fig 5.2 Peninsula and Bay
1. Seine  Which is a peninsula Greece or
2. Rhine France?
3. Oder  Are Spain and Portugal peninsulas
4. Po too?
5. Danube
 Name the mountain range in the
6. Vistula Scandinavian Peninsula.
7. Volga
The sea surrounds some of the European
8. Dnieper countries, not just on three sides but on all
9. Don
four sides! These are island countries.
10. Dvina Great Britain is one such island country.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Europe 45

--- PAGE 54 ---
www.apteachers.in
 Find out the names of some other  Why is the climate of Europe so
island countries of Europe. different from ours? Discuss in the
class.
Since ancient times, the seas have played
Distance from the Equator
an important role in the lives of the people
of these islands and peninsulas. Central and
The regions near the Equator remain
southern Europe is largely mountainous and
warm all round the year. As we move
travel and transport over them is both
northwards or southwards away from the
difficult and expensive. In comparison, sea
Equator, it gets cooler and cooler. Indeed the
transport is easy and less expensive. This
Polar Regions are covered with ice all round
is the reason why Europeans have been
the year.
extensively using sea routes since ancient
times.
The presence of a large number of bays  Look at a globe to see how far is
and gulfs has also facilitated the use of sea north Europe from the Equator.
routes. Bays and gulfs are parts of the sea
 Is Europe farther north than India?
enclosed by land on three sides. In a bay,
 Will Norway be warmer than Italy?
the land curves inwards and the mouth of
Why?
the bay is usually wide as in the Bay of
Bengal. A gulf is a narrow inlet of the sea
The Atlantic Ocean
and has a narrow mouth. The entire Baltic
Sea as you can see in the map is a large
The climate of Europe is influenced
gulf. Since the bays and gulfs are protected
by another factor – the Atlantic Ocean and
from the storms, of the high seas, they are
the winds blowing from it. This impact is felt
very useful for building harbours where
more by the regions along the Atlantic
ships can be safely anchored and cargo
loaded or unloaded. Deep gulfs or bays are Ocean than the ones which are far inland.
preferred for building harbours as large
 Locate the regions of Europe along
ships can be anchored in them. Ships need
deep waters so that their bottoms do not with Atlantic Ocean and state
touch the sea floor. whether they are on eastern side or
western side?
 Find out from Map 4 the names of In the winters, it is quite cold in Western
the countries on the three sides of Europe but it is even colder in Eastern
the Baltic Sea. Europe. Thus, countries like Poland and
Climate Russia have severe winters while France
and Great Britain are comparatively warmer.
Europe has a cooler
Russian winters are so cold that the rivers
climate than ours. Most of
its countries experience and even the nearby seas freeze. However,
snowfall in winter. Their
this does not happen in the countries of
summers, too, are not as
Western Europe along the sea coast.
warm as ours are.
4 6 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 55 ---
www.apteachers.in
Warm Ocean Currents
 Look at the map and tell which
country is warmer, Spain or The waters in the oceans are not static.
Slovakia? They keep flowing from one place to
another along the continents. These are the
You would have guessed that this
ocean currents, which flow for thousands
difference must be because of the nearness
of kilometers in the ocean just as rivers
of Western Europe to the Atlantic Ocean.
flow on land.
Let us see exactly how this ocean affects
One such ocean current is to be found
the climate of Europe.
in the Atlantic Ocean. This current
Westerlies originates near the Equator where the
waters are warm throughout the year. This
Winds blow all the year round from the
current flows westward to North America.
Atlantic Ocean towards Europe. Since they
It flows north along the eastern coast of
blow from the west, these winds are called
America under the impact of the
‘Westerlies’ (Actually these blow from the
Westerlies and then advances towards
southwest towards the northeast). These
Europe. Moving northeast, it hits the
winds are warmer than the land temperature
western coast of Europe. This current is
and are moist too. The climate of Western
called ‘Gulf Stream’ in America, while in
Europe is affected by these warm and moist
Europe it is called ‘North Atlantic Drift’.
winds all the year round as they blow
throughout the year. The coastal waters of the east coast of
North America and the west coast of
 Can you guess the impact of
Europe do not freeze in winters, thanks to
Westerlies on Europe ?
the Gulf Stream. Thus, it is possible for
ships to visit the ports on these coasts in
winter.
north Europe north
America America Europe
Africa
Africa
Equator
south Equator
America
south
America
Map 5: The Westerlies Map 6: Gulf Strean
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Europe 47

--- PAGE 56 ---
www.apteachers.in
 Why do you think the climate of  What differences did you notice
Eastern Europe is not so strongly between the climates of India and
affected by the warm currents? West Europe?
Fill in the blanks: Western Europe also benefits in other
 The waters near the Equator ways from the Gulf Stream. The warm
are…… (warm / cool / icy cold) currents are very good for fish breeding as
they contain ample food materials for the
 Starting near the Equator, the Gulf
fishes. As a result, the fishery industry is
Stream reaches the …….. coast of
very well developed in the North Sea near
America. (eastern / western /
Britain. This part of the North Sea is called
northern)
‘Dogger Bank’. Fish is an important part
 The Gulf Stream flows in the
of the food of the Europeans and fishing is
………. (Atlantic Ocean /
a very important industry in Europe.
Mediterranean Sea / Black Sea)
 The waters of the Gulf Stream  Name the countries which would
which hit the European coast are benefit from the Dogger Bank.
…….. (cold / warm / icy cold)
Mediterranean Climate in Southern
 The Westerlies blow from the
Europe
Atlantic Ocean towards Europe
Look at the countries of Southern
………….. (in winter / in summer
Europe. They have the Mediterranean Sea
/ all round the year)
to their south, so they are called
 These winds are ……….. (dry /
‘Mediterranean Countries’. The lands along
moist / icy)
the Mediterranean Sea have a distinct
climate called the ‘Mediterranean
Western Europe: Showers all the Year
climate’.
Round
 Look at Map 2 and name four
The Westerlies, which blow throughout
Mediterranean countries.
the year, also bring ample moisture to
northern and Western Europe. Since these The Mediterranean countries are the
winds blow from the sea, they carry a lot of southernmost countries of Europe. As a
moisture and regularly cause rainfall. result, the winters here are not too cold
Therefore, it rains throughout the year and summers are warm. It does not rain all
in northern and Western Europe. While through the year as in Western Europe. The
Westerlies blow here during the winter
it rains only for a few months in our country,
months only. These winds bring rain to the
there are light showers all round the year in
Mediterranean countries. In other words,
Western Europe. The sky is usually
it rains here only in winter. Such rainy
clouded. While we, in India, eagerly await
winters and dry summers are termed as
cool showers, the people of Western
‘Mediterranean climate’. Several regions
Europe await bright sunny days.
4 8 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 57 ---
www.apteachers.in
in other continents too have a shines once in a while. The sun rises very
Mediterranean climate. This climate is very late in the day, at about nine or ten O’ clock
good for growing juicy fruits. Thus, regions and sets by four O’clock in the afternoon.
with Mediterranean climate are famous for The overcast sky makes it even darker.
their fruits. Fruits like olives, figs, grapes, France has broad-leaved trees, which shed
oranges, etc. are grown extensively in their leaves in winter and stand entirely
southern Europe. leafless.
 Compare Mediterranean and Spring: The landscape begins to change
Andhra Pradesh climates on the as March comes. The days get longer and
following aspects: the nights shorter. The snow begins to melt
and new shoots appear on trees. Fresh green
Seasons
leaves appear and colourful flowers bloom
Rainfall
everywhere. Lush green grass begins to
 When does it rain most in your
grow on the pastures.
state, in summer months or in
The fields are ploughed in spring and
winter months?
sowing is done during this season. Wheat,
 Find out if your region gets light
rye, barley, corn, sugar beet and oats are the
winter showers and the name given
principal crops.
to it in the regional language.
Summer: It is summer in Europe from
 Fishing industry is importance in
June to August. It does not rain so much
.…,
and there is more sunshine. The days are
 whereas fruit growing is important
longer - longer than even in our country.
in ……
The sun rises as early as four O’clock in
The Four Seasons and Agriculture the morning and sets after eight O’clock in
In our country, we have the evening. Infact, in the northern
three seasons, winter, countries like Swedan, the sun does not set
summer and the rains. at all. These countries are called lands of
However, most European
Midnight Sun. Nevertheless, it does not get
countries including
very hot. This is because the sun does not
France have four main
rise high on the sky and remains close to
seasons. They are winter,
the horizon - where the earth and sky seem
spring, summer and
autumn. The look of the land changes to meet.
according to the season and the agricultural
Summer is the season of agriculture in
routine changes, too. The transformation
Europe. Crops mature in this season. There
of a place over these seasons can be seen
is no need for irrigation as the occasional
in the pictures given in the next page.
showers are sufficient for the crops. At the
Winter: As November approaches, it
end of summer, the crops are ready to be
begins to get chilly. December onwards, it
gets very cold and snow begins to fall once harvested.
in a while. It snows heavily on the
mountains and less on the plains. The sun
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Europe 49

--- PAGE 58 ---
www.apteachers.in
Winter Spring
Summer Autumn
In our country, we have to agriculturel Autumn: The climate changes once
seasons Rabi and Kharif (winter and again in September and October. Tree leaves
monsoon). Does it is possible to grow turn red and yellow and begin to fall.
crops nearly 8 to 10 months in a year. On Agricultural operations are wound up. Hay
the other hand in European countries is cut and dried for feeding farm animals
cultivation is possible only for 6 to 7 in winter. Grapes and other fruits are
months. plucked and used for making wine, jams and
juices of various kinds and preserved in
 In which regions of Andhra Pradesh
other ways.
are grapes grown?
Land and Agriculture
In our country, we have two agricultural
European plains and river valleys are
seasons: Rabi and Kharif (winter and
very fertile. It rains here all through the year
monsoon). Thus, it is possible to grow
and the rivers, too, do not dry up in any
crops for nearly eight to ten months in a year. season. As a result, the plains are very
On the other hand, in France and other suitable for agriculture. However, a very
European countries, cultivation is possible large part of Europe is mountainous and not
only for six to seven months. suitable for agriculture. Some countries
5 0 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 59 ---
www.apteachers.in
have very little agricultural
land. For example, only 3% of
the land of Norway is available
for cultivation. 30% of
England is cultivable while in
Germany it is about 40%. This
is very different from our
country. In India, as much as
55% of the land is cultivable.
There is an acute shortage
of land in Holland. The people
of Holland (the Dutch) have
reclaimed small portions of Fig 5.3 Hay bales after the harvest which
will be stored as fodder for winter.
land from the sea by building
embankments called dykes to push back the However, in southern Europe it is possible
sea. The land that is reclaimed is called to raise two crops a year.
‘polder’.
 Why is it possible to raise two
In eastern and northern Europe, it is not
crops in the Mediterranean
possible to cultivate the land in winter as snow
countries?
covers it for almost six months. The snow
begins to melt only in spring leaving very Wheat is the main crop of European
little time for crops to ripen. It is in spring plains. It is grown extensively in France,
that sowing takes place and crops ripen in Germany, Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Italy,
the summer months and are ready for harvest Greece, etc. We have seen that fruit
in autumn. As a result, it is possible to raise cultivation is prominent in southern
only one crop in a year in these parts. Europe. Fruits like grapes are used for
ο
0 Equator
Index
Route of Columbus
Trade winds
Old Land route to India
Map 7: Trade routes
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Europe 51

--- PAGE 60 ---
www.apteachers.in
making wine. The Mediterranean countries brought from Europe. Do you know what
like Portugal, Spain, Italy and southern route they took from Europe to India?
France are famous for their wines. Look at map 7 in which two major routes
are given. Both the routes crossed the
Barley, oats, rye, sugar-beet, potato, etc.
Mediterranean Sea; while one of them took
are also important crops of Europe. Sugar
a land route via the Middle East, Iran, and
is manufactured from beet in Russia,
Afghanistan, the other route took a sea
Ukraine and Germany.
route via the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea.
Discovery of Sea Routes
About five hundred years ago, the West
European sailors and traders began to
No part of western Europe is too far
search for new routes to India. This was
from the ocean. In contrast, many countries
because both the routes mentioned above
of Asia are thousands of kilometers from
passed through countries ruled by the Arabs
the sea.
who were often at war with the Europeans.
Further, most of the trade in the
 Look at the wall map or atlas to
Mediterranean Sea was controlled by
identify the names of at least six
Italian merchants who did not let traders
cities of Europe which are situated
of other countries in easily. That is why the
on the sea coast.
sailors of the other countries began to look
for routes to India, which did not have to
There are thousands of such seaside
pass through the Mediterranean Sea or the
settlements where seafaring people have
been living for hundreds of years. With Arab ruled countries.
centuries of experience of sea travel, the
European sailors were famed for their skill  Looking at the map can you tell
and courage on the seas. They were also what the new route could be?
skilled in building boats and ships. Initially
ships were built and used for fishing in deep Of course, these maps did not exist in
seas. Later on, they are used for those days and people had just begun to
international trade too. figure out that the earth must be round and
From the very ancient times, the people not flat. An Italian sailor named Christopher
of Europe have been Columbus thought: ‘If the earth is round
trading with India and then it should be possible to reach India
other countries of Asia
from the west too. If we were to travel
like Indonesia and China.
westward across the Atlantic Ocean we
From these countries,
Europe obtained many would reach China and India sooner or
things like cotton and silk later.’
cloth, gems, ivory and
spices such as cloves, pepper, and
cinnamon – that were not available in  Look at a globe to check whether
Europe. The Europeans got these in Columbus’s thinking was correct.
exchange for gold and silver, which they
5 2 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 61 ---
www.apteachers.in
Columbus set out with three ships in
America?
1492 to cross the Atlantic Ocean. After
 Could the sail driven ships use the
three months of sailing he saw land ahead.
Trade Winds to return to Europe?
Columbus thought that he had reached India.
Give reasons.
Actually, he was still far from India; he had
reached the country which we now call the After Columbus, the Europeans
West Indies. These are a group of islands discovered several sea routes. They could
near America. In fact, Europeans did not now sail not only to America but also to
know of America before Columbus. In a different parts of Africa, India and Australia.
way, he ‘stumbled’ onto America. Soon They traded with these countries and
Europeans realized that Columbus had not amassed immense wealth, which was used
reached India but a new unknown continent. to develop industries in Europe.
After that, several Europeans went to
Industrial Revolution in Europe
America to trade, conquer and settle.
The industrial revolution as you know
The ships of those times had sails to
started in England around 1750 and soon
harness wind-power. They sailed with ease
factory production spread to France,
with the winds blowing westwards towards
Holland, Germany, Spain, Russia, etc.
America. Were they the Westerlies? No,
Countries like England and Germany, which
they were not the Westerlies, which blew
had large reserves of coal and other minerals,
towards Europe. These were different
took lead in developing new industries.
winds, which blew from the south of
Europe towards the south-west direction. However, as times changed, European
They blew throughout the year and took countries began to use less and less of their
ships from south-west Europe to the east own mineral resources and relied on
coast of America. They are called ‘Trade imports from other countries. The old
Winds’ (Map 7). mining towns and old factories were closed
down and new factories grew in new areas.
The Westerlies blow from the south-
Industrialisation also enabled the European
west to the north-east to the south-west. In
countries to import agricultural goods
other words, the two winds blow in
from other countries. Thus, they relied less
opposite directions all through the year
on the agriculture of their countries for
(both these winds are shown on Map 7).
their food and raw material requirements.
This helped Europeans to travel to and from
Hence, Europe became dependent upon
America easily. They could go to America
trade with other countries. Initially this
using the Trade Winds.
trade was with their colonies in Asia, Africa
Look at Map 7 and answer the and America. However as the colonies
following questions : became independent, they had to develop
 Which winds would help the new ways of trading with them.
sailors to return to Europe from
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Europe 53

--- PAGE 62 ---
www.apteachers.in
Key words :
1. Peninsula 2. Island 3. Bay 4. Currents 5. Gulf 6. Climate
Improve your learning
1. The Atlantic Ocean has a deep impact on the climate of Europe as well as on the life and livelihood
of the people of Europe. Collect relevant information and write an essay on the theme. AS
1
2. Answer these questions with the help of the maps given in the lesson: AS
5
• Which of the following is not a landlocked (surrounded by land) country – (Hungary / Romania
/ Poland / Switzerland)?
• Which mountains lie between the Caspian Sea and the Black Sea – (Alps / Caucasus
Mountains)?
• Which countries are on the shores of the Arctic Ocean – (Russia / Germany / Sweden / Norway)?
• Can a ship sail from the Black Sea to the Atlantic Ocean? If yes, trace the route it will have to
take.
3. Why are harbours built in deep gulfs or bays? AS
1
4. Why are the winters less severe in Western Europe than in Eastern Europe? AS
1
5. Name four countries on the coast of the Black Sea. AS
1
6. How do the Westerlies benefit the people of Western Europe? AS
1
7. How do the Westerlies benefit the people of Western Europe? AS
1
What are the characteristics of the Mediterranean climate? Name the countries which have a
Mediterranean climate.
8. What are the factors that limit European agriculture? AS
1
9. Name the important crops of southern Europe. AS
1
10. How can you say that the trade and cultural relations have been developed among the countries
due to the discovery of new sea routes by European sailors? AS
6
11. Read the last para of this lesson and comment on it. AS
2
12. How is agriculture similar or different in Europe from that of our country? AS
1
5 4 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 63 ---
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Africa 55
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
6
Africa
To the west of India lies a large continent.On this continent,
there are extensive deserts, dense forests, long and broad rivers,
numerous large lakes and grasslands stretching over thousands of
miles. There are certain wild animals, which we do not find in our
country. The world’s largest gold and diamond mines are located
here. The name of this continent is Africa. Perhaps, you will be
surprised to know that Africa is the cradle of the humankind. Human beings first
evolved in Africa and then moved to other continents.
Fig 6.1 Equatorial forest in Uganda Fig 6.2 Savanna in Kenya
Fig 6.3 The city of Cairo by the River Nile

--- PAGE 64 ---
www.apteachers.in
There are long and narrow valleys in the
 Look for Africa on the world map,
high plateau. There are several large lakes
name the oceans that surround it.
in these valleys.
Which are its neighbouring
continents?  Identify two other lakes in Africa,
other than Lake Victoria and write
Africa - A vast Plateau
down their names.
Look at the physical map of Africa. Do  Locate the following rivers on a
you see any large plains in the interior of map of Africa. Use map 6 to locate
the continent? Only on the coast do we find the countries of Africa. Which
a narrow plain. The rest of the continent is countries do the following rivers
a vast plateau of varying height. Look for flow through, and which oceans do
the valleys of the Nile and the Congo. There they empty themselves into?
are also several mountains on this plateau.
River Country Ocean
The highest peak in Africa is Mount
Kilimanjaro in Tanzania. Nile
Look at Map 1 and answer the Niger
following questions: Congo
Zambezi
Map 1: Relief map of Africa
 What is the
Mediterranean
average height ASIA
Atlas Sea
of the narrow
mountains
coastal plain?
R
SAHARA DESERT i
v
 What is the e
r
River Niger
height of a N
i
l
major portion River e
Chad
of the plateau?
River Volta
 The height of
ngo
the high plateaus
Co
in the south and
River Lake Victoria
Kilimanjaro Park
east of Africa is Lake Tanganyika
…............... ZR Lake Nyasa
Plain 0 -200 Mts a miv
 In the north are
be
r
Plateau 200-1000 Mts. e z
the ............... ie
Mountains. Hills 1000 Mts and Kalahari
above
Desert
THE
ATLANTIC
THE INDIAN
OCEAN
OCEAN
5 6 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 65 ---
www.apteachers.in
There is a region in the north where no Climate
rivers are to be seen. This is the Sahara
If you look at Africa on the globe you
Desert, which receives very scanty rainfall.
will find that the Equator passes through
There is only one river, which crosses the
its middle. Thus Africa is divided into
Sahara Desert.
northern and southern parts.
Look for some of the large lakes on the
plateau. Lake Victoria is the largest lake in  Try to recognise the Tropic of
Africa. This is one of the largest fresh Cancer on the wall map of Africa
water lakes in the world. The Nile originates and label Map 2. To the south of
from this lake. the Equator is the Tropic of
The region where this river has its Capricorn. Locate it and write its
source receives such heavy rainfall that name in the correct place on the
there is enough water to flow across the map.
desert into the Mediterranean Sea. The Nile  Does the Equator pass through the
also flows through Egypt. Most of Egypt middle of any other continent?
is a desert.
The zone between the Tropic of Cancer
The Nile has helped a civilization to
and Tropic of Capricorn is the hottest
develop in this desert. Egyptian civilization
region of the world. There is hardly any
is several thousand years old. The waters
winter here. This is also known as the
of the Nile have helped to irrigate the fields
Tropic region.
of Egypt for thousands of years (look at
Map 3).
 Locate this zone on the map of
Africa, colour it and label it as the
‘Tropical Region’. Colour the zone
Map 2: Africa - Out line
north of the Tropic of Cancer and
south of the Tropical of Capricorn
in different colours.
These zones south and north of the
tropics experience summer as well as
winter. They are called ‘Temperate
Equator
Regions’.
So far we have been talking only about
summer and winter. However, regions that
are hot but receive heavy rainfall have a
different climate from hot regions that get
scanty rainfall.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Africa 57

--- PAGE 66 ---
www.apteachers.in
Map 3: Distribution
of Rainfall in Africa
High rainfall
Medium rainfall
Low rainfall
Map 4: Natural
Vegetation in Africa
Equatorial forests
Broad leaved trees and grass
Savanna
Soft grass of high plateau
Mountainous vegetation
Desert vegetation
5 8 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 67 ---
www.apteachers.in
Regions with Heavy Rainfall
Study Map 2 and 4 and answer:
A large part of Africa, on both sides of  Zones of heavy rainfall have ......
the Equator, receives heavy rainfall. Look vegetation.
at the regions with heavy rainfall on Map  Zones of moderate rainfall have
….. vegetation.
3. They are in Central and Western Africa.
They have dense forests due to heavy  Zones of scanty rainfall have …..
rainfall and warm climate. vegetation.
Regions with Moderate and Scanty
Pictures of different areas of Africa
Rainfall
have been shown in the beginning of the
Look for regions with moderate rainfall
chapter. Somewhere there is dense forest,
in Map 3. It surrounds the zone of heavy
in another area trees and grass grow
rainfall. In the region of moderate rainfall,
together, elsewhere there is grass and
it rains only in the summer, whereas it rains
shrubs, and in still other areas there is no
throughout the year in the equatorial
vegetation at all.
regions.
The People of Africa
As in our country, dry and wet seasons
are distinct in the zones of moderate rainfall
People with different languages,
in Africa. Due to moderate rainfall, tall lifestyles and habits live in different
grasses grow in this region. In some places, regions of Africa. Since ancient times,
these grasses are so tall that even elephants people have lived in small tribes, carrying
can hide in them! Some trees also grow out hunting gathering, animal husbandry and
between the grasses. This region is known as agriculture. Hunters have inhabited the
the ‘Savanna’. Look at this region in Map equatorial regions and the deserts.
4. Different kinds of wild animals inhabit this Pastoralists inhabited the high plateaus and
region. You will read about them later. Savanna, grazing their animals on the
A very large part of Africa is extremely extensive grasslands. Agriculture has long
arid (dry), where the rainfall is scanty or been carried out on river banks as well as
there is no rainfall at all for several years. on the margins of forests. There are several
cities on the coasts where traders from
 Locate these arid zones in Map 3. distant countries come to trade.
Almost half of the northern part of
Africa is an arid region and is called the
Sahara desert. Thorny bushes and short
grasses grow in some parts of this desert.
In other parts, there are large stretches of
sand, bare hills and rocks, stones and
Fig 6.4
pebbles. In the south there is another arid Boabab tree
region called the Kalahari Desert.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Africa 59

--- PAGE 68 ---
www.apteachers.in
Africa, Europe and Asia Look at the map to answer these questions:
For a long time, people from other
 How to reach India from Africa?
continents were largely ignorant about
Which ocean has to be crossed?
Africa. Europeans were familiar only with
 Are Asia and Africa connected by
the northern coastal regions of Africa while
land?
the Indian and Arab traders knew about the
eastern coast.
The African Coast
 •Look at the map and guess how
While studying Europe, you must have
Europeans would have reached the
noticed its broken coastline. You must have
northern coastal areas. How to
read about the gulfs and bays of Europe.
reach Africa from Europe? Which
Try to recall how these helped the
sea has to be crossed?
Europeans in their ocean travel.
Apart from these coastal areas, neither
 Now look at the African coast. Do
the Europeans nor the Indian or Arab traders
you see a broken coast or a smooth
had much knowledge about the interior parts
of Africa. coastline?
 Do you find many bays and gulfs
About 500 years ago, Europeans began
here, as in Europe? Name a bay and
their attempts to reach India by the sea
a gulf near Africa from Map 6.
route by going around Africa. Traversing the
Atlantic Ocean, they would stop over on the
Initially when Europeans tried to go
islands of St. Madiera and Azores. They were
inland, many African tribes came in direct
apprehensive about going south of these
conflict with them. Europeans indulged in
islands. They thought it would be so hot
unfair trade, tried to enslave the African
further south that the sea would be boiling.
people, and sold them abroad. They wanted
Then in 1498, a Portugese sailor named Vasco
to establish their rule over Africa and
da Gama went around the southern tip of
exploit the resources. Hence, the African
Africa and reached India.
people resisted the efforts of foreigners
to establish themselves in their land.
Slave Trade
In the 16th century many Europeans
began migrating to America and started
cultivation there. There was plenty of land
in America, but not enough people to work
on the fields. To fill the gap, the slave trade
from Africa began.
Fig 6.5 Cape of Good Hope in South Africa
6 0 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 69 ---
www.apteachers.in
A f r i c a n s several days to reach
were captured America. Many slaves
and enslaved did not survive the
mainly from the journey due to illness
and malnutrition.
coastal areas of
Guinea as well Even in America,
inhuman treatment was
as eastern
meted out to them. Despite working hard,
Africa. The
they were not given proper food or living
captured people
quarters. In this manner, millions of
were brought to
Africans were enslaved and taken to North and
the coast and South America and the nearby islands. Lakhs
sold to the of people died after they were made slaves.
Fig 6.6 Slave
Europeans. In In the 16th and 17th century, numerous
companies were engaged in the slave trade.
exchange for the slaves, the African tribal
Eventually, the slave trade ended in the 19th
leaders accepted guns, iron objects, liquor
century and the slaves were declared free
and clothes.
citizens in America in 1860.
The slaves were greatly oppressed. Many
European Colonies
of them died by the time they reached the
ports. The ships were stuffed with slaves. Earlier, you have read that Europeans
had reached India by going around Africa.
There were no proper arrangements for
Subsequently, these Europeans started
food or medicine. In those days, it took
halting at African ports.
Map 5: European colonies in Africa in 1913 Slowly the Portuguese,
Dutch, English, French
and Germans gained a
Ethiopia foothold in the interior and
colonized these areas. The
political map of Africa at
the close of the 19th
century is given in Map 5.
Liberia
The regions colonized by
the European colonies
Belgium
have been indicated on this
Britain
map.
France
 Can you locate the
Germany
countries that colonised
Italy Africa on a map of
Portugal Europe?
Spain  Which European
countries colonized
Independent
Sudan and Zaire?
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Africa 61

--- PAGE 70 ---
www.apteachers.in
found in wild forests. When the demand for
 Can you point out any area of Africa
them increased, patches of forest were
which was not colonised?
cleared and these trees were planted there.
Along with attempting to build their Cocoa, rubber, palm and palm oil are
colonies in Africa, the Europeans continued being exported and this enables Nigeria to
to explore the interior of the continent. earn foreign exchange.
They travelled to the source of the Nile in
 In Map 4, identify the region of
the north. In the west, they explored the entire
Nigeria where these crops are
valley of the Niger and in the south, they moved
grown.
northwards from Cape Town. There they
explored the region around the river Zambezi.
Plantations were started by the British
The Europeans exported African timber,
who were not satisfied with the quantity of
minerals etc. on a very large scale to Europe.
wild products collected from the forests.
In fact, the gold and diamond mines in
They wanted to produce more and export
southern Africa are still under the control
them.
of European companies. Zambia and
Plantations made many things easy for
Zimbabwe have priceless mines of copper.
them. First of all, it was no longer difficult
This mineral has long been an important
to go into the forest and locate the trees. It
export item.
was easy to look after the trees since they
The Europeans did not stop with
were all in one place. Harvesting the
exporting the resources of Africa. They
produce became much easier. Therefore,
established plantations to grow tea, coffee,
the production increased.
rubber, tobacco, etc. These products were
Nigerian people started working in these
also exported to Europe.
plantations, while the British were their
Crops and Plantations of Nigeria managers.
You may be fond of eating chocolates. In this way, commercial agriculture of
They are made of cocoa, which grows in palm, cocoa and rubber began in Nigeria.
Nigeria. In Southern Nigeria, apart from Not only this, a number of processing
cocoa, there are also rubber plantations. Oil- units were also set up near plantations, such
bearing palm trees are also found there. Oil as units to separate seed from the cocoa
is extracted from its fruit. People reach fruit, to dry it, extract oil from palm fruit,
these forests crossing the Niger by boat to extract milk from rubber plants and so on.
collect palm fruit. Earlier all these trees were
Most of the profit from trade of palm,
6 2 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 71 ---
www.apteachers.in
cocoa and rubber went to the British. The For example, mineral oil or petroleum
Nigerian people worked there only as is the most important natural resource of
agricultural labourers. Even in India during Nigeria. The Dutch companies established
the British times, plantations of tea and control over the oil mining and refining in
coffee were started for trade purposes. Nigeria. Since 1958, mineral oil has been
Nigeria was under the British rule until exported from Nigeria. Oil refineries have
1960, when it won independence. After been set up at Harcourt and Variport.
that, the plantations and trade in plantation This indursty is mostly in the hands of
products have gradually come under the foreign companies to this day. The Nigerian
control of the Nigerians and they are able government has only a small share in the
industry. This is the same with many other
to benefit from these.
minerals mined from Africa.
Independent Africa
The foreign companies do bring in new
technologies and invesments into the
During the last century, African
mining and processing industries, thus
countries gained independence from the
creating employment for the local people.
control of European powers. New nations
However, they use cheap labour to make
came up with their own governments. Of
huge profits which are taken away from the
course, many Europeans are still settled in
African people most of these companies
African countries. But slowly, the African are also careless about environmental
people are acquiring control over their land, protection and have caused immense
forests, mines, and agricultural production damage to the natural environment. This has
affected the quality of land and life of the
and benefiting from them.
people adversely.
Minerals of Africa
Key words :
The continent is very rich in minerals
like coal, copper, tin etc., besides, it is 1. Colonies
perhaps the largest producer in the world 2. Slave
of precious minerals like gold and
3. Plateau
diamonds. One of the main aims of
4. Tropic region
Europeans in Africa was to exploit these
5. Temperate region
resources by using servile labour of the
6. Tropics
Africans. Many of these countries and their
companies control most of mineral  Familiarise yourself with the
resources of even the independent African countries of Africa by colouring
countries till date. and labeling Map 7.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Africa 63

--- PAGE 72 ---
Map 6: Countries of Africa
O
C
C
O
R
O
M
ALGERIA LIBIYA
The Indian Ocean
6 4 Diversity on the Earth
AISINUT
N
R
EA
TR
SA EGYPT
EH
W A
S
A NI
A
T
RI
U
A
M MALI
NIGER
CHAD
SENEGAL
BURKINA
GUINEA FASO
NIGERIA
L
IB E
R
IA
COAST GHANA
IVOIRE
NOOREMAC
SUDAN ERITHRIA
DJIBOUTH
CENTRAL SOUTH ETHIO-
AFRICAN REP SUDAN PIA
LI
A
A
A M
D O
N S A
G
U KENYA
DEMO-
CRATIC REP
BURUNDI
CONGO
TANZANIA
GABON
MALAWI
REP. OF
CONGO
MOZAMBIQUE
ZAMBIA R
A
C
S
ZIMBABWE A
G
A
D
BOTSWANA A
M
AIBIMAN
www.apteachers.in
BENIN
TOGO
RAWANDA
EQUATO-
RIAL
SIERRA
GUINEA
LEONE
GUINEA
BISSAU
AN-
THE GOLA
GAMBIA
The Atlantic Ocean
SWAZILAND
SOUTH LESOTHO
AFRICA

--- PAGE 73 ---
www.apteachers.in
First, label this map with the help of Map 6. Then colour all the countries with different
colours. Take care not to colour two neighbouring countries with the same colour.
Map 7: Countries of Africa
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Africa 65

--- PAGE 74 ---
www.apteachers.in
Improve your learning
1. From Europe, which sea does one have to cross to reach northern Africa? AS
5
2. State three difficulties that the Europeans faced in reaching the interior parts of
Africa. AS
1
3. Name the two large deserts of Africa. AS
1
4. a. The Zone between the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn is the Zone of …..
climate. AS
1
b. The main vegetation of Savanna lands is …..
c. The two main rivers emptying themselves into the Atlantic ocean are ….. and …..
d. The regions in Africa to the north of the Tropic of Cancer and to the south of the
Tropic of Capricorn are of ….. climate.
5. Two political maps of Africa have been given in the chapter. Compare the two to
find out which European country controlled the present day countries of Nigeria
and Zimbabwe. AS
5
6. Name two countries of Africa where equatorial forests are found. AS
5
7. What goods did Europeans trade with Africa? What kind of agricultural produce did
they promote for trade purpose? AS
1
8. Who benefited from the slave trade? Why did America need slaves? AS
1
9. How can you say that the slave trade is highly heinous? AS
6
10. Read the last para of this lesson and comment on it. AS
2
6 6 Diversity on the Earth

--- PAGE 75 ---
Handicrafts and
Handlooms
Basket Maker of Andugula  What are the tools used by the
basket makers?
Polaiah is a basket
Each bundle of date palm spines costs
maker from
Rs.120. Polaiah and other basket makers
Shankavaram village in
usually bring 10 bundles for two months.
Kanigiri Mandal,
Polaiah’s family makes 25 baskets from
Prakasam district. He is
about 35 years old. He one bundle. Ten bundles of spines would
belongs to Yerukala, a give them about 250 baskets. It takes 30
tribal community. His family has been minutes to make a basket. He weaves
weaving baskets for generations. baskets from 10 am to 5 pm with a few
Bagyamma, his wife, also works as a basket
breaks to eat and rest.
maker. Moreover, they have three children.
Polaiah’s father along with other 25
families came to Kandukuru and Ongole
about 30 years ago as the demand for
baskets had declined in their native village.
He sells baskets on road side are near by
villages.
Polaiah uses the spines of wild date
palm (eatha chettu) leaves. Using a knife,
he shaves off the leaves and keeps them in
hot sunshine to dry them. The raw material,
wild date palm leaves, are brought in
bundles from Shankavaram, their native
village. His relatives in Shankavaram
collect the spines from bushes around
their villages and sell to basket makers like
Polaiah. Shankavaram is about 80 km from
Ongole.
Polaiah sells each basket for Rs. 20.
Sometimes, customers ask for a bigger
 What do you understand about raw
basket for family rituals. These are sold at
material in the context of basket a higher price depending on the amount of
making? Who collects them? raw material used. He sells baskets
throughout the year. In two months he can
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Handicrafts and Handlooms 67
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
7
PART - I
Fig 7.1 Basket shop with bamboo products

--- PAGE 76 ---
www.apteachers.in
is true for many involved in traditional
activities. However, they often have to live in
urban areas without basic amenities.
Urban Slum
Polaiah lives in a slum, which does not
have proper drainage, so it emits foul smell,
and breeds mosquitoes and flies. There is
no electric connection or safe drinking
water. Polaiah’s hut is made of bamboo,
mats and recycled plastic bags and tarpaulin.
During the rainy season, their roofs often
leak and the huts are flooded. Sometimes
the Municipal Corporation officials evict
Polaiah and other basket maker families.
Despite struggling hard, people like
Polaiah have been denied voting rights in
the city. In fact, they have been denied ration
Fig 7.2 Basket weaving
cards, as they don’t have any proof of
sell Rs.5000 worth of baskets. The cost identity or proof of residence.Thus, they
price is Rs. 1200 excluding the cannot either participate in the democratic
transportation charges of Rs.100 for every processes of the city or avail the facilities
visit to his village. So, the income of his for the poor.
family is Rs.3700 for 2 months. He does
Basket Makers
not earn sufficient income to meet his
People of Yerukula tribe are usually
family expenditure. To supplement his
involved in basket making and live in
income Polaiah buys and sells bamboo
different parts of Andhra Pradesh. They are
products like trays and stands.
called ‘Yerukula’ after their women’s
Basket making is a craft work that
involves the use of wild date palm leaves,
cane and bamboo, which are found in
forests. There has been depletion of
forests due to their extensive
exploitation for big industries. This
affects the livelihoods of people who
have traditionally depended on forest.
Further, the demand for such products
has reduced considerably. This forces
them to move out of rural areas and
migrate to urban areas for survival. This
Fig 7.3 Basket weaving
68 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 77 ---
www.apteachers.in
traditional profession of fortune telling
 Do you think people like Polaiah
‘Eruka chepputa’ (Sodhi). People of this
should be given ration card and
tribe speak ‘Yerukula basha’ . Words from
allowed to vote in Hyderabad?
Telugu, Tamil and Kannada languages are
used in this language. By now, you have learnt that goods such
as baskets made of bamboo and etha chettu
Choose the correct option:
require simple production – using very few
a. Forests are depleted largely materials mostly made of natural
because of the usage by (basket resources. There are many other goods
weavers / big industries). which require raw materials to be
b. Polaiah buys bamboo items from processed in a more complex way with
(a trader in mandi/a village in complex tools. Cloth materials made of
Andugula). cotton and silk are examples of such goods.
Cloth can be manufactured today either in
 Make a table showing expenditure
hand-operated looms or by power looms
for raw material and income from the
or in large mills. We will study here how it
produce.
is produced by handloom weavers.
PART - II
Handloom Weavers in Textbook for more details of sericulture
Dharmavaram and reeling processes.)
The weavers would not produce the
Dharmavaram is
raw material required for manufacturing
located in Anantapur
sarees such as silk yarn, colours and zari.
district in the state of
Andhra Pradesh. They purchase from market. Farmers grow
Dharmavaram Sarees are silk worms to produce cocoons on
traditionally woven in the mulberry leaves from which silk yarn is
interlocked-weft
made. Silk yarn is obtained from cocoon
technique Dharmavaram silk sarees are a
in reeling centers. This silk yarn is locally
benchmark in traditional craft industry.
called “Katcha Pattu”. Some of the
They are very famous for their striking
merchants from Surat sale Zari to the
colour combinations with contrast pallu and
border woven with exquisite brocade gold weavers of Dharmavaram.
patterns. It caters to the needs of the
customers. The designs are decided by the Stages before weaving:
designer according to the market demand.
The raw silk extracted from the silk
The additional design can be added to silk
cocoon undergoes some process before it
saree using kundans, chamkies, and stones
reaches on Loom (Maggam). The strands
and also opposite colours. Depending on
of Katcha Pattu twisted together to make
the elaboration of the saree design, the cost
yarn in twisting centres. The raw silk is
varies. Recently Dharmavaram sarees
made convenient for warp (vertical threads)
received the patent right. (Please refer
and weft (horizontal threads). This process
Animal Fibre lesson in your Science
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Handicrafts and Handlooms 69

--- PAGE 78 ---
is called ‘Sappuri’. Later silk yarn is dyed Process of weaving a Saree:
with colours. Dyeing is the colouring
Weavers use warp, wept and zari in
process by dipping the yarn in boiled
this process. First of all weaver put the
colour water at very high temperature.
thread roles on the vertical frame of the
Repeated boiling and cooling of the yarn
warping machine (Dolu) which is octagonal
helps in the uniformity of dye application.
in shape. The warp is nearly 75 meters long
After colouring the silk yarn is dried in
which can make 10 sarees at a time.
shade. This process is called ‘Tye and Dye’.
The most basic process in which two
Tools and machinery :
different sets of yarns are entwined to form
Weavers own the wooden loom a fabric or cloth. One of these sets is called
which is the main tool for weaving. Apart a warp which runs from the rear end to the
from it they also use small knives, trunks front of the loom lengthwise. The other set
of maize, horns and other tools like huge of crosswise yarns are the filling, called the
container for boiling, iron rods for drying, weft or the woof.The warp is loaded in to
spinning wheel for turning fiber into thread the loom by attaching each strand of warp
or yarn, fly shuttle, paddle which help in to the loom. This process is locally called
the designing and weft formation, ‘achhu’.
computers and punched Jacquard cards for
After setting the warp the weaver
designing.For weaving a saree, they give
arrange Jacquard cards as per the design and
priority for designing. If you look at the
enters into the loom to starts weaving. The
saree, you will notice that there are very
pit loom which is locally called ‘Maggam’.
intricate designs on them. Previously they
Zari, Kundans, Stones also used in the
used to plotting the design on graph paper.
weaving where design occurs. The weavers
But now computers are used. They are
use hands and legs to weave the saree. It
designing different designs very easily on
requires approximately 4-8 days
Jacquard cards. For this purpose there are
(depending on the variety of saree) of
special designing centres, which facilitate
continuous efforts of two persons for
many attractive designs.
weaving a saree.
Warp and Weft
You will notice that cloth has threads
passing from top to bottom and sideways
something like this #. Warp is the yarn
that goes from top to bottom and weft is
the yarn that go from left to right.
Fig 7.4 Jacquard card printing
 Look at a saree and draw any of the
common designs on them in your
notebook.
70 Production Exchange and Livelihoods
tfeW
www.apteachers.in
Warp

--- PAGE 79 ---
www.apteachers.in
A case Study
Let us look at the account
of a visit to a weavers’ house
in Dharmavaram to know
more about makng of silk
sarees.
Venkatesu is a resident of
Dharmavaram. All of his
family members – he, his
wife, his son and daughter-in-
law work as weavers. When we
Fig 7.5 Katcha Pattu Fig 7.6 Coloured Pattu
visited his house, we found all
members in the family
engaged in different tasks.
While he was winding yarn,
his son Nagendra was engaged
in weaving on the maggam
(pit loom) set up inside the
house. Silk sarees are
manufactured by following
different tasks like dyeing of
Katcha Pattu, Spendiling of
Yarn etc. Since he has become
old, Venkatesu spends most of
the time winding yarn and his
son weaves on the loom.
Venkatesu’s wife and Fig 7.7 Dyeing
daughter-in-law do bobbin
winding. There is some work
like making saratas for
warping done collectively by
group of weavers on streets or
outside their house.
His son Nagendra brings all
the raw material like dyed silk
yarn, zari and design from
master weaver and sometimes
from cooperative society of
Fig 7.8 Weft making
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Handicrafts and Handlooms 71

--- PAGE 80 ---
www.apteachers.in
will get cut. The whole family
works only till afternoon
during these days. Women are
distressed a lot as they have
to do not only weaving but
also the household chores like
cooking food, fetching
water,preparing children to go
to school etc.
Earlier, Venkatesu’s family
used to weave only for the
cooperative society. The
Fig 7.9 Warp making
cooperative societies provide financial
which he is a member. Venkatesu gets raw
assistance through insurance in case of
materials at a time to weave ten sarees. The
unexpected illness or death in the weaver’s
whole family has to work for 12-15 hours
family. They also help in getting loan for
a day for nearly 40- 50 days to weave 10
construction of houses. Now-a-days the
sarees. They earn about Rs.1300 per saree
cooperative society is not giving sufficient
for the work.
work, so they had to look for additional
sources of income to run their families.
Since a master weaver in Dharmavaram
agreed to give work and remuneration
Presently Venkatesu’s family weaving silk
sarees for the master weaver. Venkatesu has
not given up the membership with the
cooperative society with a hope that it will
improve its functioning in future. Though
they have own loom due to lack of
investiment, raw materials, new designs,
Fig 7.10 Pitloom
market facilities they have to depend on he
Weaving saree is a hereditary occupation
master weavers. Recently number of
for Venkatesu’s family. The income
factories started in and around
Venkatesu’s family gets from weaving silk
Dharmavaram with more number of looms.
sarees is insufficient to run his family.
In each factory there are about 100-300
Between March and May, Venkatesu’s looms. Here weavers are provided shelter
family is able to weave only for a few hours and salary.
a day. If there is high temperature, thread
72 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 81 ---
www.apteachers.in
Weaver’s Problems and
Cooperative Societies
Andhra Pradesh has the second
largest number of handlooms in
the country, next only to West
Bengal. Handloom weavers are
facing a serious problem. They
face a stiff competition from
power loom and mill made cloth
-these are cheaper as they are
produced on machines and also Fig 7.11 Weaving
because they use synthetic yarn
which is cheaper than cotton or
silk. Even though it is popular due
to its high quality and unique
beauty, the Dharmavaram saree
seems to be expensive. But the
weavers do not get good rate due
Fig 9.8 Weaving in process
to middle men’s involvement.
The sarees that are
manufactured on powerlooms are
entered in the Dharmavaram
market by the middle men. There
is a degrees in the demand for the
sarees woven by the handloom
weavers. Due to these reasons the
living conditions of the weavers Fig 7.12 Powerloom
fall in danger. lack of investment
and ill wealth weavers faced many
problems.
The buyers are spread all over
the world and weavers do not have
any direct contact with them.
Fashions in the cities change fast
and it is difficult for the weavers
to know what kind of designs are
in demand. Therefore, they have
to rely on middlemen and master Fig 7.13 Jacquard centre
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Handicrafts and Handlooms 73

--- PAGE 82 ---
www.apteachers.in
weavers to know about the designs in vogue procurement of raw materials and the sale
and change their designs accordingly. They of cloth and dress materials. They do not
have to depend up on middlemen for provide opportunities for weavers to
getting raw materials and investment. produce sarees to suit the changing
Middlemen playing key role in handloom preferences of consumers. This has once
sector and getting huge prficts from again pushed the weavers into the clutches
consumers. of the middlemen and traders.
In order to overcome these problems the A large amount of handloom cloth
weavers are encouraged to form materials in Andhra Pradesh are produced
cooperative societies. The cooperative and marketed by master weavers and
societies are meant to help the weavers in merchants. The master weavers and
buying raw materials at low price and to merchants procure all the raw materials,
arrange for marketing of their cloth. This supply them to weavers and collect the
reduces their dependence upon middlemen woven cloth. Then they sell these materials
and traders. The cooperative societies to wholesale cloth merchants.. They pay a
should setup training centers to help the stipulated amount as wages for the weaving
weavers by training in new designs. work. Many master weavers also provide
However, now-a-days, a large section of loan to weavers to set up loom, to buy other
weavers in many parts of Andhra Pradesh tools and thus restrict them not to weave
do not get sufficient work from sarees for other master weavers. They also
cooperative societies. In some cooperative decide the wages for the work done by the
societies, weavers are not given any role weavers. Since they are interested in raising
in making decisions regarding the their incomes, it is natural for them to look
for ways to pay less to the weavers. So,
the cooperative societies should provide
work and save the distressed weaving
families from the master weavers. Along
with Dharmavaram there are many amazing
weavers in Andhra Pradesh at Uppada (East
Godavari), Mangalagiri (Krishna), Ponduru
(Srikakulam), Venkatagiri (Nellore),
Chirala (Guntur) and Srikalahasti
(Chittoor).
 Prepare a table showing raw
materials and tools used to
makeing Dharmavaram Silk
sarees.
 Why Venkatesu’s family has begun
to weave for a master weaver?
Fig 7.14 Saree before packing
74 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 83 ---
www.apteachers.in
Key words :
1. Raw materials 2. Jacquard Cards 3. Sappuri 4. Katcha Pattu
5. Patent 6. Warp - Weft 7. Tie & Dye 8. Co-operative Societies
Improve your learning
1. Do you think people have enough earnings from work like basket making and weaving? AS
1
2. Prepare a list of goods which could have substituted the basket. Discuss with your parents
before preparing the list. AS
3
3. Many new products have replaced handicrafts – identify them and find out where they are
produced. Discuss how this could affect the lives of handicrafts persons. AS
4
4. Why did Polaiah’s family come to Kandukuru? Why does he have no right to vote in
Kandukuru? AS
1
5. You may find crafts persons like Polaiah producing goods other than baskets. Meet two such persons,
collect the following details and discuss them in the class. One sample is given for you. AS
3
Sl. Name of the Goods One or two important raw
Source of raw materials
No. crafts person produced materials used
1 Polaiah Baskets Spokes of date palm leaves Shankavaram – native village
2
3
6. Why do you think patenting Dharmavaram silk saree weaving would help weavers in and around
Dhrmavaram? AS
1
7. Should weavers procure raw materials, weave Silk sarees and sell them directly to the people? What
are the challenges in it? AS
1
8. Prepare the flow diagram depicting the organisation of production in basket making and handloom
textile weaving. AS
3
9. Compare the similarities and differences between basket making and Ikkat saree weaving and fill
in the following table: AS
1
Work Raw materials used Tools used How goods are sold
Basket making
Handloom weaving
10. List various handicrafts with location in Andhra Pradesh and prepare a chart. AS
3
Project :
1. Invite a craftsperson to your classroom or visit their work place. Make a wallpaper showing
different processes of their production.
2. Meet different artisans in your village/locality fill in the following table and discuss in the classroom.
Sl. Name of the Profession Continuing/ If discontinued If continued whether
No. artisan Discontinuing reasons they are satisfied
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Handicrafts and Handlooms 75

--- PAGE 84 ---
Industrial Revolution
In the previous lesson, you learned about various ways in which
things are made by artisans. We also read that many of them are
not able to compete with machine-made products and that many
people have stopped practising their professions. In this chapter,
we shall explore how machines have come to dominate the way in
which products are made and how they impacted the lives of people.
Increasing control of Traders
During 1500 AD to 1800 AD trade
between countries in America, Europe,
Africa and Asia increased manifold. Textile
trade too began to expand. Now European
traders began to use putting out system –
that is they gave advances to small farmers
and artisans to produce textile goods.
During this period, income from farming
was low and many peasants lost their farm
and grazing land. Therefore, doing textile
work helped them to make a living.
Under putting-out system, a cloth trader
in Britain purchased cotton from a supplier
and carried it to the spinners. Then the yarn
was taken by the trader to the next stage of
production - the weavers. The cloth was
taken to the fullers and finally to the dyers
who gave it colour. These different
activities could be done in different parts
of the country. But all finishing work was
done in London before it was sold in other
countries. Thus, textiles goods were
76 Production Exchange and Livelihoods
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
8
produced by a large number of producers
who were controlled by traders. There was
no system as in a factory - that is, the
different stages of producing cloth did not
happen in the same place but in different
households. Each trader engaged 20-25
craftspersons at each stage of production.
Sometime later, the traders brought the
craftspersons under one roof so that they
could explain their requirements and
organise the production more effectively.
They set up small workshops called
manufactories. The craftsmen brought their
own tools and worked with raw materials
given by the trader. Then, the trader took
the product and sold it in the market. In
this way, slowly the control of the trader
over the craftpersons increased. This phase
is called ‘proto-industrialisation’ – a phase
in which more and more people entered
craft production; traders established
control over the workers; and a large
market for craft products developed across
the world.

--- PAGE 85 ---
www.apteachers.in
Beginning of Industrial such machines. Then came the long awaited
Revolution 1750-1850 AD invention – a machine which could spin lots
of yarn in a short time. However, these
Many changes occurred during this
machines were very heavy and the artisans
period. In about 1750, machines and steam
thought, ‘It is so tiring to turn these
power began to be increasingly used to
machines with our hands or feet. How nice
produce goods, to move goods and people
it would be if these machines could turn by
from one place to another. Several people
themselves.’ Their dream also became true
living in villages moved to towns and cities
with the famous invention of James Watt –
for work. Today we use many machines and
the steam engine.
machine-made goods in our daily life. This
was the beginning of the ‘machine age’ in James Watt’s Invention
Britain.
James Watt was an English craftsman
As the demand for cloth, and other who invented machines. He noticed that
handicrafts increased many times, many
steam had so much strength that it could
artisans wondered how they could increase
move enormous weight. To tap this energy,
the production to cope with the demand. he made a machine which would run with
Some of them began thinking, ‘These days the help of steam and would not need men
there is a great demand for our cloth, but or animals to drive it.
we are not able to produce more cloth to
He showed his invention to an
meet this demand. Besides, the cloth made
industrialist called Boulton and the two
with our looms is expensive. If we can make
entered into a partnership to make such
machines which can spin yarn faster and
machines. Boulton invested the money
weave cloth faster, we will be able to
necessary and paid Watt a salary. Watt made
produce more cloth at a lower price. Then
the steam engine. They made an agreement
more people will buy our cloth and we can
Rod
earn more money.’ connecting
piston and
As a result of the pressure of trade and
the wheel
work, several people attempted making
Fig 8.2 This is one of the steam engines
made by James Watt. The piston under the
Fig 8.1 Spinning Jenny - A new pressure from the steam pushes the rod up
machine to spin yarn. and down which in turn turns the wheel.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Industrial Revolution 77

--- PAGE 86 ---
www.apteachers.in
between them to share the profit: two thirds The Experience of a 19th
to Boulton and one third two Watt. These
Century Child Worker
two persons made a large number of steam
In the 19th century, the industrial
engines, sold them, and made huge profits.
workers of Europe had to face several
Once it is established that machines could
hardships. Let us read about the
run on steam, then such machines were
experiences of a child employed in an
made for all kinds of work – spinning,
English coal mine.
weaving, making iron tools, driving vehicles
and ships, etc. “I have been working in these mines
since I was four. Workers hew coal with
 How did the need for self-driven
pickaxes and fill the large wagons with it.
machines emerge in England?
Our job is to push these loaded wagons to
 Do you think the arrangement
the point from where horses or mules can
between the scientist- inventor and
haul them. This is a very difficult job.
the capitalist fair?Give reasons.
Hauling the loaded wagons through water
and slush, and over very steep slopes, leaves
Factory System of Production
us very tired. We have to work in this way
During 1750-1850,
for more than 12 hours a day. By the time
a new system called the
we return home, we are so tired that we
‘factory system’
don’t even feel like eating. Yesterday, I fell
emerged. In the place of
asleep on my way to home. My mother
simple tools and
searched for me and carried me home.”
manual power, new
machines and steam
power came to be increasingly used.
Production was now carried on in a place
called ‘factory’, unlike what we read
earlier, where production took place in
houses. Hundreds of workers were brought
together to work in these large factories.
Machines became important in place of
minor tools and handlooms. They produced
goods on a very large scale.
All facilities for production were owned
and managed by individuals called
capitalists. They invested money on
workers, raw materials, machines, etc. and
owned them. Unlike in guild system,
workers worked for wages and did not own
the things they produced.
Fig 8.3 Children pushing cart
The early factories were dreadful places
inside coal mine.
to work.
78 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 87 ---
www.apteachers.in
There were several movements to stop only for an hour. By the end of the day, we
employing children in this manner in are too tired to work. But the factory owner
factories and mines. In response to these uses whips to goad us to keep working.
movements child labour was banned and These days, new machines are being
now it is a thing of the past in most introduced constantly. Since they can do
European countries. the work of several workers in the same
time, fewer workers are required. Every
Inside Early Factories
time a new machine is introduced many of
Major changes swept industries with the
us are thrown into the street.”
coming of machines. Machines could be
Most of these workers had no other
worked by even unskilled persons. Thus,
option as they had been expelled from their
skilled artisans were no longer required. In
lands and if they were small craftsmen,
their place, a large number of women and
their shops had closed down. Gradually,
children were employed and made to work
workers of factories and mines formed
for meagre wages.
their own organisations to fight against the
Machines cost a lot of money, and
conditions of work. In the beginning, they
ordinary artisans could not afford them.
demanded 10 or 8 hours working day,
Only wealthy merchants could set up
higher wages, disallowing children under
mechanised factories.
14 years of age from being employed in
This is what the workers had to say about
mines or factories etc. Over time, the
their plight:
struggles and their conditions were
“Every day, we come for work at 6 am.
improved.
and work till 8.30 pm. The lunch break is
Fig 8.4 Redrawing of an illustration of inside of a factory.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Industrial Revolution 79

--- PAGE 88 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 8.5
Fig 8.5, 8.6 & 8.7
 Look at these
illustrations. They
were made during the
time of Industrial
revolution.
 What can you see in
these pictures?
Fig 8.6 Describe them.
Fig 8.7
80 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 89 ---
www.apteachers.in
 Who were employed to work on
In 1840s, John Loudon McAdam
machines?
devised a method of laying road using
 Do you know of any factory nearby?
broken stones. This created a hard surface,
Compare its conditions of work
which was an important advancement in
with that of English factories 150
road construction. Within another decade
years ago.
bitumen-based binding, which we see in our
 Compare the conditions of workers
areas as tar(mac) roads were built. This was
of a leather tannery and the English
further followed by the use of motor cars.
workers 150 years ago. Find out
In the early 20th Century, aircraft was
the similarities and differences.
developed by Wright Brothers and today,
The factories too have changed by now. air transport is a major means of transport.
Almost all work has become automated,
Trade in Industrial Products
with machines directed by computers. They
require very few people and little manual
Industrial production increased so much
work to run them.
that it was not possible to sell all the
Sources of Energy and products in their own countries. The
Industrial Development factory owners began to sell them in other
countries too. Machine made goods were
You have seen that
cheap and durable. Hence, the demand for
energy is needed to run
machines in a factory. them increased all over the world. This gave
Energy is available from a boost to the industries in England and
coal, electricity, other countries. However, the interesting
petroleum, and so on.
thing about them, is they did not have the
Initially, industries
raw materials required for the production
depended upon the energy from coal and
of these goods. For example, the cotton
steam. Subsequently, they started using
needed for producing cloth was grown in
several other sources of energy like thermal
and hydroelectricity,, petroleum, natural India and America. English traders
gas, nuclear energy and solar energy. purchased these raw materials from India
and other countries and sold them to factory
Transport Revolution
owners. Subsequently, the traders
The invention of steam engine boosted
purchased the finished products and sold
shipping industry. It also reduced the cost
them in countries like India, America, etc.
of transportation by one third of cost of
road transport. Yet people looked for better
In order to serve the interests of their
ways of transportation. The next big thing
in the context of transport was adaptation trade and industry the Europeans sought to
of steam engine to locomotives. George subjugate these countries. Other countries
Stephenson’s locomotive pulled heavy
like France, Germany, Spain, Portugal,
loads along a 64 kilometre track from
Belgium, Holland and others conquered
Liverpool to Manchester at a speed of 46
kilometers per hour. colonies for themselves in Asia, Africa,
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Industrial Revolution 81

--- PAGE 90 ---
www.apteachers.in
Australia and America (‘Colonies’ are those cramped and had little sanitation or other
countries whose resources are used for the facilities. Accidents, diseases and epidemics
benefit of another country). These were common. Most workers’ residential
European countries exploited the colonies areas lacked proper ventilation, health
in other continents and grew wealthy in the and sanitation facilities. Slums became
process. common scenario in towns and cities
especially near the factories and mines. At
Urbanisation and slums
the same time, distinct quarters came up for
Industrial revolution led to gradual shift of the rich and the powerful which were well
people from villages to towns. Industries and provided in terms of open spaces,
other urban activities gave people livelihood. sanitation, water supply, roads and other
As people moved to towns which were facilities. Slowly people fought for civic
newly emerging, they settled down in rights and the conditions of the workers
makeshift houses and shelters which were quarters also improved.
Map 1: A world map showing colonies of European countries in 1800
Key words :
5. Nuclear Energy
1. Revolution
6. Urbanisation
2. Production
7. Child worker
3. Factory
8. Slums
4. Organisation
82 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 91 ---
www.apteachers.in
Improve your learning
1. Correct the false sentences: AS
1
Under the putting out system
a. Spinners took cotton to the weavers.
b. Unlike in guild system traders controlled what product was to be
made.
c. All work was done by the same group of people.
Under the Guild system
a. All small farmers were allowed to learn weaving.
b. Weavers determined prices and quality of the products.
2. Putting out system is better than factory based production of textiles. Do you agree? Give
reasons for your answer. AS
1
3. If Kruthika argues, “Railways in India were built only for the benefit of the people by the
colonial rulers”, how can you counter this statement? AS
4
4. How will increase in the wages of the workers affect industrial production? AS
1
5. Why did factory owners pay low wages and force workers to work for longer hours? AS
1
6. Why do you think the working conditions in factories should be improved? AS
4
7. Why is it necessary for government to enact laws to improve the working conditions? AS
1
8. Why are children not allowed to work in factories? AS
6
9. Transport system helps the industry – justify this statement in the context of
Industrialisation. AS
6
10.Locate the following places in the world map. AS
5
a) England b) Portugal
c) France d) Spain
11. Read the para ‘Urbanisation and slums’ of page 82 and comment on it. AS
2
Project:
1. You may recall lessons on agriculture and trade in Class VI. Compare the nature of farmers and
traders in Andhra Pradesh with traders in Britain or Europe. You can use a few criteria and
tabulate.
2. Do you know any child working in a factory or shop? If you find, how do you respond?
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Industrial Revolution 83

--- PAGE 92 ---
Handicraft production is done at home by small families with
the help of some simple tools. In contrast, factories produce goods
on a large scale, with the help of machines and a large number of
workers. Let us find out how production is organised in large
factories.
 Have you ever visited any factory?
Describe it.
 Draw a picture of the factory you
visited and using your imagination
describe in 300 words on what
could happen inside a factory.
We use so much of paper. Do you know
how the paper of books, records, registers,
progress reports and newspapers is made?
There are two paper mills in Andhra
Pradesh - Rajahmundry (East Godavari
district) and Kurnool.
 Mark the four districts with paper
mills in a map of Andhra Pradesh.
Why do you think they are located
there?
84 Production Exchange and Livelihoods
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
9
Production in a Factory –
A Paper Mill
Raw Materials
Materials required to produce a
commodity are called raw materials.
Factories require large, continuous supply
Fig 9.1
Andhra Paper Mill
Rajahmundry

--- PAGE 93 ---
www.apteachers.in
Paper mills and
Disappearance of Bamboo
Although raw materials for paper
are available in the forests, they are not
easily procured. Paper mills are
generally established near forests
where bamboo and other soft wood
trees are available.
Paper mills engage contractors to
Fig 9.2 Lorries waiting with bamboo loads
supply bamboo and other raw
of raw materials.You will find dozens of materials. A few decades ago, contractors
lorries supplying raw materials to them employed tribal people (like those living
every day. Paper mills generally use wood
in Kunawaram hills you read about in Class
from bamboo, eucalyptus and subabul trees.
VI) to cut bamboo from forests. Due to
Subabul wood is most widely used now.
excessive cutting in the past, there are no
Besides wood, a number of chemicals like
bamboos available in forests near the paper
common salt and caustic soda are also used
mills now.
in different stages of paper-making. Scrap
Hence, paper mills are looking for
paper is also recycled in paper mills.
alternative raw materials like subabul,
Factories use heavy machinery which are
which are grown in villages. This led the
run by electricity. Paper mill needs
government to encourage people to grow
electricity for operating its machines. For
subabul trees on farmland. Now-a-days,
example, the paper mill shown in the picture
paper mills bring wood from distant places.
requires nearly 25 Mega Watt every year.
More than half of the electricity
 What are the most important raw
requirement is met through the factory’s
materials for the paper industry?
own power generators. Besides electricity,
 Would you consider electricity as
the mill requires a large quantity of clean
a raw material? Give reasons.
water throughout the year.
 Discuss with your teacher about a
few mills or factories you know
and fill in the table.
S.No. Product Name of the industry Raw Material
1 Shoe/Chappel Footwear industry Leather / rubber / canvas
2
3
4
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Production in a Factory - A Paper Mill 85

--- PAGE 94 ---
www.apteachers.in
 Do you think that if we use
more paper, we need to cut
more forests or reduce the
area under cultivation?
Discuss..
When we visited the paper
mill, we found 4-5 lorries with
loads of subabul wood waiting
outside the mill gate. Only after
9.30 am, they would be allowed
to enter the mill. There were
separate gates – one for the
workers and the other large gate
Fig 9.3 lorry lifter
for the vehicles. We had prior
uses different machines and raw materials.
permission from the paper mill authorities
The stages are as follows:
to visit the paper mill. We entered our
names in the register at the security room (i) Chipping: In this stage, large wood
near the gate and went into the mill. Later pieces are cut into small chips with the help
of large machines. They can cut a lorry load
lorries also entered the mill.
of wood into chips in about 30 minutes.
Process of Paper-making
There are about 15 to 20 workers in this
Inside the factory section. The chips are separated according
compound we saw a lifter to the size. The big chips are again cut into
crane lifting subabul wood small chips. Work goes in this way
from a lorry and placing it throughout the day. Can you imagine how
on an iron platform. A many trees have to be cut to run a paper
conveyor belt took the
mill for just one day i.e. 24 hours?
wood to the cutting
(ii) Making of wood pulp: The small
machine. Paper is actually
wood chips are sent to fibre line section.
made in five stages. This paper mill had
In this section, the wood chips are boiled
separate sections for each stage, which
Fig 9.4 Labourer at chipping machine Fig 9.5 Labourers at setting machine
86 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 95 ---
www.apteachers.in
Work in Batches
The paper in the form of rolls
and sheets is preserved in
godowns. Each roll is labeled with
Batch / Lot no., weight etc. What
is a batch? When a lorry load of
wood is brought into the factory,
the entire wood is given a batch
number. This batch is then sent to
different sections one after the
Fig 9.6 Pulping machine (Fiber line) other. Raw material of one batch
would be processed together at each stage.
with some chemicals in large vessels.
For example, when batch No. 201 is being
Through this process, the wood chips are
cut into small pieces, at the same time the
turned into a pulp of thin fibres (like cotton
previous batch (No. 200) would be in the
fibres). The liquid pulp is then whitened
section for making pulp and batch No. 199
using chemicals. Then it becomes creamy.
would be in the spreading section and so
We found the liquid pulp in milky white
on. As soon as No. 201 is cut into pieces it
colour without any dust.
would be sent to the next section and No.
(iii) Spreading the pulp: The liquid pulp
202 would come up for cutting into pieces.
is spread on thin screens over a cylinder.
Papers produced in one batch would have
This is an important stage as the width,
the same inputs and processing, so their
length and thickness of the paper is set at
quality will be the same. The batch system
this stage. The pulp dries up as the water
allows a factory to produce continuously
drains out and evaporates due to heat. Once
throughout the day. It also allows the
this is done, the pulp is forwarded through
managers to trace any mistake in the product
the conveyer belt.
by checking what went wrong with the
(iv) Pressing, drying and rolling: The
particular batch.
drying pulp is pressed by rollers to
Working Hours and Shifts
smoothen it. When the pulp dries up
completely, we get a sheet of paper, which This paper mill runs all 24 hours in a day.
is then rolled up. The workers work in three shifts of eight
hours each. They are ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ shifts.
(v) Cutting: The paper is cut in the
In each shift about 800-900 workers are at
cutting machines according to the size
work.
required. Paper is made into rolls and sheets
A Shift: 6 AM to 2 PM
as well. It is then packed and sent to
B Shift: 2 PM to 10 PM
godowns.
C Shift: 10 PM to 6 AM (Night Shift)
Production takes place continuously in
Night shift workers get a special
all sections simultaneously.
allowance. Workers change their shift
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Production in a Factory - A Paper Mill 87

--- PAGE 96 ---
www.apteachers.in
cyclically. Workers of each shift have to
 Why is there a security guard at the
move from A shift to B and then to C every
gate? Enact how the watchman
week. There is also a general shift for the
behaves. Who does he allow/ not
administrative staff which is from 9.30 am
allow?
to 5 pm. Administrative staff look after the
management, accounts, trade and sales of Working in Paper Mill
the product, workers’ welfare activities etc.
A factory employs a large number of
Selling the Paper workers of different kinds - some work on
machines, some help them, some take care
This paper mill has marketing depots in
of electrical fittings, some help in
different cities. It also sells papers in other
transporting the materials, etc. Some of
countries such as Sri Lanka, Bangladesh,
them are highly qualified like engineers
Nepal, Malaysia, Singapore, Nigeria and
while others may have education from ITI
South Africa. The paper is sold through
and polytechnic colleges. Still others may
these depots.
be illiterate doing manual work like
Developed railways and roadways make
cleaning. A factory also employs people on
it is easy to transport wood and paper to
different terms and conditions.
and from the mill.
Some are regular ‘permanent’ workers
of the factory, while some others may be
 Why is it necessary to put the Label
employed as casual workers when the need
/ Batch no. on the paper rolls?
arises; still others are employed as contract
 Why do you think the paper mill workers. Let us look at this in detail.
works round the clock? Compare
Anand is a permanent worker in the paper
this with agricultural field work.
mill. You can see him in his uniform - blue
 Fill in the blanks in the flow chart
shirt and khaki pant in the pressing section.
given below:
Liquid
Wood is Wood is
wood pulp
brought cut into
is cleaned
into the small
and colours
mill. chips
added
Pressing,
rolling,
and
finishing
88 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 97 ---
www.apteachers.in
He has been working in this mill for Umar is not a permanent worker but he
more than 10 years and he is getting Rs. comes daily and works in the factory. He
15,000 per month. As a regular employee, is a contract labourer. He is usually asked
he gets a number of benefits like Provident to help in unloading the trucks or in packing
Fund (paid when he retires from service), and loading the paper. Last year, a labour
medical insurance, etc. Also, if for any
contractor came to his village in
reason his employment is terminated, or
Maharashtra and promised him a job in this
if he cannot work due to any accident, he
mill. Workers like Umar are paid a lower
will be paid compensation by the factory.
salary than permanent workers (about
He will also get a raise every year. If he or
Rs.8000 a month). They do not get
his family member becomes sick, he takes
allowances or medical help or bonus or
them to nearby Employees State Insurance
paid holidays. However, they get work
(ESI) dispensary and gets medicines free
throughout the year and may become
of cost. He pays a small amount and the
permanent workers after two or three years.
paper mill pays some amount for availing
this facility. Anand gets regular holidays –
The women who work in this factory
one day every week, festivals, and some
usually clean the floors and paste lables on
additional leaves. He is also given
the paper packets. Pushpa is working as a
allowances to buy uniform and also to get
casual worker in this factory. Workers who
it washed. In due course, Anand gets bonus
are employed off and on are called ‘Casual
too, an additional amount paid to workers
Workers.’ Pushpa comes every morning to
when the paper mill earns profits. There are
the factory to see if there is work. Usually
about 1800 such permanent workers in the
they employ her for four or five days in a
mill.
week to clean the floors of the factory. In
the section where wood is
chipped, there is a lot of
wood dust and chips all
over the floor. All this has
to be cleaned and the
machines are to be dusted
properly. She is paid about
Rs.100-150 on a daily
basis. Though she has been
working for more than
three years, she earns
only Rs. 2500 a month.
She is not eligible for
any of the facilities that
are available to permanent
Fig 9.7 Paper cutting machine
workers like Anand.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Production in a Factory - A Paper Mill 89

--- PAGE 98 ---
www.apteachers.in
Usually factory owners
try to reduce their costs by
employing casual workers
even for regular work.
Sometimes they bring new
machines which require
fewer workers. In such
situations, the workers and
their unions resort to
agitations and then bargain
with the managers to
improve their lot.
Besides the workers,
the mill employs a number
Fig 9.8 Inside the factory
of accountants, clerks and
managers who are paid better salaries. The
Who Owns the Paper Mill?
senior managers who are usually from the
families of the owners of the mill get very
This mill does not have any one owner.
high salaries along with a number of
Some people got together to form a
allowances like free housing and free
company which owns this mill. These
education for children.
people invested large amounts of money
 Fill the table comparing Anand, and also borrowed money from the banks
Umar and Pushpa:
S.No. Name Work Experience Income Other Benefits
1 Anand
2 Umar
3 Pushpa
to set up this factory. They appoint the
 Why do you think a factory employs
managers, other administrative staff and
people on different terms
regular employees. The workers, managers
- regular, temporary and casual
and administrative staff are paid salaries but
labourers?
not the owners. The owners share amongst
 What are the problems of the
themselves whatever is left after paying
temporary/casual workers ?
wages and other costs of running this paper
 Why do you think people from
mill. That is, they get all the profits from
faraway places come to work in the
the factory. They also bear the loss, if any.
paper mill in Andhra Pradesh?
90 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 99 ---
www.apteachers.in
Can you summarise the main Pollution
features of factory production
When we were going to the other
using the following points?
side of the paper mill, we felt some
1. Machines: unpleasant smell in the area. This was
due to the use of chemicals. After
2. Raw Materials:
coming out of the paper mill, we talked
3. Energy and Water:
to a few residents living nearby. They
4. Production: said this stench was usual and it was
common to find dust released from the
5. Workers:
industry settle on the leaves of plants,
6. Managers:
on the farm, trees in the nearby area and
7. Market: on garden plants. The mill also draws a
lot of fresh water from the river but lets
8. Owners:
out waste water containing poisonous
chemicals, which eventually joins the
Some factories are owned not by
river.
individual owners or group of owners but
Only last year, the paper mill got an
by the government. These are run by the
effluent treatment plant to which all the
government for the welfare of all people
waste water is sent. This machine
Most factories need raw materials in removes contaminants (substances
such large quantities that natural resources causing harm to living organisms
like forests, rivers and mines are rapidly through air, water, soil and food) and
produce environmentally safe water
exhausted. They also give out smoke;
(treated effluent) and solid waste
pollute the rivers and surrounding land with
suitable for disposal or reuse (which is
their chemical effluents. Thus, there is a
normally used as a fertilizer). Besides
need to develop methods to control the
this, the paper mills use treated effluent
damage they cause to the environment. to water their gardens.
Some farmers use this
Factories provide employment to a large
for irrigation too.
number of people. However, the workers
There are a large
who work in these factories often find the
number of factories in
work very tedious and many of them our state and country,
which produce diverse
become sick due to exposure to dust and
articles of use. They
chemicals. They also get paid very little.
produce them in large quantities in a
They are also often forced to live in slums short time.
with poor facilities.
One of the major challenges before us
is to find out how to balance our need for
various kinds of goods and the ill effects
of the factory system and how to make the
life of workers comfortable and dignified.
Fig 9.9 Rolls of papers
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Production in a Factory - A Paper Mill 91

--- PAGE 100 ---
www.apteachers.in
Key words : 5. Allowance
6. Bonus
1. Platform
7. Pollution
2. Conveyor belt
8. Working hours
3. Fibre line
9. Raw material
4. Label
Improve your learning
1. Imagine that you wish to start a leather or textile factory. What are the aspects you will have to
consider for setting up a mill? AS
1
2. Explain the process of paper-making in your own words. AS
1
3. Do you think this paper mill will stop working one day? If it does, what will be the impact on
the labourers’ lives? AS
4
4. Fill in the following table AS
1
Shift Timings
A
B
C
5. Imagine a world without paper. What alternatives will you use instead of paper? AS
4
6. What are your suggestions to stop pollution caused by industries? AS
4
7. Organise a debate in the classroom on the pros and cons of the paper mill. AS
1
8. List the benefits and income received by a regular employee of the paper mill. Contrast them
with that of a temporary employee and a casual worker. AS
1
9. Compare the production of baskets by craftspersons and production of paper with reference
to the following points: (i) Workplace (ii) Tools/machines (iii) raw materials (iv)Workers (v)
Market (vi) Owners. AS
1
10.There is a paper mill at Rajahmundry in East Godavari District. Why do you think it is not
established in the district headquarters? Discuss. AS
1
11.Locate the following countries in the world map. AS
5
a) Sri Lanka b) Singapore c) Nigeria
d) South Africa e) Nepal f) Malaysia g) Bangladesh
12.Read the third para of page 91. Do you think that the factories are taking care of their workers
health? Why? AS
2
Project:
You might have noticed some factories in your area causing pollution. Or imagine that a factory in your
locality is causing pollution. Write a letter to the editor of a local newspaper and discuss the contents in
the classroom
92 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 101 ---
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Importance of Transport System 93
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
10
Importance of Transport
System
In our daily life, we use various vehicles to go from one place to
another. How people use transport facilities, roads, waterways,
railways and airports and why people make choices to use transport
services are discussed in this chapter. Besides these, why and how
people depend on transport for their source of earning and how markets
use transport are also discussed. You will learn more about other
means of transport such as railways, waterways and airports in higher
classes
You already know a lot about transport systems.
 Fill the table below with given words. Some words could be placed in more than one
place, and give reasons for choosing to put the word in a column.
Pilgrims, Car, Fish, Cattle, Grain, Bullock-cart, Petroleum, Workers, Ship,
Helicopter, Tanker, Lorry, Cycle, Tourists, Iron-ore, Goods Train, Mangoes .
Mode of Vehicles Some products/groups of people –
Transport used that could be using
Roads
Railways
Waterways
Airways
National Highways built across different
Transport System in Andhra
states in the country. For instance, a road
Pradesh
network called National Highway No.7 (or
If we look for a big picture about the
44) runs through Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
transport system in the state, we would note
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Telangana, Andhra
the following :
Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. While
Roads: In India, most roads are built and Andhra Pradesh state government maintains
maintained by government. Roads are of roads connecting small towns and districts,
different types. Some roads are called Panchayats are responsible for village roads

--- PAGE 102 ---
www.apteachers.in
many of which are made of gravel. In 2001, nearly three fourth of the villages
Corporations and Municipalities are had transport facilities.
responsible for urban roads. Roads laid along In earlier chapters, there were
international boundaries are called border roads. descriptions about farmers, fisher folk, and
Roadways play an important role in integrating industries, which depend upon transport for
people in remote areas with main cities. various reasons. Farmers want to take their
Railways: One fifth of travellers in produce to Rythu Bazar. Fisher folk want
India use trains. Railways are mainly used to make the catch reach the buyer before it
to transport goods like coal, iron ore, gets spoiled. Paper industry uses lorries to
fertilizers, cement, food grains etc. In bring their raw material. Industries that
Andhra Pradesh, there are nearly 650 produce goods depend on transport systems
Railway stations and Railway routes of to reach consumers. Let us take the
about 5000 km. Railways transport goods example of cotton. Cotton produced by
to and from sea ports. Seaports are crucial farmers moves from fields to factories.
as most of our foreign trade is done Since there are different processes through
through them. which cloth is produced, it has to move
Airways: There are six domestic from one place to another until the finished
airports in Andhra Pradesh - Visakhapatnam, product is made. Markets are thus
Tirupathi (Renigunta), Rajamundry, dependent on transport facilities.
Vijayawada (Gannavaram), Puttaparthi and
 Read the following and solve the
Kadapa. The International Airport is for
problem given below:
travel from Andhra Pradesh to foreign
Farmers residing in Punniapalli sell
countries. Domestic airports connect
their paddy mostly in the nearby town
places within India.
Nayudupet which is about 7 km away
Waterways: Almost all goods traded by
from the village. Bullock cart
Indian traders are transported to other
operators can transport about 10 paddy
countries through ports. Port cities or towns
bags at a time and charge Rs. 50 per
are thus major trading centres. Andhra
bag. Tractor owners charge Rs. 20 per
Pradesh has 15 ports out of which
bag. Each tractor can carry about 30-
Visakhapatnam is the largest one. Rivers such
40 bags. Lorries charge Rs.10 per bag
as the Godavari, the Krishna and the Penna
and can carry about 150 -170 bags in a
and their canals are used as waterways.
trip. In the case of long distances,
trucks charge more. For example, to
 Locate the airports, and port cities
transport paddy from a wholesale
of Andhra Pradesh on a map.
trader in Nayudupet to Martur in
Use of Roads for production Prakasam district, which is about 100-
and sale of goods 120 kms away truck operators charge
Rs. 50 per bag. They charge Rs. 800-
Most people in Andhra Pradesh depend
1000 per tonne to transport goods for
on roads for travel. Transport facilities
500 kilometres.
available to villages in Andhra Pradesh vary.
94 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 103 ---
www.apteachers.in
day. These employees
There are three farmers in a village.
maintain accounts,
They cultivated paddy and produced 25
repair buses, or work in
bags, 50 bags and 75 bags respectively. bus depots. Some
They wish to sell their paddy in the employees issue bus
passes and tickets in
Vyavasaya MarketYard in a nearby
bus stands or work as
town, which is 25 kilometres away.
checking inspectors.
What mode of transport would you
Nearly one crore vehicles are running
suggest and why? on Andhra Pradesh roads and about three
fourth of them are two wheelers. The
functioning of transport system also
requires many support activities – petrol/
diesel pump stations, repairing shops, shops
selling transport vehicles and spare parts.
Fig 10.1 Railway workers
Employment in Transport
Activities
In every bus two people work – adriver
and a conductor. For maintenance of Fig 10.2 Transporting Animals
transport, hundreds and thousands of people
 Find out the fares for travelling in
are required. For example, the Andhra
the following types of buses and
Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation
time taken to travel between any two
employs 1,20,000 persons to run its
locations you are familiar with.
20,000 buses all over Andhra Pradesh
carrying more than 1.25 crore people every
Type of bus Fare Time taken
Pallevelugu / Gramani
Express
Deluxe
 Do you think differences in these fares are justified? Give reasons.
 Along with the difference in the fares, there are also differences in facilities and
journey time. However, in your opinion how would most people prefer to travel? If
you were responsible for increasing the facilities in them, which type of bus would
you give preference to?
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Importance of Transport System 95

--- PAGE 104 ---
www.apteachers.in
Transport Services and Choices persons who use wheelchairs cannot use
People could use a particular mode of them and take the risk of riding them along
transport depending on the facilities the motorised vehicles.
available and affordability. Sometimes
options to use different types of transport
are possible. For example, it is possible to
travel by bus, train or flight to Pakistan. For
centuries, ships were an important mode
of travel to far away countries to take
people as well as goods. But today there
are fewer people travelling by ships,
whereas goods are mostly transported by
them.
Fig 10.3 Urban Transport in Vijayawada
It is possible that some of you come to
school by buses. People who are employed
in factories, offices, households, shops etc.
also depend on transport. Every city may
not have public transport like buses, so
people depend on their own vehicles or
hired vehicles like auto-rickshaws or
taxies.
If the cost of travel is high, people may
not be able to move from one place to
another. For example, if the wages in one Fig 10.4 Old and new modes of transport
place are higher than in another place,
 Krishna and Ibrahim study in a
people earning low incomes may wish to
school in the same class. They live
move to get higher incomes. But if the
at different places but the distance
transport cost is high, they may not show
from their house to school is three
interest in moving to that place.
kilometers. Ibrahim comes to
The cost of travel, especially for the
school in city bus whereas Krishna
people who earn low incomes, is too much,
travels by school bus. What could be
as they have to put away a larger share of
reasons for families of these
their wages for it. Cycling and walking may
students to travel by different bus
not be possible to travel long distances. In
services?
big cities, it also becomes important to
have enough place for people to walk or
Congestion and Pollution
ride a cycle. Even when there are pavements,
Most cities in our country are now
you may find them occupied by
experiencing congestion, and traffic
shopkeepers. Sometimes the height of the
blocks. If there is no good public transport
road and pavement could be so different that
96 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 105 ---
www.apteachers.in
system, people buy private vehicles, celebrate Road Safety
which can further increase the traffic Week. On this occasion,
blocks in urban areas because the roads may they give guidelines to the
not be broad enough to accommodate all people to follow traffic
these vehicles. Let us try to understand this rules. The government-run
companies such as the
with an example. The number of people
Andhra Pradesh State
living in six big cities in India increased by
Road Transport Corpora tion conduct
two times during 1981 to 2001 whereas the
awareness campaigns among drivers and
number of motor vehicles went up by eight
give them training to drive safely. They also
times during the same period.
go to schools, organise essay writing, debate
Motorcycles and cars are used in a big and other competitions for students and
way. This has led to use encourage them to travel safely following
of more petrol and traffic rules. Every person using transport
diesel, which increase system – roads, railways or airways and those
air pollution. To reduce working in them are required to follow
specific safety rules. This will reduce the
pollution we should
deaths, injuries and other casualties occuring
consume less of these
due to transport.
petroleum products.
Public transport can help
in this aspect as they carry
more people with minimum
cost.
Travelling safety
Road travel now-a-days has
become more risky. The road
Fig 10.5 A train that climbs
accidents, deaths, and injuries
the mountain in Ooty
affect low income families as
many of those killed or injured
tend to be cyclists, pedestrians
or pavement dwellers.
Accidents can occur not on roads alone. The  Contact the nearest traffic police
risk is in other means of transport too. In
or driving school in your locality
places where roads and railways cross(level
or a person who has a driving
crossing), there are often gates to stop the
licence. Discuss how drivers are
vehicles while the trains are passing. These
trained. Identify the details of
are called railway gates. However, if there
are no such gates at level crossings, it is things displayed in the driving
important for people and vehicles to stop school premises.
and look in both directions before crossing
 Discuss basic rules and regulations
the railway line.
in using roads and how to travel
Road Safety Week safely on roads. In your classroom
display rules regarding traffic.
First week of every year, the Road
Transport departments all over the country
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Importance of Transport System 97

--- PAGE 106 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 10.7 Gannavaram Airport
Fig 10.6 Visakhapatnam port
Key words :
1. Safety travelling 2. Roadways 3. Airways
4. Waterways 5. Railways 6. National Highway
7. State Highway 8. Village / Rural roads 9. Urban roads
10. Border roads 11. APSRTC 12. Congestion
Improve your learning
1. How is the transport system essential for producing agricultural goods? Illustrate with an
example. AS
1
2. How is the use of buses different from trains? AS
1
3. Why is it important to provide transport facilities to villages? AS
1
4. Why do you think waterways are important for a country? AS
1
5. How does the transport system become a means for livelihood? AS
6
6. What will happen if there is a rise in transport cost for goods made in factories? Illustrate with an
example. AS
1
7. Write a few slogans ‘Prevention of accidents’. AS
6
8. Congestion and traffic blocks are occurring due to the use of vehicles in a big way. What measures
do you suggest to prevent this? AS
4
Discussion :
Organise a demonstration/discussion with the police inspector/constable to the students on the topic
“Road accidents-preventive measures.”
Project:
Interact with a driver working in transport and obtain information on the dangers and other aspects
of his job.
98 Production Exchange and Livelihoods

--- PAGE 107 ---
New Kings and Kingdoms
Many new dynasties emerged after the
seventh century. Map 1 shows the major
ruling dynasties in different parts of the
subcontinent between the seventh and
twelfth centuries.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. New Kings and Kingdoms 99
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
11
PART - I
 Locate the Gurjara-Pratiharas,
Rashtrakutas, Palas, Cholas and
Chahamanas (Chauhans).
 Can you identify the present day
states over which they exercised
control?
Map 1: Major
kingdoms during
seventh-twelfth
centuries

--- PAGE 108 ---
www.apteachers.in
The Emergence of New Karnataka. In the mid-eighth century,
Dantidurga, a Rashtrakuta chief, overthrew
Dynasties
his Chalukya overlord and performed a
By the seventh century, there were big
ritual called hiranya-garbha (literally, the
landlords or warrior chiefs in different
golden womb). When this ritual was
regions of the subcontinent. Existing kings
performed with the help of brahmins, it was
often acknowledged them as their
thought to lead to the “rebirth” of the
subordinates or samanthas. They were
sacrificer as a Kshatriya, even if he was not
expected to bring gifts for their kings or
one by birth.
overlords, be present at their courts and
 Do you think being born as a
provide them with military support. As
Kshatriya was important in order
samanthas gained power and wealth, they
to become a ruler during this
declared themselves to be maha-
period?
samantha, maha mandaleshvara (the
great lord of a “circle” or region) and so
In other cases, men from enterprising
on. Sometimes they asserted their
families used their military skills to carve
independence from their overlords.
out kingdoms. For instance, the Kadamba
One such instance was that of the
Mayurasharman and the Gurjara-Pratihara
Rashtrakutas in the Deccan. Initially they
Harichandra were brahmins who gave up
were subordinate to the Chalukyas of
their traditional professions and took to
arms, successfully establishing
kingdoms in Karnataka and
Rajasthan respectively.
Prashastis and Land
Grants
The invocation part of an
inscription is Prashasti.
Prashastis contain details about
the ruling family such as their
predecessors and the period to
which they belonged. They also
contain exaggerated accounts of
rulers and their achievements. But
they tell us how rulers wanted to
depict themselves as, for example
valiant, victorious warriors. These
were composed by learned
Fig 11.1 Wall relief from Cave 15, Ellora, brahmins, who occasionally helped
showing Vishnu as Narasimha, the man-lion. It
in the administration.
is a work of the Rashtrakuta period
100 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 109 ---
www.apteachers.in
The “achievements” of Kings often rewarded brahmins by grants
of land. These were recorded on copper
Nagabhata
plates, which were given to those who
Many rulers described their
received the land.
achievements in prashastis.
In the twelfth century a long Sanskrit
One prashasti, written in Sanskrit and poem containing the history of kings who
found in Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh, ruled over Kashmir, was composed by an
describes the exploits of Nagabhata, a author named Kalhana. He used a variety
Pratihara king, as follows: of sources, including inscriptions,
The kings of Andhra, Saindhava (Sind), documents, eyewitness accounts and
Vidarbha (part of Maharashtra) and Kalinga earlier histories, to write his account.
(part of Odisha) fell before him Even as a Unlike the writers of prashastis, he was
prince … often critical about rulers and their
policies.
he won a war over
Chakrayudha (the ruler of
What was given with the land?
Kanauj) …
This is a part of the Tamil section of a
He defeated the king
land grant given by the Cholas:
of Vanga (part of Bengal),
We have demarcated the boundaries of
Anarta (part of Gujarat),
the land by making earthen embankments,
Malva (part of Madhya Pradesh), Kirata
as well as by planting thorny bushes.
(forest peoples), Turushka (Turks), Vatsa,
This is what the land contains: fruit-
Matsya (both kingdoms in north India)
bearing trees, water, land, gardens and
Find these areas in Map 1.
orchards, trees, wells, open spaces, pasture-
land, a village, anthills, platforms, canals,
ditches, rivers, silt-laden land, tanks,
granaries, fish ponds, bee hives, and deep
lakes.
He who receives the land can collect
taxes from it. He can collect the taxes
imposed by judicial officers as fines, and
the tax on betel- leaves, woven cloth,
vehicles, etc.
He can build large rooms, with upper
storeys made of baked bricks, he can get
large and small wells dug, he can plant trees
Fig 11.2 This is a set of copper plates recording a grant and thorny bushes, if necessary, he can get
of land made by a ruler in the ninth century, written
canals constructed for irrigation. He should
partly in Sanskrit and partly in Tamil. The ring holding
the plates together is secured with the royal seal, to ensure that water is not wasted, and that
indicate that this is an authentic document
embankments are built.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. New Kings and Kingdoms 101

--- PAGE 110 ---
www.apteachers.in
 List all the possible sources of Warfare for Wealth
irrigation mentioned in the
You may have noticed that each of these
inscription, and discuss how they
ruling dynasties was based in a specific
might have been used.
region. At the same time, they tried to
control other areas. One particularly prized
Administration in the Kingdoms
area was the city of Kanauj in the Ganga
Many of these new kings adopted high- valley. For centuries, rulers belonging to
sounding titles such as maharaja-adhiraja the Gurjara-Pratihara, Rashtrakuta and Pala
(great king, overlord of kings), dynasties fought for control over Kanauj.
tribhuvana-chakravarti (lord of the three As there were three “parties” in this long-
worlds) and so on. However, in spite of drawn conflict, historians often describe it
such claims, they often shared power with as the “tripartite struggle”.
their samanthas as well as with
Look at Map 1 and suggest reasons
associations of peasants, traders and
why the rulers wanted to control Kanauj
brahmins.
and the Ganga valley.
In each of these kingdoms, resources
were obtained from the producers – that Mahmud Ghazni :
is, peasants, cattle-keepers, artisans – who
One of the rulers,
were often persuaded or compelled to
Sultan Mahmud of
surrender a part of what they produced. Ghazni, Afghanistan,
Sometimes these were claimed as “rent” ruled ruled from 997 AD
due to a lord who asserted that he owned to 1030 AD, and
extended control over
the land. Revenue was also collected from
parts of Central Asia, Iran
traders.
and the north-western part of the
These resources were used to finance the
subcontinent. He raided the subcontinent
king’s establishment, as well as for the almost every year – his targets were
construction of temples and forts. They were wealthy temples, including that of Somnath,
Gujarat. Much of the wealth Mahmud
also used to fight wars, which were in turn
carried away was used to create a splendid
expected to lead to the acquisition of wealth
capital city at Ghazni.
in the form of plunder, and access to land as
Sultan Mahmud was also interested in
well as trade routes.
finding out more about the people he
The functionaries for collecting conquered, and entrusted a scholar named
al-Biruni to write an account of the
revenue were generally recruited from
subcontinent. This Arabic work, known as
influential families, and positions were
the Kitab al-Hind, is an important source
often hereditary. This was true about the
for historians. Al-Biruni consulted Sanskrit
army as well. In many cases, close relatives scholars to prepare this account.
of the king held these positions.
Chahamanas
Chahamanas, later known as the
 In what ways was this form of
Chauhans, ruled over the region around
administration different from the
Delhi and Ajmer. They attempted to expand
present day system?
their control to the west and the east, where
102 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 111 ---
www.apteachers.in
they were opposed by the Chalukyas of
Look at Map 1 again and discuss why
Gujarat and the Gahadavalas of western
the Chahamanas may have wanted to
Uttar Pradesh. The best-known Chahamana
expand their territories.
ruler was Prithviraja III (1168 AD-1192
AD), who defeated an Afghan ruler named
Sultan Muhammad Ghori in 1191 AD, but
lost to him the very next year, in 1192 AD.
PART - II
The Cholas From Uraiyur to Thanjavur
How did the Cholas rise to power? A
Let us have a look at
minor chiefly-family known as the
South India now.
Muttaraiyar held power in the Kaveri delta.
Chola rule is one of the They were subordinates to the Pallava kings
well documented history of Kanchipuram. Vijayalaya, who belonged
in the South. Let us see to the ancient chiefly-family of the Cholas
how they became successful rulers. from Uraiyur, captured the delta from the
Muttaraiyar in the
middle of the ninth
century. He built the
town of Thanjavur and
a temple for goddess
Nishumbhasudini
there.
The successors of
Vijayalaya conquered
neighbouring regions
and the kingdom grew
in size and power. The
Pandyan and the
Pallava territories to
the south and north
were made part of this
kingdom. Rajaraja I,
considered the most
powerful Chola ruler,
became the king in
985 AD and expanded
Free DistMribaupti o2n: b Ty hGeo vCt.h oofl Aa .Pk.ingdom and its neighbours New Kings and Kingdoms 103

--- PAGE 112 ---
www.apteachers.in
specialists who
worked at the
temple and very
often lived near
it – priests,
garland makers,
cooks, sweepers,
m u s i c i a n s ,
dancers, etc. In
other words,
temples were
not only places
of worship, but
also the hub of
e c o n o m i c ,
social and
Fig 11.3 The temple at Gangaikonda-
cultural life as
Cholapuram. Notice the way in which the roof
well.
tapers. Also, look at the elaborate stone
sculptures used to decorate the outer walls Amongst the
Fig 11.4 A Chola bronze
crafts associated sculpture.
his control over most of these areas. He
with temples, the Notice how carefully it is
also reorganised the administration of the
making of decorated
empire. Rajaraja’s son Rajendra I continued
bronze images
his policies and even raided the Ganga
was the most distinctive. Chola bronze
valley, Sri Lanka and countries of Southeast
images are considered to be the finest in
Asia, developing a navy for these
the world. While most images were of
expeditions.
deities, some images of devotees were
Splendid Temples and Bronze Sculpture made as well.
The big temples of Agriculture and Irrigation
Thanjavur and Gangai
Many of the achievements of the Cholas
konda-Cholapuram, built
were made possible through new
by Rajaraja and Rajendra,
developments in agriculture. Look at Map 2
are architectural and
again. Notice that the river Kaveri branches
sculptural marvels.
off into several small streams before
Chola temples often became the nuclei emptying into the Bay of Bengal. These
of settlements which grew around them. streams overflow frequently, depositing
These were centres of craft production. fertile soil on their banks. Water from the
Temples were also endowed with land by streams also provides the necessary
rulers as well as by others. The produce of moisture for agriculture, particularly the
this land went into maintaining all the cultivation of rice.
104 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 113 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 11.5 A ninth century sluice gate in Tamil Nadu. It regulated the
outflow of water from a tank into the channels that irrigated the fields
Although agriculture had developed took an active interest in these activities.
earlier in other parts of Tamil Nadu, it was
The Administration of the Empire
only from the fifth or sixth century that this
How was the
area was opened up for large-scale
administra tion organi
cultivation. Forests had to be cleared in
sed? The king had a
some regions; land had to be levelled in
council of ministers to
other areas. In the delta region
help him. He had a strong
embankments had to be built to prevent army and navy. The
flooding and canals had to be constructed empire was divided into
mandalams or provinces,
to carry water to the fields. In many areas,
further sub-divided into valanadus and
two crops were grown in a year.
nadus.
In many cases, it was necessary to water Settlements of peasants, known as ur,
crops artificially. A variety of methods became prosperous with the spread of
irrigated agriculture Groups of such
were used for irrigation. In some areas wells
villages formed larger units called nadu.
were dug. In other places, huge tanks were
The village council and the nadu performed
constructed to collect rainwater.
several administrative functions including
Remember that irrigation works require
dispensing justice and collecting taxes.
planning – organising labour and resources,
Rich peasants of the Vellala caste
maintaining these works and deciding on exercised considerable control over the
how water is to be shared. Most of the new affairs of the nadu under the supervision
of the central Chola government. The Chola
rulers, as well as people living in villages,
kings gave some rich landowners titles like
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. New Kings and Kingdoms 105

--- PAGE 114 ---
www.apteachers.in
Inscriptions from Uttaramerur in
muvendavelan (a velan or peasant serving
Chingelput district, Tamil Nadu, provide
three kings), araiyar (chief), etc. as
details of the way in which the sabha was
markers of respect, and entrusted them with
organised. The sabha had separate
important offices of the state at the centre.
committees to look after irrigation works,
Types of land gardens, temples, etc. Names of those
eligible to be members of these
Chola inscriptions mention several committees were written on small tickets
categories of land: of palm leaf; these tickets were put into an
vellanvagai earthenware pot, from which a young boy
was asked to take out the tickets, one by
land of non-brahmin proprietors
one for each committee.
brahmadeya
Inscriptions and texts
land gifted to brahmins
Who could be a member of a sabha?
shalabhoga
The Uttaramerur inscription lays down:
land for the maintenance of a school
All those who wish to become members
devadana, tirunamattukkani
of the sabha should be owners of land
land gifted to temples from which land revenue is collected.
pallichchhandam They should have their own homes.
land donated to Jaina institutions
They should be between 35 and 70 years
of age.
We have seen that brahmins often re-
They should have the knowledge of the
ceived land grants or brahmadeya. As a
Vedas.
result, a large number of Brahmana
settlements emerged in the Kaveri valley They should be well-versed in
as in other parts of south India. administrative matters and be honest.
If anyone has been a member of any
Each brahmadeya was looked after by
committee in the last three years, he cannot
an assembly or sabha of prominent
become a member of another committee.
Brahmana landholders. These assemblies
Anyone who has not submitted his
worked very efficiently. Their decisions
accounts,including his relatives, cannot
were recorded in detail in inscriptions,
contest the elections.
often on the stone walls of temples.
Associations of traders known as  Do you think women participated
nagarams also occasionally performed in these assemblies? In your view,
administrative functions in towns. are lotteries useful for choosing
members of committees?
106 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 115 ---
www.apteachers.in
While inscriptions tell us about kings (plural) to their day’s work; and by day,
and powerful men, here is an excerpt under the shade of the kanji tree spread
from the Periyapuranam, a twelfth- the voice of the wavy-haired Pulaiya
century Tamil work, which informs us women singing as they were husking
about the lives of ordinary men and paddy …
women.
On the outskirts of Adanur was a small
Describe all the activities that were
hamlet of Pulaiyas, studded with small
taking place in the village.
huts under old thatches and inhabited by
agrarian labourers engaged in menial
Key words :
occupations. In the thresholds of the huts
1. Samantha
covered with strips of leather, little
chickens moved about in groups; dark 2. Temple 3. Nadu
children who wore bracelets of black iron
4. Sabha 5. Kingdom 6. Sultan
were prancing about, carrying little
puppies … In the shade of the marudu Project:
(arjuna) trees, a female labourer put her
1. Look at Map 1 and find out whether
baby to sleep on a sheet of leather; there there were any kingdoms in Andhra
were mango trees from whose branches Pradesh.
drums were hanging; and under the 2. Compare the temple shown in this
coconut palms, in little hollows on the chapter with any present-day temple
in your neighbourhood
ground, tiny-headed female dogs lay after
3. Find out more about taxes that are
whelping. The red-crested cocks crowed
collected at present. Are these in
before dawn calling the brawny Pulaiyar
cash, kind, or labour services?
Improve your learning
1. Who were the parties involved in the “tripartite struggle”? AS
1
2. What were the qualifications to be a member of a committee of the sabha in the Chola empire?AS
1
3. What were the two major cities under the control of the Chahamanas? AS
1
4. How did the Rashtrakutas become powerful? AS
1
5. What did the new dynasties do to gain acceptance? AS
1
6. What kind of irrigation works were developed in the Tamil region? AS
1
7. What were the activities associated with Chola temples? AS
1
8. Contrast the “elections” in Uttaramerur with the present-day panchayat elections. AS
4
9. Collect the pictures of ancient temples and make an album. AS
3
10. Read the first two paragraphs under the title ‘Agriculture and Irrigation’ from pages 104 and 105
and comment on them. AS
2
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. New Kings and Kingdoms 107

--- PAGE 116 ---
Fig 12.1 Kirti Torana entrance of
Svayambhu Siva Temple - built by Kakatiya
kings in Warangal.
108 Political Systems and Governance
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
12
The Kakatiyas - Emergence
of a Regional Kingdom
You may have listened to many ballads and stories about the bravery
and martial skill of Brahma Naidu and Balachandrudu. You may have
also participated in Jataras dedicated to Sammakka and Sarakka -
they fought against armies of kings to protect the rights of the tribal
people. You might have enjoyed the popular story of Katama Raju who
fought with the Kings of Nellore in defence of theright of animal herders.
We have a large number of inscriptions
 Find out from your parents and
which tell us about the activities of the
elders the stories of the Palnati
kings, queens, chiefs, farmers, herders and
Virulu, Sammakka-Sarakka and
traders. We also have a number books
Katama Raju. Relate these stories
written about them in Sanskrit and Telugu.
in the class.
Vidyanatha wrote Prathaparudra
Yashobhushanam during the Kakatiya rule.
All these stories relate to the period
Some works were also written after the end
from 1000 to 1350 AD. This was a very
of their rule (Vinukonda Vallabharaya’s
important period in our history. In the
Kridabhiramamu, Ekamranatha’s
previous chapter, we read about the new
Prataparudra Charitramu).
ruling families that emerged all over India.
These rulers sought to establish small
kingdoms over agricultural villages and to
enable their herder-followers to settle
down as agriculturalists. These ambitious
warriors and kings fought against each other
constantly. Amidst this situation arose the
Kakatiya kingdom in Warangal.
This was also the time when the first
books in Telugu were written. According
to tradition, Srimad-Andhra Mahabharatam
is the first poetic work in Telugu which was
composed by Kavitrayamu, the Trinity of
Poets - Nannaya, Tikkana and Erra Pragada
between 1000 and 1400 AD.

--- PAGE 117 ---
www.apteachers.in
 Having read the above Map 1: Warangal Fort
passage, can you tell which
are the two important
sources of information
about the Kakatiya kings?
Stone wall
According to inscriptions and and Moat
literature, the Kakatiyas traced
their lineage to certain Durjaya.
They also adopted Telugu as the
favoured language of the court.
Inner Rampart
Most of their inscriptions are in
Telugu and they called themselves
as ‘Andhra Rajas’. They also
sought to bring together the three
Outer Rampart
regions in which Telugu was
spoken - the coastal regions,
Telangana region and
Rayalaseema region. In this
manner the Kakatiya kings tried to
build a Telugu regional consciousness. To
over Anmakonda in Telangana. The
some extent, they were also successful as
Kakatiyas emerged as independent rulers
even to this day they are remembered
after the fall of Western Chalukyas.
fondly in this region.
During Rudradeva’s rule (1158-1195
Important Kakatiya Rulers
AD), the capital was shifted from
Anmakonda to Orugallu (Warangal). The
Prola II (1116 - 1157AD)
new city was laid out with a plan to
Rudradeva (1158 - 1195AD) accommodate the growing city population
and to address the needs of an imperial
Ganapati Deva (1199 - 1262AD)
capital. Rudradeva built a big fort, a tank
Rudramadevi (1262 - 1289AD) and a temple called Thousand Pillared
Temple in Anmakonda.
Prataparudra (1289 - 1323AD)
Look at the map of Warangal Fort. You
The early members of the dynasty began
can see an outer fort wall with four gates.
their career as warriors and samanthas of
This protected agricultural lands and
Rashtrakuta and Chalukya kings who were
several water tanks within it. In this area
ruling in Karnataka. They were holding the
were huts of many artisans like basket
posts of village heads called Rattadi and
weavers. After crossing these, we come to
through their military skills became army
the centre where there was another moat
chiefs, samanthas etc. and gained control
and a fort wall made of mud.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. The Kakatiyas - Emergence of a Regional Kingdom 109

--- PAGE 118 ---
www.apteachers.in
the samantha chiefs attempted to become
Further towards the centre was another
independent but the Kakatiya kings sent
moat and fort wall made of stone. The city
armies to subdue them.
buildings and palaces were within this stone
wall. It had four gates opening out into east, Rudrama Devi
west, north and south. From each gate, a main Have you heard of a brave woman ruler
road went to the centre of the city, where by the name of
there was a temple of Svayambhu Siva. This Rudramadevi? She was a
temple too had four gates in the four powerful and successful
directions. ruler who impressed one
and all with her abilities.
The city itself was divided into several
Rudramadevi ruled from
quarters or vadas. People of a profession
Orugallu (modern
lived in their own distinct vadas.
Warangal) and belonged to the famous
Kakatiya family. She ruled from 1262 AD
 Can you draw a rough map of your to 1289 AD for nearly 27 years. In our
country, there have been very few women
village or town and compare it with
rulers. In distant Delhi too, there was a
the map of Orugallu?
woman ruler called Raziya Sultana some
 What are the main differences years before. But her nobles did not like to
between modern towns and the be ruled by a woman and had killed her. A
cities of the past, like Orugallu? famous traveller from Italy, called Marco
Polo visited Rudramadevi’s kingdom and he
 Use the scale shown on the map to
says that she was fearless, dressed herself
find out the breadth of the outer wall
like a man and rode horses with ease. In
from East to West.
 Also, find out the breadth of the city
within the inner stone wall from
north to south.
 If you have ever been to Warangal,
describe it to your classmates.
 Svayambhu Siva was the family god
of the Kakatiyas. Why do you think
they built the temple and not a palace
or a market place in the middle of
the city?
As Kakatiya kings became powerful,
they were able to persuade many chiefs to
accept them as their Kings. The Kakatiyas
protected their samantha subordinates
from other warriors and chiefs. Also, they
took the samanthas with them when they
Fig 12.2 Rudramadevi - Riding the Horse.
went to conquer other kingdoms. Many of
110 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 119 ---
www.apteachers.in
fact, in her inscriptions Rudramadevi calls father, but Rudramadevi succeeded in
herself as Rudradeva Maharaja. Like Raziya subduing them. Rudrama and her grandson
Sultana, she too faced the opposition of many Prataparudra faced many revolts and took
important chiefs who had been under her several steps to control these chiefs.
Fig 12.3 A segment of the inner earthen wall with its (dry) moat at right
Fig 12.4 Aerial view of the eastern gateway in the city’s inner stone wall, showing
the ‘bent entrance’ (Vankadari) and open courtyard (anganam). The doorway at
right is the ‘great city gate’ leading to the royal avenue (raja margambu)
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. The Kakatiyas - Emergence of a Regional Kingdom 111

--- PAGE 120 ---
www.apteachers.in
Encouragement to Agriculture
Nayankara System
and Temples
Rudramadevi and Prataparudra
encouraged several skilled warriors who The Kakatiyas brought large tracts of
were not from any powerful family but were land under cultivation by building tanks and
very loyal to the queen and the king. They digging wells. Apart from members of the
gave them high positions and the title of royal family and other feudal families the
Nayaka. They were given several villages rich sections of the society like merchants
from where they could collect taxes. These and artisans participated in expanding
villages were called their
Nayankara. Each nayaka had to
maintain a stipulated amount of
army, from the income they get
from the nayankara, for the
service of the king. But they did
not keep these villages
permanently as they could be
transferred at the will of the king
to a new place. These Nayakas
depended upon the queen or the
king and remained loyal to them.
They were also probably used to
subdue the rebellious chiefs.
This arrangement was called Fig 12.5 The remains of the great
temple dedicated to Siva
Nayankara system.
Read here a portion of an inscription by
agriculture through construction of tanks.
a nayaka of Rudramadevi :
This enabled the extension of cultivation
in the difficult terrains of Telangana and
“In the year (1270 AD) on the occasion
Rayalaseema.
of Sankranti, Bollinayaka the guardian
of the gate for Kakatiya Rudradeva The Kakatiyas also extensively
patronised temples by donating to them.
Maharaja, gave ten measures of land to
Women members of royal family like
the temple servants of God Kalyana
Muppamamba, and Mailamma made land
Keshava of Kranja village in his own
grants. Women of other rich sections also
nayankaramu for the merit of his master
made gifts of land, tanks,
Rudradeva Maharaja.” cash, cattle, jewellery,
etc., to temples and
brahmins. By promoting
 Why do you think Bollinayaka was
agriculture, they derived
calling Rudramadevi as Rudradeva
income in the form of
Maharaja?
taxes and agriculture
produce.
112 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 121 ---
www.apteachers.in
issued by Kakatiya king Ganapatideva in a
place called Motupalli:
“This Abhaya Shasana has been granted by
Ganapatideva to sea traders going back and forth
to all continents, countries and towns. In the
past, kings forcibly seized all the cargo such as
gold, elephants, horses, jewels, etc. when sea
going vessels were caught in storms, wrecked and
cast on shore. But We for the sake of our
reputation and punya and out of pity for those
Fig 12.6 Gold coin issued by Kakatiyas
who have incurred the grave risk of a sea voyage,
give up all but the customary tax.”
Trade The inscription goes on to mention the
tax he would collect from the traders on
Warriors, chiefs and Kings derived much
different articles of trade.
of their income by taxing traders, especially
those who engaged in overseas trade from  How did the kings treat the traders
the ports. Read a portion of an inscription earlier?
 What was the guarantee
Ganapatideva was giving them?
 Why do you think he was giving
this protection to the traders?
Marco Polo, who visited one of these
ports says, that the exports were diamonds
and the best and the most delicate cloth, which
looked like the tissue of a spider’s web.
He further says, “There is neither a king nor a
queen in the world who would not be glad
to wear them”.
The End of the Kakatiyas
Sometime around 1190 AD a new
kingdom was established in Delhi. The new
kings were called Sultans and they
originally came from Turkistan. They had a
powerful army and were able to defeat
most of the kings of north India and the
Deccan before long. Sultan Mohammad bin
12.7 Motupalli Pillar Inscription Tugluq was able to defeat Kakatiya
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. The Kakatiyas - Emergence of a Regional Kingdom 113

--- PAGE 122 ---
www.apteachers.in
Prataparudra in 1323 AD. Thus ended the Key words :
Kakatiya dynasty.
1. Warriors
Some years later, two new kingdoms were
founded in Karnataka called Bahamani and 2. Nayankara System
Vijayanagar Kingdoms about which we will study
3. Samantha
in the next chapter.
4. Artisans
Palnati Vira – Heroes who cut across Caste
5. Turksthan
barriers
6. Abhaya Sasana
Palanati Virula Katha written by Srinatha around
1350s helps us to understand how collectives of
7. Marcopolo
warriors must have been formed. The leading
character, Balachandrudu, has a small war band
Project:
of devoted companions from diverse backgrounds.
One is a brahmin while the others – a blacksmith, a 1. Prepare a short presentation of
goldsmith, a washerman, a potter and a barber – are any of the three stories in the
drawn from the service and artisan communities. form of a play.
Balachandrudu and his cohorts are so committed to
2. Collect popular accounts of the
each other that they are called sodarulu (brothers).
origin of your village or town,
Just before they set out for battle, Balachandrudu’s
prepare a chart, and present the
mother prepares a meal for all the “brothers” with her
same.
own hands. But she serves this food to each one on a
3. Visit an old temple of your area,
different kind of plate (earthen, bronze, leaf, etc.)
and is rebuked for making such distinction by her find out who built the temple,
son, who says that caste must be set aside when one when etc., and look for any
goes to war. And so the “brothers” all eat from each inscriptions in it.
other’s plates, in defiance of the convention but in
recognition of their joint fate.
Improve your learning
1. Compare the warriors of those times with what you know about the armies of modern times.
What differences do you see between them? AS
1
2. Kings and chiefs built irrigation tanks to improve agriculture in the Kakatiya times. What would
they do now? AS
1
3. How do you think the Kakatiyas were able to gain control over the chiefs? AS
1
4. Why do you think the Kakatiyas did not appoint powerful chiefs as Nayakas? AS
1
5. Why was it difficult for women to rule in those days? Is it different today? How? AS
4
6. In those days, powerful men had their own land and were able to tax other farmers, traders and artisans.
Can powerful people do this now? Give reasons. AS
4
7. Read the para under the title ‘Nayankara System’ of page 112 and comment on it. AS
2
8. ‘Women too manage the adminstrative affairs effectively’– How do you support it? AS
2
114 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 123 ---
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. The Kings of Vijayanagara 115
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
13
The Kings of Vijayanagara
In the previous lesson, we read about warriors and chiefs
who had established control over villages and how the Kakatiyas
tried to bring them under their control and built a kingdom. The
efforts of the Kakatiyas ended when the Delhi Sultans conquered
Warangal. But soon another kingdom was built by a family of
warriors who laid the foundations of a large empire called
Vijayanagara or Karnataka
Vijayanagara means the ‘City of warriors many of whom came from Iran and
Victory’. It was located on the banks of Arabia. All these kingdoms were constantly
Tungabhadra River in Karnataka. According at war with each other trying to enlarge
to tradition, it was founded by two brothers their own kingdoms. They also tried to
named Harihara Raya and Bukka Raya recruit the local warriors and chiefs about
around 1336 AD with the blessings of a whom we read in the last chapter. With their
sage named Vidyaranya. The kings of help, they tried to establish control over
Vijayanagara worshipped Sri Virupaksha the villages and towns and collect revenue
(Shiva) and greatly enlarged the temple. The from the farmers and traders.
Vijayanagara empire lasted for about 250
years though it was not ruled by kings of Some Important Kings
the same family. After the family of of Vijayanagara
Harihara Raya and Bukka Raya of Sangama
Harihararaya (1336-1357AD)
dynasty, Saluva, Tuluva andAraviti families
Bukkaraya I (1357-1377AD)
ruled the empire one after the other.
Harihararaya II (1377-1404AD)
On the North of the Tungabhadra river
too arose some new kingdoms called the Devaraya II (1426-1446AD)
Bahamani kingdoms. Initially it was one
Saluva Narasimharaya (1486-1491AD)
large kingdom with its capital in Gulbarga,
Krishnadevaraya (1509-1529AD)
later on, between 1489 and 1520 AD, it
broke up into five smaller kingdoms. Of Achyutaraya (1529-1542AD)
these five kingdoms, Bijapur and Golconda
Aliya Rama Raya (1543-1565AD)
ruled over large parts of the present day
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. These Venkatapati Raya (1585-1614AD)
kingdoms were ruled by Sultans and

--- PAGE 124 ---
www.apteachers.in
How do we know?
We know much about Vijayanagara
Empire from inscriptions, books and
buildings of that period. We get insights
into the daily life, the administration and
the social organization of the kingdom. Of
particular value are the detailed accounts
left by travellers from several countries –
Nicolo Conti from Italy who visited
Vijayanagara in 1420 AD, Abdul Razzak the
Persian trader who visited in 1443 AD, the
Portugese travellers and Paes, who visited
it in 1520 AD and Nuniz who wrote in 1537
AD.
The City of Vijayanagara
The city was built on the banks of the river
Tungabhadra next to the ancient temples of
Fig 13.1 Bronze images of
Pampadevi and Sri Virupaksha. Abdul Razzak
Krishnadeva Raya and his two wives
says that the city had seven rings of
installed in Tirumala Temple.
fortifications. Some of these have been
found by archaeologists.  Why were vegetables, fruits and
horses sold in the evenings?
Read the description of the city by
Portugese traveller, Paes: Archaeologists are of the opinion that the
city had four separate divisions – the first one
“The king has made a very strong city,
devoted to temples, situated on rocky hills;the
fortified with walls and towers… These
second one on the valley where crops were
walls are not made like those of other
raised using water from irrigation
cities, but are made of strong masonry…
and inside very beautiful rows of channels; the third a royal centre in which royal
buildings with flat roofs… palaces and residences of important
nayakas were located and the fourth one
You have a broad and beautiful street
allocated for the residences of ordinary
full of fine houses… and these houses
townsfolk. Each area was separated from the
belong to merchants, and there you find
others as shown in the map.
all sorts of rubies and diamonds, and
emeralds and pearls… and cloths of  Compare Vijayanagara with
every sort on the earth… In the evening Warangal to point out the
you have a fair where they sell horses, similarities and differences
vegetables, fruits, wood, etc.” between them.
116 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 125 ---
www.apteachers.in
Vijayanagara rulers invested a lot
of money in building their military
Fort
power. They imported a large number
Anegondi of horses from Arabia and Iran, which
Tungabhadra
Ri
v
er
came in ships to their ports on the
west coast. They recruited a large
army and built many strong forts. One
of the important rulers, Devaraya-II of
Bridge
Vijayanagara started recruiting
Temples
I
A
rr
g
ig
ri
a
c
t
u io lt n u r C e anal M
tra
u
in
sl
h
im
is s
fi
o
g
l
h
di
t
e
e
r
r
s
s
i
t
n
o
t
s
h
e
e
r v
n
e
e w
hi
m
m
o
a
d
n
e
d
s o
to
f
Mosque A
r
e
a
w
co
a
n
r
s
f
t
a
r
r
u
e
c
.
ti
H
o
e
n
a
o
l
f
s o
m
p
o
e
sq
rm
ue
it
s
t e
i
d
n
t
t
h
h
e
e
U
r
b
a
n
c
w
a
e
p
r
i
e
ta
g
l
a
c
r
i
r
ty
is
w
on
h
e
e
d
re
. I
t
n
he
t h
m
o
u
s
s
e
l i
d
m
ay
s
s
o
,
l
g
di
u
e
n
r
s
s
and cannons had been newly
introduced. The Vijayanagara kings adopted
guns and cannons in their forces. The
combination of firearms and cavalry
Tower Gate
Outer (horse-riders) made them one of the most
Rampart
Pattabhirama powerful armies in India.
Temple
 Horses in those days were
Map 1: Vijayanagara City
important for fast movement of
troops. What do you think have
taken their place today?
 Why do you think modern cities do
not build fort walls of this kind?  Elephants were slow moving but
powerful in attack. What do you
Armies and Military Leaders
think has replaced them today?
You would have heard and read about great
‘Captains of the Troops’ - the
wars being fought today and also about
Amaranayakas
the powerful armies.
The entire kingdom was actually
controlled and administered by the
 What makes the armies of
commanders of these armies. Who they
countries powerful?
were and what they did, let us find out. Read
 What kinds of arms and weapons
the following account left by Domingo
do modern armies use?
Paes, a Portuguese traveller who visited
Let us find out how it was in Vijayanagara during Krishnadeva Raya’s
Vijayanagara times. period:
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. The Kings of Vijayanagara 117

--- PAGE 126 ---
www.apteachers.in
“This king has a million
fighting troops, in which are
included 35,000 cavalry
(horse riders) ready to be
dispatched to any quarter
whenever necessary... He is
the most feared king in these
parts…
The captains of these
troops are the nobles of his
kingdom and they hold the
city, the towns and the villages
of the kingdom. There are Fig 13.2 Stone Chariot at Hazara Rama Temple
captains among them who
 What did the captains have to do for
have a revenue of About a million gold
the king in return for these villages?
coins, others two hundred, three hundred
or five hundred thousand coins. The king  Did the king depend only on the
fixes for each, according to his revenue troops sent by the captains?
the number of troops which he must
The ‘captains’ mentioned here were the
maintain, on foot, on horse, and
nayakas. These nayakas held amara revenue
elephants. These troops are always ready
assignments – that is they were given some
for duty whenever and wherever they
villages and cities whose revenue they could
may have to go. Besides maintaining these
collect and use. They had an obligation to
troops, each captain has to make his
maintain a certain number of troops for
annual payment to the king.
keeping the revenue of such assignments.
Besides the troops supplied by the
They also administered the areas under
captains, the king has his own troops
their control. They had judicial powers
whom he pays.”
too.(the power to judge criminals and give
Answer the following questions punishments) This was quite similar to the
after reading the above passages system of the Delhi Sultanate, whose
carefully: nobles or amirs were given similar revenue
assignments called Iqtas.
 Why was Krishnadevaraya the most
feared king? Most of the amaranayakas were
 Who controlled the towns and Telugu warriors. They recruited their
villages of Vijayanagara Empire? soldiers, usually from among their own
villagers or kinsmen, and trained them.
 Did all of them get equal income?
These armies were loyal to the Nayakas
 What did the captains do with the
rather than to the king. Many powerful
villages and towns under their
nayakas like Saluva Narasimha or Narasa
control?
Nayaka controlled vast areas and at times
118 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 127 ---
www.apteachers.in
could even challenge the Vijayanagara Amaranayakas and Agriculture
Kings. In fact, some of them were so
Most of the Nayakas were Telugus and
powerful that when a king died they took
they led armies which were mostly
power in their own hands and themselves
composed of Telugu speaking farmers. As the
became kings.
Nayakas established control over
Let us compare
different regions of south India, these
You read about how the villages were peasant soldiers also settled down and
administered in Chola kingdom by councils brought land under cultivation. They built
of landholding villagers and how the king irrigation tanks and canals. Thus, they settled
collected revenue from villages with the down in various parts ofAndhra Pradesh and
help of these councils. Things had begun Tamil Nadu, especially in regions with black
to change in Vijayanagara Empire as the soils.
power of the armies and nayakas increased.
All over the empire, tanks / reservoirs
You saw that the control over the villages
for capturing rain water and other drainage
and town was given over to these nayakas.
water were constructed by the kings,
chiefs, nayakas and traders. Even temples
 What impact do you think it would invested their endowments in irrigation and
have had on the villagers? Discuss were sharing the enhanced production with
in your class. those who worked on their lands. Look at
portions of an inscription from Tirumala
 In a previous lesson, you read about
temple of 1494 AD:
how villages and towns are
“The authorities of Tirumala Temple
administered in our country today.
executed this inscription in favour of
Can you compare this with the
Timmana Dandanayaka of Chandragiri
Vijayanagara system and point out
as follows: whereas you have paid three
the differences?
hundred gold coins to the Temple
treasury, this sum shall be invested for
Fig 13.3 Relief on Hazara Rama Temple. Can you write a story based on this image?
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. The Kings of Vijayanagara 119

--- PAGE 128 ---
www.apteachers.in
towns attained considerable size and
excavation of tank fed channels in the
permanence as pilgrim centres.
villages belonging to the temple and with
the harvest reaped thereby certain Krishnadeva Raya - The Ruler
offerings will be made to the deity.”
Krishnadeva Raya ruled
All these efforts resulted in the from 1509 AD to 1529
expansion of agriculture into new areas and AD. He was a great general
tremendous increase in agricultural who led the Vijayanagara
armies successfully
production. This in turn provided impetus
against the Bahmani
to trade.
sultans and also against
the Gajapatis of Odisha. He also subdued
 In what way would the nayakas have
several chiefs who had revolted in
benefitted from increase in
Karnataka, Andhra and Tamil regions. This
agricultural production?
gave him control over the entire region
south of river Krishna and especially
Trade and Cavalry
control over the ports of the eastern coast.
Trade in agricultural produce as well as During this period, the Portugese had
craft produce like cloth increased manifold established their power over some ports of
the western coast, like Goa.
in Vijayanagara period. We find change in
Krishnadevaraya established friendly
trade activity during this period. Trade
relations with them in order to get
centres were established on India’s extensive
exclusive supply of horses and firearms
coasts and they were under the
from them. He also employed Portugese
administration of the local merchants troops in his wars.
and others representing trader
Every year on the Vijayadashami day, the
communities from other places: Arabs,
King organised elaborate festivities and
Jews, Armenians and others. States were
worship, which concluded with a massive
attracted to these ports for the revenue as well parade of his armies. On this day, all the
as for access to strategic commodities chiefs and amaranayakas of the empire
like horses. Knowledge of the breeding brought their tributes to the King.
of horses appropriate for heavy cavalry Krishnadevaraya paid special attention
tactics was lacking in India at that time. to the temples of his kingdom and
Through the ports, war horses from Arabia personally visited many of them like
could be imported by chiefs and kings in the Tirupati, Srisailam and Ahobilam. He also
Indian peninsula. Guns were another donated to a large number of temples.
strategic goods that were obtained through Krishnadeva Raya’s inscriptions state
the ports. While these goods were imports, that he had distributed the great treasure
Indian exports remained the same as in gained in his successful wars to all the
major temples of southern India. Towering
the earlier periods – textiles, spices and
temple gateways called ‘Raya gopuram’
other craft items.
were built in many of these temples in his
In addition to ports and market towns,
honour. This generosity assured that his
there were towns strategically sited for
name would be remembered for long
defence and administrative purposes. Some
120 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 129 ---
www.apteachers.in
Allasani Peddana, Mukku Thimmana,
Dhurjati, Ramaraja Bhushana, Tenali
Ramakrishna, Pingali Surana, Ayyalaraju
Ramabadhrudu and Madayagari Mallana.
The power of the Vijayanagara kings
grew further during the time of
Krishnadevaraya’s successors Achyutadeva
Raya and Aliya Rama Raya. As the
Bahamani rulers were unable to fight the
Vijayanagara individually, by 1565 AD, all the
five Bahmani kingdoms joined together and
defeated Rama Raya in Rakkasi tangadi war
also known as Tallikota war, looted, and
destroyed the city of Vijayanagara. The
emperors who succeeded him shifted their
capital to Chandragiri near Tirupati, but
Fig 13.4 Gopuram of Ekamreshwar never regained the glory of earlier times.
Temple in Kanchipuram. While part of the empire came under the
control of the Sultans, the chiefs and
among the people of south India. He also
Nayakas became independent in other parts.
built some beautiful temples in
Vijayanagara city. Key words :
Krishnadevaraya was also a patron of 1. Amaranayaka
Telugu literature and he himself composed 2. Iqta 3 Archaeologists
the poetic work Amuktamalyada on the life 4. Amirs
of Andal the Tamil Bhakta poetess. His 5. Raya gopuram
court was adorned with eight poets known 6.Bahamani Kingdoms
popularly as “Ashtadiggajas”. They are 7. Portugese 8. Ashtadiggajas
Improve your learning
1. Why were the Portugese travellers interested in the forts and armies of Vijayanagara kings? AS
1
2. Why did the kings of Vijayanagara live in a separate quarter and not in the middle of the city as in
Orugallu? AS
1
3. Historians feel that Vijayanagara state was highly militarised – in what way do you think it would
have affected the common people? AS
1
4. Why were the amaranayakas very powerful? AS
1
5. Compare the amaranayakas with the old chiefs of Kakatiyas. Were they different or similar – in
what way? AS
1
6. Why was the Vijayanagara army dependent on imports from the western coast? AS
1
7. Krishnadeva Raya fought against several enemies in order to consolidate his kingdom. Make a list
of all of them. AS
3
8. What services were rendered to Telugu literature by the Vijayanagara Kings? AS
6
9. Locate the following in the in the India map. AS
5
a) Humpi b) Bijapur c) Tirupati d) Srisailam e) Kanchi f) River Tungabhadra
10. Discuss the support of various kingdoms to telugu literature? AS
1
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. The Kings of Vijayanagara 121

--- PAGE 130 ---
Who were the Mughals?
The Mughals were from ruling families
of Central Asian countries like Uzbekistan
and Mongolia. Babur, the first Mughal
emperor (1526 - 1530 AD), was forced to
122 Political Systems and Governance
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
14
Mughal Empire
A new age began with the unification of India
under the Mughals. The Mughals created an
empire between 1550 and 1700 AD and
expanded it from around Delhi to all over the
entire subcontinent. Their administrative
arrangements, ideas of governance and
architecture continued to influence rulers long after their
decline. Every year, the Prime Minister of India addresses the
Coin showing
nation on Independence Day from the ramparts of the Red Fort
Jahangir
in Delhi, the residence of the Mughal emperors.
leave his ancestral throne due to the
invasion of another ruler. After years of
wandering, he seized Kabul in 1504 AD. In
1526 AD, he defeated the Sultan of Delhi,
Ibrahim Lodi and captured Delhi and Agra.
Fig 14.1 Red Fort

--- PAGE 131 ---
www.apteachers.in
Important Mughal emperors -
Major campaigns and events
Babur 1526-1530 AD
1526 AD – defeated Ibrahim Lodi and
established control over Agra and Delhi.
He introduced cannons and guns in Indian
warfare.
Humayun 1530-1556 AD
Sher Khan defeated Humayun, forcing
him to flee to Iran. In Iran, Humayun
received help from the Safavid Shah. He
recaptured Delhi in 1555 AD but died in
an accident the following year.
Akbar 1556-1605 AD
Akbar was 13 years old when he became the
emperor.
He rapidly conquered Bengal, Central India,
Rajasthan and Gujarat.Thereafter, he also
conquered Afghanistan, Kashmir and portions of the Deccan.
Look at his empire in Map 1.
Jahangir 1605-1627 AD
Military campaigns started by
Akbar continued. No major
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Mughal Empire 123

--- PAGE 132 ---
www.apteachers.in
Shah Jahan 1627-1658 AD
Mughal campaigns continued in the
Deccan. He faced many revolts by nobles
and chiefs of his empire. In 1657-1658
AD, there was a conflict over succession
amongst Shah Jahan’s sons. Aurangzeb
was victorious and his three brothers
were killed. Shah Jahan was imprisoned
for the rest of his life in Agra.
conquests.
Aurangzeb 1658-1707 AD
Conquered Assam but faced a large number of revolts all
over his kingdom from Afghanistan, Assam, Rajasthan,
Punjab, Deccan, etc. Guru Tegh Bahadur, Govind Singh,
Shivaji and his own son Akbar revolted against him. Shivaji
succeeded in establishing an independent Maratha
kingdom. Aurangzeb conquered Bijapur in 1685 AD and
Golconda in 1687 AD. His death was followed by a
succession conflict amongst his sons.
Kabul
Map 1: Akbar’s Reign 1605AD
Kashmir
Qandahar
Multan
Panipat
Delhi
Amber Agra
Ajmer Fatehpur Sikri
Sindh Chittor Alahabad
Malwa
Bengal
Gondwana
Berar
Odisa
Ahmednagar
Golconda
Bijapur
112244 PPoolliittiiccaall SSyysstteemmss aanndd GGoovveerrnnaannccee

--- PAGE 133 ---
www.apteachers.in
Mughal Relations with other balance between defeating but not
Rulers removing their opponents enabled the
Mughals to extend their influence over
In India of those times, there were
many kings and chieftains. The Mughals
several kings and chiefs in all parts of the
married princesses of many of the local
country. The Mughals sought to bring them
rulers as a mark of friendship. The mother
under their control. They allowed the older
of Jahangir was the daughter of the Rajput
rulers and chiefs to continue to rule over
ruler of Amber (modern Jaipur). The
large parts of their old kingdoms and
mother of Shah Jahan was a daughter of the
collect revenues from them. But they could
Rajput ruler of Jodhpur.
not wage wars against each other and had
Mansabdars and Jagirdars
to keep an army ready for the use of the
Emperor.
As the empire expanded to encompass
Mughal rulers campaigned constantly
different regions, the Mughals recruited
against rulers who refused to accept their
diverse kinds of people. From a small
authority. But as the Mughals became
nucleus of Turkish nobles, they expanded to
powerful, many other rulers also joined
include Iranians, Indian Muslims,
them voluntarily. The Rajputs are a good
Afghans, Rajputs, Marathas and other
example of this. Many of them married
groups. Those who joined Mughal service
their daughters into Mughal families and
were enrolled as mansabdars (or rank
received high positions. But many resisted as
holder). They were directly under the
well. The Sisodiya Rajputs of Chittor refused
control of the emperor, who could allocate
to accept Mughal authority for a long time.
any work for them to do – like guarding his
Once defeated, however, they were given
605AD palace, governing a province, conquering a
their lands back as assignments. The careful
new kingdom or suppressing a rebellion.
Fig 14.2 A mansabdar on march with his sawars.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Mughal Empire 125

--- PAGE 134 ---
www.apteachers.in
The Mughals developed a political permitted. The jagirs too were constantly
system in which the mansabdars would not transferred every two or three years.
act independently but follow the orders of In Akbar’s reign, these jagirs were
the emperor. You may remember that the carefully assessed so that their revenues
Nayakas in Vijayanagara empire could were roughly equal to the salary of the
become independent and powerful enough to mansabdar. By Aurangzeb’s reign there
declare themselves the kings. The was a huge increase in the number of
Mughals prevented this by constantly mansabdars, which meant a long wait
transferring the mansabdars from one before they received a jagir. These and
place to another every two or three years. other factors created a shortage in the
Thus, a mansabdar could not become number of jagirs. As a result, many
settled and powerful in any one place. jagirdars tried to extract as much revenue
The mansabdar’s military as possible while they had a jagir.
Aurangzeb was unable to control these
responsibilities required him to maintain a
developments in the last years of his reign
specified number of horse riders or
and the farmers therefore suffered
cavalrymen. The mansabdar brought his
tremendously.
cavalrymen for review, got them registered,
their horses branded and then received
Zabt and Zamindars
money to pay them as salary.
The main source of income available to
A mansabdar’s son could not become
Mughal rulers was tax on the produce of
a mansabdar automatically. That is, it was
the peasantry. Akbar’s revenue minister,
not hereditary. The emperor decided
Todar Mal, carried out a careful survey of
whether to appoint the son as a mansabdar.
crop yields, prices and areas cultivated for
In fact, he even took over all the property
a ten-year period, 1570-1580 AD. On the
of the mansabdar on his death.
basis of this data, tax was fixed in cash for
Mansabdars received their salaries as
each crop. Each province was divided into
revenue assignments called jagirs, which
revenue circles with its own schedule of
were somewhat like Vijayangara
revenue rates for individual crops. This
Nayankaras. But unlike the Nayakas, most revenue system was known as zabt. It was
mansabdars did not actually reside in or prevalent in those areas where Mughal
administer their jagirs. They could only administrators could survey the land and
collect the revenue due from their jagir keep very careful accounts. This was not
villages and send to the emperor. This was possible in provinces such as Gujarat and
collected for them by their servants while Bengal.
the mansabdars themselves served in
In most places, peasants paid taxes
some other part of the country. The jagir
through the rural elites, i.e., the headman
was administered by other officials directly
or the local chieftain. The Mughals used
under the emperor. These officials tried to
one term – zamindars – to describe all
ensure that the jagirdars’ agents did not
intermediaries, whether they were local
collect more from the farmers than
126 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 135 ---
www.apteachers.in
 What was the difference between
a mansabdar and a zamindar?
1
 Who was under the greater control
of the emperor?
 Compare the position of a Nayaka
and a mansabdar.
A Closer Look at Akbar’s
Policies
2
The broad features of administration
were laid down by Akbar and were
elaborately discussed by his friend and
member of his court, Abul Fazl in his book
the Akbar Nama.
Fig 14.3 Details in a miniature from Shah
While Akbar was at Fatehpur Sikri (near
Jahan’s reign showing corruption during
Agra) during the 1570s, he started
his father’s administration 1. A corrupt
officer receives a bribe and 2. A tax discussions on religion with the Muslim
collector punishes poor peasants scholars, Brahmins, Jesuit priests who were
Roman Catholics, and Zorastrians. He was
headmen of villages or powerful chieftains.
interested in the religion and social
The zamindars were not appointed by the
customs of different people. Akbar wanted
Mughal Emperors but existed on hereditary
to bring together people of diverse faiths.
basis, that is, sons succeeded when the
This eventually led Akbar to the idea of
fathers died. They too had contingents of
sulh-i kul or “universal peace”. This idea
armed followers. They received from the
of tolerance did not discriminate among
jagirdars a share of the revenue collected
people of different religions in his
from the area and also some dues from the
kingdom. Instead, it focused on a system
farmers and others. They often acted as
of ethics – honesty, justice, peace – that
representatives of the local people in
was universally applicable. Abul Fazl
dealing with the Mughal officials.
helped Akbar in framing a vision of
In some areas, the zamindars exercised a governance around this idea of sulh-i kul.
great deal of power. The exploitation by The Emperor would work for the welfare
Mughal administrators could drive them to of all subjects irrespective of their religion
rebellion. Sometimes zamindars and or social status. This principle of
peasants allied in rebelling against Mughal governance was followed by Jahangir and
authority. These zamindar-peasant revolts Shah Jahan as well. Aurangzeb deviated from
challenged the stability of the Mughal this policy and tried to project himself as
favouring only Sunni Muslims. People of
Empire from the end of the seventeenth
other religions felt anguished by this policy
century.
of Aurangzeb.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Mughal Empire 127

--- PAGE 136 ---
www.apteachers.in
The Mughal Empire
in the 17th Century
and after
The administrative and
military efficiency of the
Mughal Empire led to
economic and commercial
prosperity. International
travellers described it as the
fabled land of wealth. But
the same visitors were also
appalled at the state of
poverty that existed in
contrast to the
greatestwealth.. The
inequalities were glaring.
Documents from the
twentieth year of Shah
Jahan’s reign inform us that
the highest ranking
Fig 14.4 Akbar holding discussions with learned
mansabdars were only 445
individuals of different faiths in his ibadat khana
in number out of a total of
8,000. This small number – a mere 5.6 per
Sulh-i kul cent of the total number of mansabdars –
received 61.5 per cent of the total
Jahangir, Akbar’s son, described his
estimated revenue of the empire as salaries
father’s policy of sulh-i kul in the
for themselves and their troopers.
following words:
The Mughal emperors and their
“As in the wide expanse of the divine
mansabdars spent a great deal of their
compassion there is room for all classes and
income on salaries and goods. The scale
the followers of all creeds, so … in his Imperial
of revenue collection left very little for
dominions, which on all sides were limited
investment in the hands of the primary
only by the sea, there was room for the
producers – the peasant and the artisans.
professors of opposite religions, and for beliefs,
The poorest amongst them had hand to mouth
good and bad, and the road to intolerance
existence and could hardly invest in tools
was closed. Sunnis and Shias met in one
and supplies to increase productivity.
mosque and Christians and Jews in one
church to pray. He consistently followed the The wealthier peasantry and artisanal
principle of ‘universal peace’ (sulh-i kul).” groups, the merchants and bankers profited
in this period.
128 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 137 ---
www.apteachers.in
The enormous wealth and resources commanded by the Mughal nobility (elite) made
them an extremely powerful group of people in the late seventeenth century. As the authority
of the Mughal emperor slowly declined, his servants emerged as powerful centres of power
in the regions. They constituted new dynasties and held command of provinces like
Hyderabad and Awadh. Although they continued to recognise the Mughal emperor in Delhi
as their master, by the eighteenth century the provinces of the empire had consolidated
their independent political identities.
Key words :
1. Mansabdar 2. Jagirdar 3. Jagir 4. Zabt 5. Elite
Improve your learning
1. Match the following AS
1
i) Mansab ( ) a) Marwar
ii) Zamindar ( ) b) Revenue assignment
iii) Sisodiya Rajput ( ) c) Hereditary chiefs
iv) Rathor Rajput ( ) d) sulh-i kul
v) Akbar ( ) e) Mewar
vi) Jagirdar ( ) f) rank
2. What was the relationship between the mansabdar and his jagir? AS
1
3. What was the role of the zamindar in Mughal administration? AS
1
4. How were the debates with religious scholars important in the formation of Akbar’s
ideas on governance? AS
1
5. “The decision of Emperor is final” - Is this procedure formulated by Mughals? What do you
think? AS
2
6. Why did the Mughals allow the earlier rulers to continue in their old kingdoms as before? AS
1
7. Why was the policy of sulh-i kul important for the Mughals to control their vast empire? AS
1
8. Read the first para under the title ‘Zabt and Zamindars’ of page 126 and comment on it. AS
2
9. Collect and fill in the table with the particulars of Moghal emperors. AS
3
Name of the emperor Ruling period Important features
S.No.
1
2
3
4
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Mughal Empire 129

--- PAGE 138 ---
130 Political Systems and Governance
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
15
Establishment of the British
Empire in India
Aurangzeb was the last of the powerful Mughal rulers. He
established control over a very large part of the territory that is now
known as India. After his death in 1707 AD, many Mughal governors
(subedars) and big zamindars began asserting their authority and
establishing regional kingdoms.Consequently, Delhi could no longer
function as an effective centre.
By the second half of the eighteenth century, however, a new power was emerging on
the political horizon – the British. Did you know that the British originally came as a small
trading company? How then did they become the masters of a vast empire?
East India Company Comes to
East
In 1600 AD, the East India Company
acquired a charter from the ruler of England,
Queen Elizabeth I, granting it the sole right
to trade with the East. This meant that no
other trading group in England could
compete with the East India Company.
With this charter, the Company could
venture across the oceans, looking for new
lands from which it could buy goods at a
cheap price, and carry them back to Europe
to sell at higher prices.
Mercantilism
Mercantile is a business enterprise that
makes profit primarily through trade.
Trading companies in those days made
profit primarily by excluding competition, Fig 15.1 The headquarters of East
India Company in London

--- PAGE 139 ---
www.apteachers.in
The problem was that all the companies
so that they
were interested in buying the same things.
could buy cheap
The fine qualities of cotton and silk
and sell dear.
produced in India had a big market in
The royal
Europe. Spices like pepper, cloves,
charter, however,
cardamom and cinnamon too were in great
could not
demand. Competition amongst the
prevent other
E u r o p e a n European companies inevitably pushed up
powers from the prices at which the goods were
entering the purchased. Trade was carried on with arms
Eastern markets. and trading posts were protected through
By the time the fortification. This effort to fortify
Fig 15.2 first English settlements and carry on profitable trade
VascodaGama
ships sailed
led to intense conflict with the local rulers.
down the west coast of Africa, round the
Armed Traders
Cape of Good Hope, and crossed the Indian
Ocean, the Portuguese had already European traders formed their own
established their presence in the western companies to trade in India. The English
coast of India, and had their base in Goa. It traders formed the English East India
was Vasco da Gama, a Portuguese explorer, Company while traders from France
who had discovered this sea route to India formed the French East India Company.
in 1498. By the early seventeenth century,
Both companies fought against each other
the Dutch (Holland) too were exploring the
for many years to capture the trade in India.
possibilities of trade in the Indian Ocean.
Each made efforts to drive the other away.
Soon the French traders arrived on the
They brought armies from England and
scene.
France to help them in
their fight. The kings of
England and France also
backed their respective
companies and helped
them in many ways. The
companies acquired
land in India and built
their own forts to wage
battles against each
other.
Fig 15.3 A drawing of Machilipatnam from 1676
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Establishment of British Empire in India 131

--- PAGE 140 ---
www.apteachers.in
The wealth that was
accumulated in this way was one
of the most important factors that
enabled England to develop
industries and establish their
dominance in the world.
This was the time when England
as well as some other European
countries like Spain, Portugal,
France, Holland and Germany
were acquiring colonies in North
and South America, Africa, and
Asia. The colonies contributed to
the power and wealth of these
European countries.
The Mughal emperors as well as
many rajas and nawabs began to
Fig 15.4 Mughal Emperor Shah Alam granted
realise how dangerous it was to let Robert Clive the right to rule Bengal
such traders maintain armies, build
tried to check the growing military strength
forts, fight battles and use military force
of the companies.
to establish their economic power in their
For example, in 1764 AD, Nawab
kingdoms.
Anwaruddin Khan of Arcot (in northern
As long as the Mughal empire was
Tamil Nadu) sent his army to fight against
strong, it had not been possible for the
the French company. However, to the
European companies to establish their own
astonishment of all, the small French army
military power in India. In fact, Emperors
managed to defeat the large army of the
Shahjahan and Aurangzeb had fought and
Nawab. The European traders became
defeated the European companies on a
bolder after this victory and felt they could
number of occasions. Some years after the
do whatever they wanted in India because
death of Aurangzeb, the different provinces
of the strength of their armies.
of the empire became almost independent
How were the European armies different
and were ruled by their respective
from the armies of Indian rulers in the
governors. Thus Bengal, Awadh (Lucknow)
1700’s? The soldiers of European armies
and Hyderabad became independent
were better trained and received higher and
kingdoms which only nominally
more regular salaries. They also had better
acknowledged the Mughal Emperor as their
cannons and guns. The European armies
supreme.
held parades and drills every day. With such
Once the Mughal empire broke up into
regular exercise, Indian soldiers enrolled
these small kingdoms, the companies found
in these armies also became quite skilled
their chance to assert their power. Though
in battle.
the rajas and nawabs wanted more trade they
132 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 141 ---
www.apteachers.in
Growing European Interference The companies also began to acquire
in the Kingdoms of India small parts of kingdoms as ‘gifts’ from the
local rulers. They would collect land tax
The companies used their military
from the villages and towns in these areas
advantage to increase their profits from
and use the money for their trading
trade. On many occasions when they saw
activities. They also used this money for
two Indian rulers fighting among
maintaining and improving their army.
themselves, they would take sides and get
involved in the fight. They would lend their Slowly, the English Company began
army to one side to help them defeat their emerging victorious over the French
rivals. But, in return, the companies would Company in the struggle for dominance in
demand and extract many trade concessions India.
from the rulers. The rulers also ‘gifted’ the Misuse of the Company’s
companies large amounts of money in
Power
return for their military help. This money
helped the companies increase their trade The Indian rulers soon found that the
even more. burden of giving ‘gifts’ to the English East
India Company and bearing the expenses of
For example, Dupleix, a governor of the
French East India Company, helped its army was becoming very heavy. They
Muzaffar Jang to become the Nizam of were also troubled by many other things the
Deccan. In return, Muzaffar Jang gave the company was doing.
French some territories near Pondicherry Some Indian rulers exempted the
and the town of Machilipatnam. He also
company from paying taxes on many of the
gave Rs. 50,000 to the Company, Rs.
goods it purchased from their kingdoms.
50,000 to the French troops, and Rs.
However, people began taking advantage of
20,00,000 and a Jagir worth Rs. 1,00,000
these concessions. For example,
per year to Dupleix.
employees of the company would do their
own private trading.
Fig 15.5 Local boats bring goods from ships in
Madras, painted by William Simpson, 1867 But they would show
their own goods as
belonging to the
company to escape
paying taxes. In this
way, while the
company got richer,
its employees and
officers also made a
lot of money in India
and returned home
wealthy. Many Indian
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Establishment of British Empire in India 133

--- PAGE 142 ---
www.apteachers.in
traders and seths helped the company in its of the kingdoms of India, big and small.
trade. They, too, showed their goods as The English East India Company also
belonging to the Company to escape paying forced the Nizam of Hyderabad to hand
taxes. over the coastal Andhra Pradesh districts
Thus, there was much looting and (Krishna, East Godavari, West Godavari,
swindling taking place in the kingdoms Srikakulam, Vijayanagaram, Prakasam
under the Company. So proud was the Visakhapatnam and Guntur,) between the
Company of its military strength that it years 1765-1768. These were known as the
began working with great impudence. It ‘Northern Sarkars’ of the Madras province
forced craftsmen to sell their goods at low of the company. In return, the English
prices. In the areas it had acquired, the agreed to maintain an army contingent for
company tried to squeeze revenue from the the use of the Nizam. In fact this army was
peasants beyond reasonable limits. When used more to control the Nizam rather than
the rulers protested against such practices, to help him.
the English fought against them. They even Many rajas and nawabs understood the
went to the extent of dethroning kings and British plot and fought hard against them.
anointing successors who would be only They included Haider Ali and Tipu Sultan
too willing to remove any obstacles in the of Mysore, the Maratha sardar Mahadji
way of their trade. Scindia, Nana Phadnawis and others. But
their kingdoms were small. One by one,
 Traders need money to buy the
they lost them to the English.
goods they sell to others. List three
Among those who played an important
sources of money that helped the
role in the British success on the
English to buy goods in India.
battlefield were generals Robert Clive,
 What advantages did the Indian
Warren Hastings and Lord Wellesley.
rulers get from the English?
Slowly, large areas of India came under the
The English Impose their Rule direct rule of the English. In many places,
The English gradually the rajas and nawabs continued to rule, but
began to feel that they they were under the sovereignty of the
could make fuller and
English. An English official (known as the
freer use of India for trade
‘resident’) would be assigned to stay in the
if they themselves ruled
the country. So they began court of these kings or nawabs so that the
removing the nawabs and British government could keep an eye on
rajas and started ruling
how they ran their kingdoms.
themselves.
In 1757 AD, the English defeated  While carrying on trade with India,
Sirajuddaula, the Nawab of Bengal, at a
why did the English East India
place called Plassey and established their
Company start thinking of
rule over Bengal. The Battle of Plassey is
establishing its rule over the
an important event in Indian history. After
country?
that, the English started conquering many
134 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 143 ---
www.apteachers.in
INDIA INDIA
Map 1 Map 2
About
About
1830 AD
1770 AD
INDIA
Map 3
About Maps showing expansion of the
1857 AD British territorial power in India.
 Look at these maps along
with a present day political
map of India. In each of
these maps, try and
identify the different parts
of India that were not
under the British rule.
 How far did English rule
spread by 1857? Make a
list of those areas where
Indian kings still ruled in
1857.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Establishment of British Empire in India 135

--- PAGE 144 ---
www.apteachers.in
Discontent with English Rule English began implementing in their areas.
As a result, many tribal people lost their
The English had to fight with many kings
rights over jungles and land. You will read
and nawabs to establish their rule. You will
more about this in the later years.
learn more about their policies and
Many Hindus and Muslims feared that
administration in later years. They
the English would destroy their religions
constantly faced resistance from the
and convert them to Christianity.
people of India.
The English faced their toughest battle
The royal families resisted them
in 1857 when, for few months, their rule
because the English would anoint or
was uprooted over almost the entire
remove rulers as and when it suited their
northern Indian region. This revolt was
purposes.
started by Indian sipahis or soldiers, who
Farmers and landowners resisted them
were soon joined by royal families,
because the English imposed very high
landowners, farmers, tribal people and
taxes on them and collected the taxes very
craftsmen. The royal families who joined
strictly. So they lived in constant fear of
the revolt include Nana Sahib, the adopted
failing to pay the taxes and losing their lands
son of the peshwa, Tantia Tope, his general,
as a result.
the Begum of Awadh, and Rani Lakshmi Bai
Tribal people also offered resistance,
of Jhansi. Hindus and Muslims fought
because of the new rules and laws that the
together against their common enemy.
The Revolt of 1857 Kolkata in March 1857. The sense of
discontent at Meerut was widespread and
Place: The military cantonment
on this day the soldiers opened fire on their
at Meerut, where the British army
English officers. The rebellious soldiers
had camped
marched towards Delhi that very night.
Date: Sunday, May
10, 1857
The sun was about to
set when the Indian
soldiers began firing their
2)
guns on their English
officers. These were the 1)
same soldiers who had helped the English
to conquer the kingdoms of India. They
were now fed up with the behaviour of the
3)
English. They were not getting their salaries
on time and they were not treated with Fig 15.6 A - Loading a gun
respect in the British army. On top of this,
1) The soldier was supposed to tear open the
the sipahis suspected that the cartridges for
their new guns (rifles) were being coated paper case with his teeth.
with cow and pig fat to keep them dry. They 2) He would pour the gun powder into the
felt that their religious faith was being rifle.
violated. Based on this suspicion, a similar 3) He would then ram the bullet wrapped in
paper into the rifle.
uprising had occurred at Barrackpur, near
136 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 145 ---
www.apteachers.in
Place:
Meerut town
Date: Sunday
night - Monday,
May 10-11,
1857
News of the sipahi revolt spread
like wildfire in Meerut. The whole
town was in ferment. A wave of
people came from the bazaar and
began attacking the bungalows of
the English. Policemen joined the
mobs and, before long, the
bungalows and offices of the
English were set a fire. Many Fig 15.7 A view of Sipahi revolt at Meerut in 1857
English people were killed.
By daybreak, the sipahis of Meerut
had crossed the Yamuna and reached
Delhi. They entered the Lal Quila where
Place: Delhi, the Lal Quila
Badshah Bahadur Shah Zafar of the
Date: Monday, May 11, 1857
Mughal dynasty was imprisoned by the
English. They declared him their badshah
and persuaded him to reject the
sovereignty of the British. ‘Drive out the
English and bring back Mughal rule’ was
the clarion call of the rebels.
Fig 15.8 A view of Delhi in
1857 showing the pontoon
bridge the soldiers used to
cross the Yamuna.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Establishment of British Empire in India 137

--- PAGE 146 ---
www.apteachers.in
The Revolt Spreads
No sooner did this
call go out, revolts
against the English
erupted in many
places. Sipahis went
on the rampage in the
cantonments at
Aligarh, Mainpuri,
Bulandshahar, Attock
and Mathura. The
English were badly
shaken. Their situation
was, indeed, very
delicate. Fig 15.9 An illustration of Rani Lakshmi Bai.
There were a mere 45,000 English relied on. Consequently, many English
officers and soldiers in India. Against this, soldiers were kept back to protect the
the number of Indian soldiers in their army English families. As a result, the revolt
was two lakh and thirty two thousand! It was could not be suppressed immediately and
these very sipahis who revolted. So who it spread from place to place.
would now protect the lives and property
Many royal families, whose kingdoms
of the English residents in the towns? The
had been taken away by the English, joined
Indian sections of their army could not be
the revolt. Among them were the former
Nawab of Awadh and the Maratha peshwa
Nana Sahib. Armies of rebel sipahis and
rulers from different corners of the
country marched towards Delhi. Hope was
in the air that the English would be driven
away and Mughal rule and the earlier
political order would be restored.
 Discuss why the idea of the Mughal
empire brought the rebelling Indian
people together.
 When you oppose something, you
need an alternative in its place.
Think of an example from your
experience that brings out this need
of an alternative.
FIg 15.10 Nana Saheb
138 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 147 ---
www.apteachers.in
Every Village in Revolt The rebels fought bravely. But there
were two major weaknesses among them.
The flames of revolt spread from kasba
In every town or region, different groups
to kasba and village to village in Uttar
of rebels fought separately against the
Pradesh and Bihar. The peasants and
English. They did not fight together. There
zamindars took up arms together and had
was no combined and well-planned effort.
the English and their officers on the run.
So the English were able to tackle the
They stopped paying taxes to the British
rebels one by one in each area.
government. They tore up railway lines,
burnt down police stations, courts, post & The rebels also faced a shortage of
telegraph offices and uprooted the modern arms. The guns and cannons,
telegraph wires. These were the new things cartridges and gunpowder they required
the English had introduced in India. As were brought from outside India.
defeat stared the English in their faces, the Consequently, the rebels had to fight with
Indian people became more and more old guns, arrows, spears and swords. How
courageous in their fight against the British long could such weapons last in a contest
rule. against the more modern arms?
The rebels looted the houses and burnt
Even then, the speed with which the
the documents of many moneylenders.
revolt spread frightened the English. So
These moneylenders had become very
they behaved with great cruelty whenever
powerful in the villages with the help of
they suppressed a rebel group. They killed
English laws.
the rebels in a most inhumane way and
The Revolt is Suppressed hanged their bodies from trees in the
villages so that the village folk would
Despite the widespread success of the
‘understand’ the consequences of revolt.
revolt, the English slowly gained control
over the situation. They tied some rebels to the mouths
of cannons and blew them to bits.
Many rebels went into hiding, moving
from place to place to avoid being
caught by the English. Many of them
even went to places like Nepal to hide.
The English deported Emperor
Bahadur Shah Zafar to far away
Rangoon and it was there that the last
Mughal emperor died. The revolt of
1857 was the biggest revolt to
challenge the might of the English.
After suppressing it, their hold over
India became stronger and they ruled
Fig 15.11 Hanging the rebels. the country for the next 90 years.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Establishment of British Empire in India 139

--- PAGE 148 ---
www.apteachers.in
because the English would not try to
 Choose the correct alternative:
dethrone them.
a) The rebels of 1857 AD wanted to
In this way, they established a close
(restore/remove)_________
collaboration with the royal families of
Mughal rule.
India. Similarly, the zamindars, too, were
b) The weakness of the English army given many concessions and were assured
was that most of its soldiers were that their property would be protected.
(Europeans/Indians)_________.
The pundits and maulvis were assured
 What were the weaknesses of the that the British government would not
rebel Indian armies? interfere in matters relating to Indian
religions and would let the old traditions
After the Revolt continue. There was also a promise that
Indians would be included in the
It took the English more than a year to government. The truth is that the English
suppress the revolt of 1857. During this had seen their Indian empire being snatched
period, they changed many of their policies away in 1857. Now they directed their
and adopted new ones. In 1858, Queen efforts towards giving all kinds of
Victoria of England made an important concessions to some of the elite powerful
declaration. She said Indian kings should Indians, to conciliate them and ensure that
rule their own kingdoms without anxiety they continued to support the English.
Fig 15.12 Bahadur Shah Zafar and his sons being arrested by Captain Hodson. After Aurangzeb
there was no powerful Mughal ruler, but Mughal emperors continued to be symbolically
important. When rebellion against British rule broke out in 1857, Bahadur Shah Zafar, the
Mughal emperor at the time, was seen as the natural leader. Once the revolt was put down by
the company, he was forced to leave the kingdom, and his sons were shot in cold blood.
140 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 149 ---
www.apteachers.in
Key words :
1. Royal Charter 5. Jagir
2. Subedar 6. Cantonment
3. Sole right 7. Colonies
4. Demand 8. Maulvies
Improve your learning
1. Why did the European trading companies maintain armies in India? What role did these armies
play in the business of the companies? AS
1
2. How could the European armies defeat the Indian armies in the 1700’s and 1800’s? AS
1
3. Collect the information of 1857 revolt and fill in the table with the particulars. AS
3
S.No. People participated in the revolt People stayed away from the revolt
4. In 1857, which soldiers felt their religious faith was being violated, and why? AS
1
5. In what ways did people revolt against the British in 1857? AS
1
6. What did the people who revolted in 1857 want to achieve? AS
1
7. What complaints of the rebels did Queen Victoria try to address in her 1858 declaration. try to
address? AS
1
8. What are the similarities and differences between the ways the Mughals and the English came to
power in India? AS
1
9. Locate the sea route of Vascodagama from Portugal to India in the map. AS
3
10. Write a short note on the need of Unity to avert foreign invasion. AS
6
11. Express your dissatisfaction towards the rule of Britishers. AS
1
 Perform monoactions of Indian freedom fighters in your school functions.
Project :
Prepare an album with pictures and information of Indian freedom fighters.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Establishment of British Empire in India 141

--- PAGE 150 ---
142 Political Systems and Governance
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
16
Making of Laws
in the State Assembly
In this section, so far we have been reading about how people
managed their public affairs – how they ruled or were ruled. Last
year, we studied about tribal societies which were small and which
managed all their public affairs through consultation in meetings and
had a headman who carried out the decisions. In kingdoms and empires
we saw how these matters were decided by Kings and their officials,
how kings fought with each other to gain control over more people
and lands. We also saw how chiefs and warriors controlled the lives of people and levied
taxes on them at their will and used the money to build large palaces for
themselves, to fight wars and also to build some public utilities like tanks, canals and
temples or mosques. We also saw how the British established their power so as to exploit
the resources of our country and how this was resisted by our people.
Today we don’t have any kings or warriors ruling us. We became independent of the
British rule more than sixty years ago. So how do we rule ourselves now? You know that
there are MPs, MLAs, Ministers, Chief Ministers and high officials. Are they like the
kings of olden times? Can they do what they please? No, modern governments are run
according to laws. No one is above the law and all ministers and officials have to function
according to laws. But who
makes the laws? How are the
laws made? Are they made as
per the whims of the rulers?
No, the laws are made by the
Legislative Assemblies and
the Parliament. The
Constitution of India lays
down how these bodies can
make laws. They make laws
according to these
procedures. In this chapter we
will read in detail about how
state legislatures make laws.
Fig 16.1 AP-Assembly

--- PAGE 151 ---
www.apteachers.in
Here is a news item - let us try to understand what is being said in it about Andhra
Pradesh Prohibition of Smoking and Health Protection Act 2002
Bill for ban on public smoking passed
MARCH 27. Our Special Correspondent
The Andhra Pradesh State metres of educational Supreme Court directions
Legislative Assembly on institutions, sale to those given on November 2, 2001.
Wednesday passed a bill below 18 years and Those contravening Sections
providing for prohibition of prohibition of advertisement 5, 6 and 10 relating to ban on
smoking in places of public of cigarettes. Others spoke of smoking in public places and
work or public use and in public the effect it would have on the public service vehicles and
service vehicles. It also provides livelihood of tobacco farmers display of no smoking board,
for conviction and levying of fines and pan shop owners. The would be punishable with a
ranging from Rs. 100 to Rs. Minister allayed their fine, which may extend to Rs.
1,000 on those who contravene apprehensions. 100 and for second or
the provisions. The Minister said the subsequent offence with a fine
Some of the concerns expressed legislation was necessary in of Rs. 200 which may extend
by the Opposition members view of the harmful effects of to Rs. 500.
include implementation of ban smoking on the health of Adapted from The Hindu
on sale of cigarettes within 100 people and in pursuance of the March 27-02
 Newspapers are often written with the  Does the newspaper article suggest
assumption that they are read by that everyone had the same opinion
adults. So first, find out the word about the bill?
meanings – conviction, allayed,  What are the provisions for
apprehension, pursuance, punishment mentioned in the
contravening, implementation. newspaper?
 In the context of above news item
The Constitution of India provides for
fill in the following
a Legislature for every State. The
1) A _____ was passed to prohibit
legislature of every State consists of the
smoking in public places (bill,
Governor and one or two Houses. The
custom, law, rule).
legislatures in the State are either
2) Prohibition of smoking does not bicameral (consisting of two Houses) or
include _______ (place of work, unicameral (consisting of one House). The
public vehicles, private garden, bus Lower House is always known as the
stand). Legislative Assembly and the Upper House
3) The legislation was in order to wherever it exists as the Legislative
_________ the directions from Council. At present, very few States have
Supreme Court (silence, punish, bicameral legislature.
follow, dismiss). Legislative Assembly
4) The bill was passed in the ______
This is the most important body for
(Supreme Court, Ministry,
making the laws for the state. The
Collectorate, Assembly).
Government of Andhra Pradesh, which is
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Making of Laws in the State Assembly 143

--- PAGE 152 ---
www.apteachers.in
responsible for implementing these laws constituencies in the state. The number of
and also formulating policies for the constituencies in a state will depend upon
welfare of the state is largely composed its population. A constituency in Andhra
of Members of the Assembly. Our state Pradesh has about 1,70,000 voters. You
Assembly has 175 members (MLAs) who may remember that all men and women of
are elected by the people just as panchayat 18 years of age or above have the right to
members are elected. vote. They have to get their names
registered as voters in the area where they
The normal tenure of the Legislative
live. All voters of one constituency will
Assembly of every State is of five years
vote to elect one member for the Assembly.
but it may be dissolved earlier by the
Each constituency comprises of a
Governor. Likewise, its term can be
number of villages, towns and cities. Or a
extended by one year at a time by the
big city like Vijayawada is divided into three
Parliament during National emergency.
constituencies. Look at map of Andhra
The State Legislature must meet at least
Pradesh. You can see that districts which
twice a year and the interval between any two
have larger population have more
sessions should not be more than six months.
constituencies while those with less
Assembly Constituency
population have fewer constituencies.
Each of these 294 members is elected
from a constituency. Thus, there are 175
Map 1: Assembly Constituencies
of Andhra Pradesh
HYDERABAD
District Boundary
Y.S.R. S.P.S. Legislative Constituency
Boundary
144 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 153 ---
www.apteachers.in
In Andhra Pradesh, laws are made by the state legislature, which has two chambers:
Chamber Member Short Form
Legislative Assembly Member of Legislative Assembly MLA
Legislative Council Member of Legislative Council MLC
Election of MLA
 Make a list of active political
Usually elections to the state legislative parties in your area and in your
assembly are held once in every five years. state along with their symbols
Persons aspiring to become MLAs contest
 If you were to contest elections
these elections. Various political parties
from your district, prepare an
field their candidates. There are also
ElectionManifesto – your
individuals who contest election but do not
promises to the people of the
belong to any political party. They are
constituency.
known as “Independents”. To contest
 Some people feel that contesting
elections a person should be a citizen of
in elections requires spending
India, and should have completed twenty
huge amounts of money, which is
five years of age. He or she should not hold
possible only for very rich people.
any office of profit under the State or
Do you agree with this?
Central government and should possess
 If only rich people are able to
such other qualifications as may be
contest elections, how will it
prescribed by law.
affect the decisions taken in the
In elections, political parties play a
Assembly?
major role. All political parties
and candidates come out with Fig 16.2
election manifestoes. These
manifestoes are descriptions
of programmes that they intend
to undertake and promises that
are relevant to the local
context. The candidates and
their supporters conduct
campaign by holding meetings
and visiting the voters door to
door.
 Here are images (Fig 18.2 & 18.3) from a calendar published by Election
Commission. They show different aspects of elections in our country from
different times. Based on these images discuss with your teacher or elders what
changes have occurred during the last many years.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Making of Laws in the State Assembly 145

--- PAGE 154 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 16.3
On the election day, people vote one by
Ellamma 45,000
one. The officer in the booth is responsible
Raghavulu 44,000
for checking the identity of the voters. In
Narasimha 16,000
most cases, the Election Commission has
Gulam Mohammad 20,000
given Voter Identity Cards to all voters. These
Badeyya 15,000
cards have to be shown to the officer. The
voters do not reveal whom did they vote Pooja 10,000
for; it is a secret.
 To what extent do you think this
winning candidate really
 Why do you think this has to be kept
represents the opinions and needs
a secret?
of the people of the constituency?
 Examine the Photo Identity Card of
Find out with the help of your
your parents and prepare an
teacher:
imaginary Identity Card for you with
 The name of your
all the details
constituency______________
 Identify three other constituencies
After voting, all votes are counted on a
in your district ________
scheduled date and candidate who secures
___________________________
the highest number of the votes is declared
elected.  The name of the MLA__________
_________________________
 Suppose, In a constituency 1,50,000
 Identify the reserved
votes were polled. Following is the
constituencies in your district
number of votes polled for various
_________________________
candidates. Who do you think will be
 Name the members of the family
declared as elected?
who voted in the last elections
________,____
146 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 155 ---
www.apteachers.in
Formation of Government
Table Political No. of Candidates
1 Party Elected
We have read that there are 175
constituencies in AP. Now what
1 Political Party - A 102
happens after elections? Look at Table
2 Political Party - B 67
1. It shows results after an assembly
3 Political Party - C 04
election.
4 Political Party - D 02
We see that the political party A got
5 Political Party - E 00
102 second largest number of
6 Political Party - F 00
candidates, i.e. number of seats is
7 Political Party - G 00
considered to have got majority. If any
law has to be made, they can easily get 8 Political Party - H 00
it passed, as more than half the 9 Political Party - I 00
members will support it. The majority 10 Political Party - J 00
members will elect one member
Total 175
among themselves as their leader. He
or she will be made the Chief
Table Political No. of Candidates
Minister of the state by the Governor.
2 Party Elected
The Chief Minister will select from
among party MLAs to be ministers. 1 Political Party - P 82
Together they will be called the 2 Political Party - Q 60
Cabinet (or ministry). In popular
3 Political Party - R 14
terms, the Cabinet is also called the
4 Political Party - S 11
‘Government’. The Cabinet is
responsible for implementation of 5 Political Party - T 04
the laws, for preparing and passing
6 Political Party - U 03
new laws and welfare schemes in the
7 Political Party - V 01
Assembly.
Total 175
 Look at Table 2 showing
results of another Assembly
elections. Which party could
Table Political No. of Candidates
have formed the Government?
3 Party Elected
 If the seats among
1 Political Party - Abcd 91
various parties are distributed
as in Table 3, how could a new 2 Political Party - Mnop 42
government be formed?
3 Political Party - Wxyz 32
Discuss with your teacher.
4 Political Party - Stuv 10
Total 175
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Making of Laws in the State Assembly 147

--- PAGE 156 ---
www.apteachers.in
In case no single party gets more than
implementing them and takes action to
half of the seats, two or more political
implement them.
parties come together to form a
While each ministry works
Government. It is called Coalition
independently, major policies are decided
Government.
upon by the entire cabinet. So, if anything
Council of Ministers
goes wrong, the entire cabinet and
especially the Chief Minister is held
The Chief Minister allots different
responsible for it. The cabinet also takes
ministries to the members of the Cabinet -
the credit for the good work done.
he or she makes someone the Finance
Minister, another the Education Minister The State Assembly
or the Home Minister, and so on. The
All MLAs together elect a person as the
Minister directs the policy of the
Speaker. The Speaker conducts the
departments under his or her charge. These
Assembly meetings – he or she decides
policies are implemented according to the
what should be discussed, when and who
rules by officials of the departments. The
will speak in what order. If any one
ministry is responsible for preparing
disobeys, Speaker has the power to punish
policies and plans which are submitted to
them.
the Assembly, for approval. After the
As mentioned above, the Assembly has
approval of the Assembly, the ministry
to approve all laws, policies and levying
formulates rules and methods for
Legislative Council
Earlier, we said that Andhra Pradesh has two houses. The second house
is called the Legislative Council. It has been in existence in two spells
from 1958-1985 and from 2007 till today. It is a permanent house.
Members of this house, known as MLCs are elected for six years. After
every two years, one-third of its members retire. To contest in this house,
a person should be a citizen of India and above 30 years of age. He or she
should not hold any office of profit under the State or Indian government
and must possess such other qualifications as may be prescribed by the
Parliament. It consists of 50 members. The Composition is as follows:
 17 members (1/3) are elected by the MLA’s.
 17 members (1/3) are elected by the members who were elected to
Local Bodies like panchayats and municipalities.
 3 or 4 members (1/12) are elected from Graduates.
 3 or 4 members (1/12) are elected from Teachers.
 8 members (1/6) are nominated by the Governor.
In order to make any law in the state, it has to be approved by both the houses.
Governor : The Governor of a state is appointed by the President of India. Her/his job is
to ensure that the state government is functioning according to the Constitution of India.
The Governor appoints the Chief Minister and other members of the council of ministers.
The constitution vests in the Governor all the executive powers of the State government.
Find out who is the governor of Andhra Pradesh.
148 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 157 ---
www.apteachers.in
System of Reservation
It has been observed that it is very difficult for weaker sections of the
population, like the dalits or adivasis to fight and win elections. As such,
very few of them get elected to the assemblies. In order to ensure that
they are adequately represented in the Assemblies, the Indian
Constitution reserve certain constituencies for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes.
Reserved Constituencies in Andhra Pradesh State Legislative Assembly:
Total Number of Constituencies : 175
Constituencies Reserved for SCs : 29
Constituencies Reserved for STs: 07
 Many people feel that similar reservation of seats for women too should be ensured.
What do you feel?
The Making of Laws
of taxes by the government. Before giving
approval, the members discuss the
How do the assemblies make laws?
proposals very carefully and different Usually laws are drafted by the ruling party
points of views are expressed. Thus, the as it alone has the majority support in the
Assembly to pass them. However, on some
benefits and ill-effects of such measures
issues, a member can also propose a law
are discussed in great detail. These are also
and it can be adopted if the majority
reported through newspapers and TV to the
supports it. Let us look at the procedure
public. for making a law in detail.
The MLAs also keep track of all Before a law is passed, the proposed law
is called a ‘Bill’. After being passed by
developments in their constituencies and
both the chambers and after the approval of
place the problems of the people before
the Governor, it becomes a law and is called
the Assembly. The minister of the
an ‘Act’ of the state
concerned department has to make legislature.
enquiries and find solutions. The minister
The minister who
and the cabinet, including the Chief
brings the Bill will
Minister, are responsible to the Assembly
describe in detail the
– that is, they have to answer any question
reasons for the new law
raised by a member with regard to their
work. If the answer
is not satisfactory,
the members may
force the concerned
1 6
3
minister to resign.
4
2
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Fig 16.4 Making of Laws in the State Assembly5 149

--- PAGE 158 ---
www.apteachers.in
in the Assembly. There will be a lot of bunds to prevent breaching of the tank
discussion and sometimes opposition from bunds.
different MLAs. There could be MLA (4): Hon. Speaker, the
suggestions to improve the provisions in Government is aware of the situation. It has
the Bill. A small committee consisting of already taken up the necessary measures
both ruling party and opposition members to prevent further damage. The Mandals
affected by the depletion of groundwater
is set up to discuss these suggestions. After
have been identified.
taking all such aspects and necessary
MLA (5) : Hon. Speaker, the
changes into account, it will be first
opposition should appreciate the steps
approved by the Cabinet. Then it will be
taken and should offer constructive
placed before the Assembly for voting. If
suggestions.They should not unnecessarily
more than half the members of the Vidhan
criticise the Government. Bunds were built
Sabha accept the bill it will be passed and
on the hill slopes in my constituencies and
taken to The Vidhan Parishad. If the Vidhana
as a result, there has been considerable
Parishad passes it, then it will be sent to rise in the level of groundwater in my
the Governor for approval, After his or her constituency. Government officials are
approval the bill will be called an Act and within the reach of the people.
published in gazettee. MLA (6) : Hon. Speaker, the Industrial
units in my area are discharging polluted
Discussions in the Assembly
water into the river and it has adverse
Let us read an imaginary example of effects on the health of the people. I would
discussions that can take place in the like to know the steps being taken by the
Legislative Assembly. government in this regard since drinking
water is a serious issue in my constituency.
MLA (1) : Honourable Speaker, due to
Minister: Hon’ble Speaker, the
lack of rains for the past three years, the
Government has great concern for the
groundwater level in my constituency has
health of the people. It has taken up all the
decreased too much. The Government has remedial and protective measures in the
not taken any steps in this regard. Moreover, drought prone mandals. Development of
tanks, plantation of trees, and banning sand
there has been an increase in the number of
mining are some of them. The Government
borewells. I wish to know from the Honourable
takes into consideration
Minister the steps being taken for the suggestions of the
honourable members
underground water and Hydrology.
and also seeks the
MLA (2): Hon. Speaker, yes it is true.
support of all for the
The situation in my constituency is no better. s u c c e s s f u l
The work of the officials is not satisfactory. implementation of the
programme.
The people have to walk a long distance
to fetch drinking water.
MLA (3): Hon. Speaker, the  What would be your response on
Government should provide money to the above issue if you were an
strengthen the bunds of the tanks, remove MLA?
the silt, and should take suitable steps to
 What is the difference between the
store the rain water during rainy seasons.
role of a ruling party MLA and an
Moreover, trees should be planted on the
opposition party MLA?
150 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 159 ---
www.apteachers.in
Key words :
1. Manifesto 2.Cabinet 3.Speaker 4. Assembly
5. Ruling party 6. Opposition party
Improve your learning
1. Name the few areas related to life of people on which laws should be made. AS
1
2. Your school belongs to the department of School Education. Find out some laws which are
applicable to your school (students, teachers, headmaster/ principal/ PTA). AS
4
3. There is a law that no child in the age group of 6 to14 should remain out of school. What
steps should be taken to implement this law? Discuss among yourselves with the help of your
teacher. AS
4
4. Read the para the making of laws and answer the question given below.
Suppose you are a member of the AP Legislative Assembly, which issue will you raise for
the making of law and why? Explain with an example. AS
4
5. Suppose there is a state under the name of Purabgarh with MLA seats of 368. After an election, different
political parties got seats as shown below: AS
3
Party A = 89
Party B = 91
Party C = 70
Party D = 84
Others = 34
Total = 368
Read the above table and answer the following questions:
a) Of the 368 seats, how many seats are needed for getting a majority to form the government in the state?
b) Which is the single largest party?
c) Can the single largest party form the government? If not, what can be the alternatives to form the
government?
d) How would a coalition government be different from a one party government?
6. At present, very few States in our country have a bicameral legislature. Can you name them? AS
1
7. Write an imaginary dialogue for the following picture in the context of the chapter. AS
1
8. Locate the Assembly constituencies of your district in your district map (Take the help of map. 1).AS
5
 List out the people represnetatives of your locality and exhibit in wall magazine.
 Organise model elections and Mock assembly/Parliament with your teacher’s
assistance.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Making of Laws in the State Assembly 151

--- PAGE 160 ---
152 Political Systems and Governance
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
17
Implementation of Laws
in the District
In the previous lesson, we saw how laws are made and how welfare and
development plans are made. But how are they implemented? Do you think people
elect those who implement laws? Do you think once the laws are made people
implement them themselves? You would be knowing how these things are done.
i. Building dams and canals
ii. Supplying electricity to houses
iii. Running ration shops
iv. Running trains
v. Printing currency notes
vi. Collecting taxes from people
vii. Preventing child labour and educating all children
viii. Defending the borders of the country
ix. Identifying those below the poverty line and implementing schemes
for their benefit
x. Preventing people from stealing from other people’s houses
 You may have heard of many kinds of government functionaries.
Can you name a few and discuss what they do?
We saw in the last lesson that there are
in all parts of the state. At the same time
various departments of the government to
the entire state is divided into a number of
do various kinds of activities. These
districts and most departments have their
departments are under the control of
offices in them for the implementation of
ministers, but they have a large number of
the government’s laws and plans. There are
officials who carry out the orders of the
13 districts in Andhra Pradesh.
government. Some of these officials are
posted in the state capital like Hyderabad  What is the name of your district
from where they plan the implementation and where is its headquarters?

--- PAGE 161 ---
www.apteachers.in
file deals with the activities of different
Each district has a District Collector & departments. She reads them and writes her
Magistrate who coordinates the work of all comments or orders on them. It is about
departments in the district. Let us learn 3.00 PM when Manisha Nagle finishes
more about their work. looking at the files. From 3.00 PM. to 4.30
PM everyday, she meets the people of the
The District Collector &
district. People from all the Villages come
Magistrate
to meet her with their problems.
Here is an imaginary district of Some farmers of Mallepalli mandal had
Nallavaram. This district has the following come to discuss the absence of irrigation
Mandals - Garipalli, Mallepalli, Narasapet, in their village. Their tanks were dry for two
Gurthur. The office of the district years. This year the crops failed. They
magistrate of the Nallavaram is in wanted to know if their loans could be
Nallavaram town. waived and if they can get some repair work
Garipalli
on tank bund. In the neighbouring villages
Nallavaram
tank bunds were repaired. They wanted such
work to be done in their village as well.
Manisha Nagle told them that since their
village was not in the state list of drought
affected areas they could not get any loan
waiver. Collector suggested that they
approach the MLA and present their
problems. She promised to instruct the
concerned department to attend to the tank
Gurthur
bund of the village.
Narasapet Mallepalli
At 5.00 A.M. on the next day morning,
Fig 17.1 Nallavaram District
Collector received a phone call from a town
The district magistrate, Manisha Nagle, in Narasapet Mandal. The cotton stored at
reaches her office at 10:30 every morning. the ginning mill there caught fire in the
At 11:30 today. there is a meeting of the night. People were trying to put out the fire.
officers of all departments in the office. The fire service had already reached the
The heads of all the departments have come area. It was necessary to ensure that fire
for the meeting. The Collector asks the did not spread to neighbouring areas. Nagle
head of each department about the progress immediately left for Narasapet Mandal. She
of the work during the previous month. She rang up the Superintendent of Police and
also asks them about the problems they face the civil surgeon and asked them to come
in the work. The meeting continued till along.
about 2 O’clock in the afternoon. The Collector reached Narasapet at
After the meeting, Manisha Nagle goes around 7.00 AM and went straight to the
through files. There is a stack of files. Each cotton ginning mill. A lot of the cotton had
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Implementation of Laws in the District 153

--- PAGE 162 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 17.2 District Collector
at the cotton factory.
and asked them to take strict actions during
the next few weeks and report to her at the
next monthly meeting. Manisha Nagle
reached Nallavaram only after it was dark.
Nallavaram is an imaginary district. But
what you saw the Collector of Nallavaram
doing is the work that they are expected
been destroyed but the fire was now under
to do in every district.
control. The Municipal Chairperson and the
police officers were also there. The  What explanation did Collector
Collector asked them about the extent of give for not waiving the loan for
damage. The Chairperson told her that two farmers?
labourers in the mill had suffered severe  Who were the other officials
burns and had been admitted to hospital. A mentioned in the incidents?
few houses nearby had also been burnt
 Who were the non-officials
down.
mentioned in the above incidents?
Nagle announced a compensation of ten
Tahasildar (MRO) and Village
thousand rupees each to the owner of the
houses, which were burnt and promised to Revenue Officers
inquire into the causes of fire. The
You may have noted
Collector then visited the injured labourers
that Nallavaram district is
at the hospital. She also announced a relief divided into different
payment of twenty thousand rupees each to Mandals. There are many
villages in each of these
the two labourers.
Mandals. In the map here,
On the way back she visited the you can see that
Municipal Office. It was pointed out that Nallavaram is divided into many Mandals.
Many villages together form a Mandal. Just
due to encroachment in many parts of the
like in the district headquarter there are
city the fire engine arrived late. Sidewalks
different offices at the Mandal. There are
of the roads were encroached by shop Mandal Parishad Development Officer
keepers. Many houses and other offices Revenue, Education, agriculture, and so on.
illegally extended their boundary walls
beyond the permitted limits. This was  Find out the name of your Mandal.
creating traffic jams in many parts of the  Name some of the Mandals in your
town. She talked to the Municipal Officials district.
154 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 163 ---
www.apteachers.in
Among others, the
Revenue Officer keeps the
land records. If you live in
a village or own land, you
may know that your parents
have some record for the
land that is owned by them.
All the land all over the
country is measured and
this information is kept in
these offices. They also
have maps of the land
showing land owned by
different people, showing
crops, tanks, drainages,
wells, neighbouring plots, Fig 17.3 Village Accountant
(V.R.O) with land records
roads, hillocks, and so on.
These documents become
extremely useful. If there is a dispute perennial rivers and forest areas. Yet today
between the boundaries of land owned by we find in many parts of Andhra Pradesh
two individuals, maps and written that borewells are dug up to 1,500 feet or
documents can be used for settling it. Or, more. In the long run, it may not be viable
if someone buys or sells the land, this to have such system of irrigation, or
information needs to be written in this drinking water.
office as well. These maps also have Andhra Pradesh Water, Land and
records of the forest or uncultivated Trees Protection Act, 2002
grazing lands. So if someone encroaches
It is important to
into these lands, they can be evicted.
protect these resources
It is the responsibility of the Village for the benefit and survival
Revenue Officer and Mandal Revenue of the next generations. In
this connection, the
Officer to keep track of these records of
Government of Andhra
the land. They also have the responsibility
Pradesh enacted the
for updating and issuing ration cards. Andhra Pradesh Water,
Land and Trees Protection Act in 2002. It
How Laws are Implemented
is being implemented from 19-04-2002.
Some of the features of this law are:
To understand this, first we need to
a. Permission from Mandal Revenue
understand an actual law. In the previous
Officer is essential to drill/ dig new
chapters we have read about the
well.
significance of groundwater, how it has
b. Specific depth and distance should
historically been important in our
be maintained between the wells to
agriculture development etc. We also have
avoid unnecessary competition.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Implementation of Laws in the District 155

--- PAGE 164 ---
www.apteachers.in
After the law was passed, government
c. Steps to prevent wastage of rain
formed an authority to implement the act.
water.
It was called the Water, Land and Trees
d. Industrial units should have waste
Protection Authority or WALTA. If you
water treatment plants.
look carefully, in order to implement a law
like this – it is necessary that different
e. Protection of Drinking water.
departments of the government work
f. In the regions affected by
together. You can note that forest
groundwater depletion sand
department has to be taken into account,
quarrying from river beds is
because forests are important for saving
prohibited.
water and the department in charge of
g. Social forestry to be taken up on Industry to ensure that the factories are not
large scale. polluting water.
So we can build a table such as the
h. Cutting trees without permission is
following to show how different persons
prohibited. When a tree is cut, two
in the government could be responsible for
saplings should be planted.
implementing the law:
Subject
Department
Registration of Rigs, Sand Mining, classification
Groundwater Department
of Groundwater basins, etc.
Municipal Administration & Construction of Rain-water harvesting
structures, tree planting, permission for
Urban Development Department
construction of new buildings.
Mines and Geology Department Monitoring Sand Mining in water bodies
Forest Department Granting permission for felling trees
Now if this law is properly implemented what will it mean? Considering the following
possibilities, can you identify which departments will be responsible if their activities are
to be evaluated – it is possible that there are more than one department which looks at
them:
 Satyavathi is a farmer who wants to dig a new bore well, but there is another bore
well in her neighbouring land. What are the rules she has to follow?
 Padmanabham wants to build a new house and and wants to get sand from the river
bed near the house. For this, whose permission is required?
 Apparao is a contractor who wants to start a stone quarry near the forest. From
which departments should he take permission.
156 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 165 ---
www.apteachers.in
Thus, in a democratic country like ours Project:
there are different roles played by elected
1. Interview your teacher, or any
representatives and appointed government government school teacher to get the
officials. In many ways, these are different following details:
from the way kings and priests dictated
When was she or he ppointed?
different aspect of our lives. That is not to
To which department of the
say that all different forms of
government does s/he report?
marginalisation, disparities and
Has the teacher been transferred?
discrimination have gone away from the
How are they promoted or punished?
society. But we can work towards achieving
Who is responsible for their salaries?
them.
If they have complaints about
working conditions, whom do they
Key words :
report to?
Magistrate
2. What has been their experience in
Loan waiver
implementing the new rules/
V.R.O programmes like ensuring enrolment of
Ginning children, mid-day meals; or any other
program? Make a presentation of your
WALTA Tahsildar
findings in classroom.
Improve your learning
1. Make a list of activities done by the District Collector. AS
1
2. Correct the following statements : AS
1
a. Law is implemented by the elected representatives.
b. The Collector is in charge of a Mandal.
c. People approach the Mandal Development Officer to solve the problems of the entire district.
d. Tahasildar (MRO) keeps the record of land revenue.
3. Read the first two paragaphs of page 161 and answer the question given below. AS
2
Why do you think land records are kept at village and mandal levels?
4. Compare the roles of people who make laws with those who implement them in the following
aspects: AS
1
a) has to contest elections; b) are part of different departments of government;
c) responsible for making laws; d) responsible for implementing laws;
e) usually elected for 5 years; f) are appointed into jobs;
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Implementation of Laws in the District 157

--- PAGE 166 ---
www.apteachers.in
Member of Legislative Assembly Persons in Administration
5. Here is another brief description of Manisha Nagle. Read this carefully and compare with the
text given under the head “Mansabdar’s and Jagirdars” in chapter 14 and “Captains of the
troops’ - The amaranayakas” in Chapter 13 and fill the following table. AS
3
Manisha Nagle has been the Collector of Nallavaram for the last 5 months. Earlier, she worked as the
Deputy Secretary in the Ministry of Public Health Department in the state capital. It is possible that she
may be transferred as a Collector of another district or taken back to the State Secretariat. She is an
employee of the Indian Government. Often, some of them have to go to Delhi and work for the
central government. They are all selected through an examination conducted by the government.
Item Government Amara Nayakas Mansabdars
employees
Process of selection
Paid through
6. Colour the mandals surrounding your mandal in your district map. AS
5
Discussion :
Organise a problem of “Students interaction with revenue officials” (Tahasildar/
Mandal Revenue Inspector/Village Revenue Officer) about “the implementation of
laws”.
158 Political Systems and Governance

--- PAGE 167 ---
Caste system has created one of the major forms of inequality in our
country. For centuries, people have fought against this discrimination
and our constitution too strives to end it. Elimination of caste
discrimination has been one of the major aims of our governments.
Let us read how caste system works and what steps have been taken
to end caste discrimination.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Caste Discrimination and the Stuggle for Equalities 159
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
18
Caste Discrimination and
the Struggle for Equality
A large number of people in our country livelihood. However, certain kinds of jobs
think of themselves as belonging to some are valued more than the others. Activities
caste or the other. They even put the names like cleaning, washing, cutting hair, picking
of their castes as a part of their own names. garbage are seen as tasks that are of less
Usually, people of a caste follow some value and people who do this work are seen
common customs and worship a particular as dirty or impure. This belief is an
deity. Many people who follow the caste important aspect of the caste system. In the
rules, marry only within their own caste. In caste system, communities/ groups of
olden days, people of one caste followed people were placed in a sort of ladder where
the same profession or work, though in our each caste was either above or below the
times, this is changing fast. Thus, you can other. Those who placed themselves at the
see that the caste system creates some top of this ladder called themselves upper
bonds among a particular group of people caste and saw themselves as superior. The
and separates them from the other groups. groups who were placed at the bottom of
the ladder were seen as unworthy and are
 To what extent are the above true
called “untouchables”. Caste rules were set
in your area and to what extent are
which did not allow the so-called
they changed? Discuss.
“untouchable” to take on work, other than
what they were meant to do. For example,
However, the caste system has also given
some groups were only allowed to pick
rise to great inequalities and discrimination
garbage and remove dead animals from the
in our society. Let us see how this happens.
village. But they were not allowed to enter
People are engaged in different kinds of
the homes of the upper castes or take water
work like teaching, carpentry, pottery,
from the village well or enter temples.
weaving, fishing, farming etc. to earn their
Their children could not sit next to children

--- PAGE 168 ---
www.apteachers.in
of other castes in school. Thus upper castes Koregaon and that we were
acted in ways, which did not give the so- waiting for father or his
called “untouchables” the same rights as servant to come, but that
neither had turned up and
they enjoyed.
that we did not know how
 In what ways do you think the caste to reach Koregaon. We were
well-dressed children.
system promotes inequality among
From our dress or talk no one could make
people?
out that we were children of the untouchables.
Indeed the station master was quite sure we
When some people are not allowed to
were brahmin children and was extremely
do what they want to do – like get touched at the plight in which he found us
education, or take up jobs of their choice, in. As is usual among the Hindus, the station
master asked us who we were. Without a
we can say that they are facing
moment’s thought, I blurted out that we were
discrimination. Dr. Bhimrao Ramji
Mahars. (Mahar is one of the communities
Ambedkar, one of the greatest leaders of
which are treated as untouchables in the
India, shares his first experience of caste- Bombay Presidency.) He was stunned. His
based discrimination, which took place in face underwent a sudden change. We could
see that he was overpowered by a strange
1901 when he was just nine years old. He
feeling of repulsion. As soon as he heard my
had gone with his brothers and cousins to
reply, he went away to his room and we stood
meet his father in Koregaon which is now where we were.
in Maharashtra. Fifteen to twenty minutes elapsed; the sun
was almost setting. Our father had not turned
up nor had he sent his servant, and now the
station master had also left us. We were quite
bewildered, and the joy and happiness, which
we felt at the beginning of the journey, gave
way to a feeling of extreme sadness.
After half an hour, the station master
returned and asked us what we proposed to
do. We said that if we could get a bullock-
cart on hire we would go to Koregaon, and if
it was not very far we would like to start
straightway. There were many bullock-carts
plying for hire. But my reply to the station
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
master that we were Mahars had gone round
(1891- 1956) among the cart men and not one of them was
Chairperson of the committee for prepared to suffer being polluted and to
demean himself carrying passengers of the
drafting of the Constitution of India and
untouchable classes. We were prepared to pay
the first Union Law Minister of India.
double the fare but we found that money did
not work. The station master, who was
“Long did we wait, but no one turned up.
negotiating on our behalf, stood silent, not
An hour elapsed and the station master came knowing what to do.
to enquire. He asked us for our tickets. We
Source: Dr B. R. Ambedkar, Writings and Speeches,
showed them to him. He asked us why we Volume 12, Edited Vasant Moon, Bombay Education
tarried. We told him that we were bound for Department, Govt. of Maharashtra.
160 Social Organisation and Inequities

--- PAGE 169 ---
www.apteachers.in
 Despite the children offering on. Sometimes I would have to sit way
money, the cartmen refused them. behind everybody, right near the
Why? door…sometimes they would beat me
without any reason.” When he was in
 How did people at the station
Class IV, the headmaster asked Omprakash
discriminate against Dr Ambedkar
to sweep the school and the playground. He
and his brothers?
writes, “The playground was way larger
 How do you think Dr Ambedkar felt
than my small physique could handle and
as a child, when he saw the station
in cleaning it, my back began to ache. My
master’s reaction to his statement
face was covered with dust. Dust had
that they were Mahars?
gone inside my mouth. The other children
 Have you ever experienced
in my class were studying and I was
prejudice or witnessed an incident
sweeping. The headmaster was sitting in his
of discrimination?
room and watching me. I was not even
 How did this make you feel? allowed to get a drink of water. I swept
the whole day,…From the doors and
Imagine how difficult it would be if
windows of the school rooms, the eyes of
people could not move easily from one
the teachers and the boys saw this
place to the other, how insulting and
spectacle.” Omprakash was made to sweep
hurtful it is to have people move away,
the school and the playground for the next
refuse to touch you or allow you to drink
couple of days and this only came to an end
water from the same source as they do.
when his father, who happened to be passing
This small incident shows how a simple by, saw his son sweeping. He confronted
task of going from one place to another in the teachers and then walking away from
a cart was not available to the children – the school holding Omprakash’s hand, he
even though they could pay the money. All said loudly for all of them to hear, “You
the cart men at the station refused to take are a teacher…So I am leaving now. But
the children. They acted in a discriminatory remember this much Master…(He) will
manner. So, clearly, as this story shows study right here…in this school. And not
us, caste based discrimination is not only just him, but there will be more coming
limited to preventing dalits from after him.”
undertaking certain economic activities but
 Why do you think Omprakash
it also denies them the respect and dignity
Valmiki was treated unequally by
given to others.
his classmates and the teachers?
An example of Discrimination in
 If you were Omprakash Valmiki,
schools
how would you feel? Write four
Omprakash Valmiki is a famous dalit
lines about it.
writer. In his autobiography, Joothan, he
writes, “I had to sit away from the others When persons are treated unequally,
in the class, and that too on the floor. The their dignity is violated. The dignity of
mat ran out before reaching the spot I sat Omprakash Valmiki was violated because
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Caste Discrimination and the Stuggle for Equalities 161

--- PAGE 170 ---
www.apteachers.in
of the way in which he was treated. By British rule also included
picking on him and making him sweep the within it the struggle of
school, because of his caste, Omprakash large groups of people
Valmiki’s schoolmates and teachers hurt his who not only fought
dignity badly and made him feel as if he was against the British but also
less than equal to all other students in the fought to be treated more
equally. Dalits, women,
school. Being a child, Omprakash Valmiki
tribals and peasants fought against the
could do very little about the situation that
inequalities they experienced in their lives.
he was in. It was his father who, on seeing
his son sweep, felt angry by this unequal In the nineteenth and the twentieth
treatment and confronted the teachers. centuries, several social reformers fought
to create a new social system based on
Has it always been like this?
freedom, equality, brotherhood, human
No, there was a time when there was no dignity and economic justice. They include
caste system. We saw the lives of hunter Jyotirao Govindarao Phule, Savitri Bai
gatherers and tribes. They did not have any Phule, Periyar E.V. Ramasami Naickar, Sri.
caste system. Some aspects of the caste Narayana Guru and
system emerged in the times of the Vedas Ayyankali.
in which the four major caste groups –
Jyotirao Govindarao
Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra Phule also known as
are mentioned. Later on, many new aspects Mahatma Jotiba Phule
like untouchability and restrictions on was a social reformer
marriage, eating together, etc. emerged. It from Maharashtra.
was said that the lower castes should serve Jotiba Phule and his
and obey the higher castes. These ideas wife Savitri Bai Phule Jyotirao Govindrao
were pioneers of Phule (1827-1890)
spread all over India including Andhra
women’s education in India. In 1873 he
Pradesh in the times of the kingdoms you
founded the Satyashodhak Samaj (Truth
studied in chapters 13 and 14. As these
Seekers Society), which was devoted to
ideas spread, many people criticised them.
securing human rights and social justice for
Thinkers like Buddha, Mahavira, Ramanuja,
low-caste people.
Basava, Kabir, Vemana, etc. criticised the
He is most known for his efforts to
idea of some people being superior to
educate women and the lower castes as
others by birth. They felt that all people,
well as the masses. He, after educating his
irrespective of their birth or profession,
wife, opened a school
can perform good deeds and attain
for girls in India in
salvation. You will read about them in August 1848.
greater detail in later chapters.
Savitri Bai Phule
Striving for Equality was the first
headmistress of the
You read about the establishment of
country’s first school
British rule and the beginnings of struggle
for girls in Pune. She
Savitri Bai Phule
against it. The struggle for freedom from
(1831-1897)
162 Social Organisation and Inequities

--- PAGE 171 ---
www.apteachers.in
devoted her life to educating dalits. She Untouchability is seen as a crime and has
started a night school for agriculturists and been legally abolished by the law. People
labourers. She died while serving plague are free to choose the kind of work they
wish to do. Government jobs are open to
patients.
all people. In addition, the Constitution
Periyar is known as a
also placed responsibility on the
rationalist and the leader of
government to take specific steps to realise
the lower caste movement in this right to equality for poor and other such
South India. He aroused marginal communities.
people to realise that all
The two ways in which the government
men are equal, and that it is has tried to implement the equality that is
Periyar E.V.
the birthright of every guaranteed in the Constitution is through
Ramasami
individual to enjoy liberty laws and through government programmes
(1879-1973)
and equality. or schemes to help disadvantaged
communities. There are several laws in
Sri Narayana Guru, born
India that protect every person’s right to be
in Kerala, preached
treated equally. In addition to laws, the
brotherhood for all and
government has also set up several schemes
fought against the ill
to improve the lives of communities and
effects of the caste
individuals who have been treated unequally
system. He led a quiet but
for several centuries. These schemes are
significant social
to ensure greater opportunities for them.
revolution and gave the
One of the steps taken by the
Sri Narayana Guru
watchwords ‘One Caste,
government includes the mid-day meal
(1856-1928)
One Religion, One God for
scheme. This refers to the programme
all men’.
introduced in all government elementary
When India became a free nation in 1947, schools to provide children with cooked
our leaders too were concerned about the lunch. Tamil Nadu was the first in India to
different kinds of inequalities that existed. introduce this scheme, and in 2001, the
The people who wrote the Constitution of Supreme Court asked all the state
India, a document that laid out the rules by governments to begin this programme in
which the nation would function, were their schools within six months. This
aware of the ways in which discrimination programme has many positive effects.
had been practised in our society and how These include the fact that more poor
people had struggled against this. Many children have begun attending school.
leaders of these struggles such as Teachers reported that earlier children
Dr.Ambedkar had also fought for the rights would often go home for lunch and then not
of the dalits. return to school. But now with the midday
So, these leaders set out a vision and meal being provided in school, their
goals in the Constitution to ensure that all attendance has improved. Their mothers,
the people of India were considered equal. who earlier had to interrupt their work to
This equality of all persons is seen as a key feed their children at home during the day,
value that unites us all as Indians. Everyone now no longer need to do so. This
has equal rights and opportunities. programme has also helped reduce caste
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Caste Discrimination and the Stuggle for Equalities 163

--- PAGE 172 ---
www.apteachers.in
prejudices because both lower and upper country between schools that the rich
caste children in the school eat this meal attend and those that the poor attend. Even
together. In Andhra Pradesh in almost all today, there are several schools in the
country in which dalit children, like
the rural schools, mid-day meal is prepared
Omprakash Valmiki, are discriminated
by the members of women self help groups,
against and treated unequally. These
who are invariably from deprived classes,
children are forced into unequal situations
and in quite a few places, dalit women have in which their dignity is not respected. This
been employed to cook the meal. The mid- is because people refuse to think of them
day meal programme also helps reduce the as equal even though the law requires it.
hunger of poor students who often come One of the main reasons for this is that
attitudes change very slowly. Even though
to school and cannot concentrate because
persons are aware that discrimination is
their stomachs are empty.
against the law, they continue to treat
 What is the mid-day meal people unequally on the basis of their caste,
programme? religion, disability, economic status and
sex. It is only when people begin to believe
 Can you list three benefits of the
that no one is inferior, and that every person
programme?
deserves to be treated with dignity, the
 How do you think this programme present attitudes can change. Establishing
might help promote greater equality in a democratic society is a
equality? continuous struggle. Individuals as well as
various communities in India should
While government programmes play an
contribute to achieve this.
important role in increasing equality of
Key words :
opportunity, there is much that needs to be
done. While the mid-day meal programme 1. Untouchability
has helped increase the enrolment and 2. Scheme
attendance of poor children in school, there
3. Constitution
continues to be big differences in our
4. Autobiography
Improve your learning
1. What is the difference between being punished for a mistake and being discriminated against?
Was the child Ambedkar being punished or discriminated against? AS
1
2. Do you think it is possible to make friends across castes – what kind of problems will you have
to overcome for this? AS
4
3. Our constitution abolished the practice of untouchability and declared it a crime. Do you think
it has been fully abolished in practice? AS
4
4. Why do you think people want to marry within their caste? Will this help to preserve caste
inequality? AS
4
5. How can your school help in ending caste based inequalities? AS
6
6. Read the third para of page 168 and comment on it. AS
2
Project :
1. Find out about a government scheme in your area. What does this scheme do? to whom this
scheme intended to benefit.
2. Discuss with your parents or grandparents about how caste system functioned earlier to find
out what has changed and what has not. Prepare a report and present it in the class.
164 Social Organisation and Inequities

--- PAGE 173 ---
In Chapter 12, we read about workers in a paper mill. Most paper mill workers
were like Anand – they get high wages, bonus (share of profit of the company),
Provident Fund (savings for future) and other allowances. They also get healthcare
and housing facilities. Such workers constitute only a small section
of all workers in India. We also learnt about other kinds of workers
in the same paper mill - Umar and Pushpa who get low wages and
do not get any other allowances or facilities required for a decent
living. Most workers in India are like Umar and Pushpa. In this
chapter, we will learn about why and how workers negotiate with
their employers for a decent life through their organisations and
laws. We will also learn about an organisation working for those
who work on their own.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Livelihood and Struggle for Equalities 165
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
19 Livelihood and Struggles
of Urban Workers
We have learnt that government makes Working as ‘Permanent Workers’
laws in the interest of the people. Laws are in Factories
also made to protect the welfare of workers
Read the following accounts of two
employed in fields, factories, private and
factories in Vishakapatnam. This was
government offices. Factories which are
recorded in 2002.
properly registered with the government are
expected to follow these laws and provide Fibrotex (not its real name), a large scale
better wages and other facilities required factory producing fibre glass began
for workers. Governments also have Labour working in 1976. In 2002, out of 570
Departments, which have the responsibility to workers, 140 were permanent workers; 60
ensure that these laws are followed. If the workers were employed on contractual
laws are not followed, workers can file cases basis and they were called badli workers,
in courts. At times, factories protect the i.e. they replaced permanent workers in
welfare of only a section of workers who are case of their absence and about 300
called the ‘Regular Workers’ and those called workers were employed daily on casual
‘Casual’ or ‘Contract workers’. basis. (A permanent worker cannot be
dismissed without a proper procedure and
.However, there are many factories
payment of compensation while other
which do not get properly registered with
workers can be removed easily.)
the government. Let us look at the
conditions of workers in such factories This factory has a Trade Union.
closely. Initially it was set up with the

--- PAGE 174 ---
www.apteachers.in
encouragement of the company, which workers with government and the
wanted a union that will be more employers. They seek to ensure proper
agreeable to its policies. Soon the Union wages, other benefits and decent working
developed into a strong workers’ conditions for their members.
organisation as workers participated in Collectively with their member workers,
the union actively. It negotiated with the they secure social security benefits,
management to fix wages etc. medical facilities, houses, Provident
Fund and pension. If any worker is
All workers get wages fixed through
harassed or is in need of help, the Trade
agreements with the union and medical
Union takes up his or her cause. Unions
facilities through Employees’ State
adopt a variety of measures like
Insurance (ESI) and Provident Fund (PF).
negotiations, filing cases in the law
The Trade Union secured other benefits also
courts and even strikes or stoppage of
– health checkup in big private hospitals,
work to pressurise the employers.
leave in case workers become sick, safety-
wear in the work place, safe drinking water The details of workers’ salaries
in the factory, educational allowance for (in 2002) in Fibrotex are as follows:
workers’ children, conveyance allowance
and also leave travel allowance. They also
Permanent worker Rs.4500 – 10,000
get loans from the company when needed
per month
and the company has also provided quarters
Contract /
for them to live in. The company also took
Badli workers Rs.3000-4000
interest in training workers who have been
working for long in the factory, sending Casual labourers Rs.58 per day for
them to foreign countries to improve eight hours
production quality. The Trade Union also
made agreements with factory owners to As you can see, most of the benefits are
regularize contract labourers after a available only to the 140 ‘Permanent
definite period of work. Workers’. About 360 workers, called
badlis and contract workers, get low
The Trade Union of Fibrotex was quite
salary and few benefits like Provident Fund
active in the town as well. This had helped
and ESI.
many other small Trade Unions in other
factories to improve their bargaining power
 What is the difference between a
from their employers.
permanent worker and a badli
Trade Union worker?
 Calculate the difference between
A Trade Union is an organisation
the monthly salary of a permanent
formed by workers to protect their
worker and casual labourer.
interests. If every single worker has to
negotiate with the employer separately,  Invite one or two factory workers
they will not be in a strong position. who are getting ESI and PF benefits
However, if all of them negotiate, their to class and collect more details
position will become stronger. Trade about how these facilities are made
Unions negotiate on be- half of all available to her / him and the steps
166 Social Organisation and Inequities

--- PAGE 175 ---
www.apteachers.in
a worker has to follow to get these Factory?
benefits. You may also invite a
 Why do you think there were more
parent of your class also to talk
women in the ‘contract worker’
about these things.
category rather than in the category
of ‘permanent workers’?
KRS Medicines Factory
 Is it fair to pay women workers less
This company (not a real name) mixes
than men for the same kind of
and packs medicines for another big
work?
medicine company. It employed about 118
 Do you think it would have been
workers of whom about 104 workers were
different if the workers had been
employed as daily casual workers. That is
educated and literate?
only 14 workers were regular and
permanent and were used for the skilled
Working on Construction Sites
work of mixing the chemicals to prepare
and Brick Kilns
the medicine powder. They were paid about
Rs. 1500 to Rs 2500 per month and had a Uma, her husband and ten year old
security of employment. They also got ESI daughter work in a brick kiln in a village
and PF. The remaining 104 workers who in East Godavari district. She comes from
were engaged on a daily basis mainly did a village in Odisha where they have a
the packaging and labelling of the medicine. small plot of land. They had taken a loan
About 56 of them were women. These daily of twenty thousand rupees and could not
workers were engaged by a labour repay it. They were at the verge of selling
contractor who was told everyday by the their land when a contractor who was
manager how many workers to engage. recruiting workers for brick kilns in
These workers mainly came from nearby Andhra Pradesh approached them. He
villages and were usually illiterate. The offered them an advance of Rs.10,000 so
women workers had to work for about 12 that they could repay a part of their debt.
hours a day and were paid just Rs.30 They would have to work for six months
whereas the men were paid Rs.42 for the in a brick kiln and they would also be paid
same work. This is much below the additional wages and provided with a hut
minimum wage fixed by the government for to live in. The work will start in December
this kind of factories. The managers do not and end in June when they could return
allow the workers to form any Trade Union work on their land. That is how Uma
and threaten that they will close down the and her family came to work in the kiln.
factory if any union is formed. They are not alone. About two lakh such
workers from Odisha come to Andhra
These days a large number of companies
Pradesh to work in brick kilns. It is also
are adopting policies similar to this
common to see thousands of worker
company, reducing the number of regular
families from Andhra Pradesh go to other
workers and replacing them with contract
states like Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra
and casual workers.
to work in kilns of those states.
 Why was no Trade Union allowed Uma wakes up around four o’clock in the
to form in KRS Medicines morning to prepare some kanji. Her
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Livelihood and Struggle for Equalities 167

--- PAGE 176 ---
www.apteachers.in
husband is still sleeping as he
worked till 2 o’clock in the morning.
She wakes up her daughter and
both of them get ready to work.
They have to fetch water and mix
sand and clay and prepare the clay
for making bricks. They begin work
around 5 AM in the morning and
work non-stop till about 9 o’clock
when they take a break for tea. By
then her husband too joins them
and he puts the clay in moulds.
Once the clay has been shaped into Fig 19.1 Construction Labour
bricks, the daughter smoothens them
person per day in this work?
and marks the seal of the company on the
bricks. These are then allowed to dry, then  Why there are no Trade Unions in
loaded on bullock carts and taken to kilns brick kilns?
for baking. The work goes on
 Do you think government should
continuously till about 2 o’ clock in the
help workers to form Trade Union
night. Uma and her husband work for
among brick kiln workers?
nearly 14 to 16 hours. They don’t want to
 In what way can the government
stop work because they are paid
help brick kiln workers to improve
according to the number of bricks they
their working conditions?
make. They are paid about Rs 108 per
every thousand bricks they make. They
normally manage to make about 1000
bricks a day. If they fall ill, they will not be
able to earn anything. In this way, they
work day and night for nearly 6 months
– on some days they just can’t work as
they grow too tired or ill. They usually eat
broken rice and dal and on some days
some vegetable. At the end of the six month
period, they often just manage to clear
Fig 19.2 Cotton Pickers
the advance they got and actually have to
go back empty handed. Sometimes they Such is the story of lakhs of brick
manage to take home about four or five makers and other labourers who work in
thousand rupees. different activities all over the world. They
are given advance by a contractor; they are
 Can you calculate how many days
taken to far off states whose languages they
it will take them to clear the
do not know; they work day and night for
advance of Rs 10,000 they got
five to six months with their family and
from the sardar (Contractor)?
children and earn just enough to clear the
 What is the average wage for one
advance they had taken. In some cases even
168 Social Organisation and Inequities

--- PAGE 177 ---
www.apteachers.in
when people are too tired to work, they are an employment which will
forced by the contractor to work. They live ensure her/him a livelihood
like bonded slaves. Whenever these and will not be arbitrarily
workers bring their plight to the thrown out of work. If it is
inevitable for a company to
government, government officials
remove a worker, he or she
intervene and ‘free’ these ‘bonded
should be paid adequate
labourers’ from brick kilns and contractors
compensation for the loss
and send them home. Since they have no
of work.
other employment opportunity at home,
4. Income Security: so that every
they are again forced to take advances from
worker has adequate and regular
the contractor and come back to the kilns
income for taking care of the needs of
again. There are no Trade Unions that fight
their families and savings for living a
for their rights, as they are migrant workers
dignified life in their old age.
spread out in a number of sites. 5. Work Security: so that when they fall
ill or meet with an accident, they can
 What kind of machines, tools and
get proper care and get paid for the
sources of power are used in brick
period of illness.
production?
6. Skill Improvement: so that they can
improve their skills and capabilities
 What kinds of skills are needed for
while at work.
this job? How are they acquired?
7. Collective Voice: so that they can
 Why do you think they are made to
form unions to express their problems
work in distant states?
and needs without fear and negotiate
Ensuring Workers’ Rights - with the employers as a group rather
A Global Concern than as individuals.
Over the last two hundred years workers
Ever since the Industrial Revolutions
about which you have studied in Chapter
10, workers all over the world have been
fighting for a dignified life and a just share
of their produce. They have fought for
several kinds of securities and rights:
1. Right to Productive and Safe
Employment: so that every worker
can work according to his or her skill
and capacity and work under safe
Fig 19.3 Knife Sharpeners
conditions without endangering their
health.
all over the world have fought to get these
2. Right to Leisure and Rest: so that rights recognized, even though they may not
they have time to rest from their tiring be implemented in all places. In most
work and also have time to attend to countries the governments have agreed that
other cultural and social interests. these are basic needs of workers and made
laws that ensure workers these rights.
3. Right to Employment Security: so
that every worker knows that he/she has
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Livelihood and Struggle for Equalities 169

--- PAGE 178 ---
www.apteachers.in
Read the previous sections again and colour the whole box (in the next page) against
rights and benefits available to workers. If only a part of workers are covered, shade a part
of the box depending on the proportion of coverage. Cross mark the box if no right/
benefit is available.
S.No Rights Fibrotex KRS Medicine Brick Kilns
Factory
1. Right to Productive and Safe
Employment
2. Right to Leisure and Rest
3. Right to Employment Security
4. Income Security
5. Work Security
6. Skill improvement
7. Right to Collective Voice
Informal Work and Workers in
Towns
In Andhra Pradesh and
other states of India,
towns and cities are
becoming bigger and
bigger. People are rapidly
shifting from villages to
these towns. But many of
them do not get sufficient
regular employment there and doing a
variety of odd jobs. They sell vegetables
or other items, make and sell snacks, work
in tea stalls, or small factories, stitch
clothes, load and unload in markets, work
as domestic maids, etc. Many of them
produce goods at home – weaving clothes,
papads, pickle, doing embroidery, etc. and
are engaged through ‘putting out’ system.
Most of these activities do not get
registered with the government. Workers
of these kinds can be called informal
workers and the nature of such work is
called informal work.
What is common about all these areas
of employment is that they require very
little capital or skill training but the
employment is both irregular and very low
Fig 19.4 Workers laying cables
paying. As such, these workers are in a very
170 Social Organisation and Inequities

--- PAGE 179 ---
www.apteachers.in
vulnerable position. Unlike ‘permanent factories now have to join the ranks of the
workers’ in factories and offices who get casual workers.
employed and paid regularly, these workers
Looking at these problems some trade
do several jobs in a day - they may distribute
unionists of Gujarat formed what is
newspaper in the morning, work in a tea
considered the largest trade union of the
shop in the day time and cook in some
informal workers in the world. Let us know
houses in the night. This keeps them busy
more about it.
throughout the day without any rest. In most
cases, all members of their families, Self Employed Women’s
including childen, work to earn. So, the Association (SEWA)
children usually remain uneducated. When
In 1971, a small group
faced with financial problems, they try to
of migrant women cart-
cut expenditure –
pullers in Ahmedabad’s
cloth market approached
like taking children out of schools or
Textile Labour
cutting down on food or medicines. Even
Association (TLA) to
after all this, they are not able to meet their
help them in improving
needs. They are forced to take small loans
their housing facilities. TLA was the oldest
from friends and relatives and at times from
and the largest textile workers’ union with
moneylenders. Almost all of them are
which Mahatma Gandhi was closely
heavily indebted to these moneylenders and
associated. The Union helped these women
often have to work for them.
to form SEWA in in 1971, which later
became a Trade Union in 1972.
Since then SEWA grew
continuously, with women
working in different
occupations becoming its
members. SEWA members
have no fixed employee
employer relationship and
depend on their own labour for
survival. They barely have any
assets or working capital. Any
self-employed women can
become a member of SEWA by
paying Rs.5 as membership
Fig 19.5 Road Laying Work fee. The SEWA helps self-
employed women in
Most of them do not have any Trade
addressing their grievances, improving
Union to defend their rights. As we
their work culture and to become
mentioned earlier, the number of such
financially self-reliant in running their
workers is increasing constantly in the
businesses. Hawkers/ vendors selling
country. They are increasing not only
vegetables, fruits, fish, eggs, food items,
because people are moving in from villages,
household goods, new and old clothes;
but also due to the closing down of old large
workers working in houses like weavers,
factories and mills. The workers of these
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Livelihood and Struggle for Equalities 171

--- PAGE 180 ---
www.apteachers.in
potters, bidi and agarbatti workers, papad rollers, readymade garment workers, artisans;
manual labourers and service providers like agricultural labourers, construction workers,
contract labourers, handcart pullers, head-loaders, domestic workers, laundry workers,
cattle rearers, salt workers, gum collectors, etc. became members of SEWA.
About 13 lakh workers in 9 states in India are now members of SEWA. The SEWA is also
running a bank cooperative for its members and provides health insurance facility. The SEWA
also helps its members in marketing their produce and ensuring them fair wages. Do you
think such organisations could be of some help in improving the conditions of hundreds of
women self-employed in selling vegetables on roadsides, market places and on streets in
Andhra Pradesh?
Key words :
1. Compensation 2. Provident Fund 3. Badli Worker
4. Wages 5. Workers on contract basis
6. ESI 7. Permanent Workers
Improve your learning
1. Compare the condition of a worker in brick kiln, a permanent worker and a contract worker in
a factory. AS
1
2. Can you make a list of jobs done by casual and self employed workers in your area? AS
3
3. Make a list of different types of unions discussed in this chapter. Fill in the table: AS
3
Company in which
Type of labour Main problems Suggested solution
union was working
4. Talk to a Trade Union member (leader) and find out why did he/ she join the union, what their
rights and duties as a union member. AS
3
5. Observe the figures 19.1 and 19.3 and comment on them. AS
2
172 Social Organisation and Inequities

--- PAGE 181 ---
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Folk - Religion 173
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
20
Folk Religion
DDDDDiiiiissssscccccuuuuussssssssss ttttthhhhheeeee fffffooooollllllllllooooowwwwwiiiiinnnnnggggg qqqqquuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss iiiiinnnnn yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr ccccclllllaaaaassssssssss :::::
1. Which gods / goddesses are worshipped in your area?
2. Which saints, pirs and babas do your family respect?
3. Which animals and trees are worshipped by people?
4. Do you know how people worship?
5. How are the deities worshipped and who performs the worship?
6. In which languages are the deities addressed by the worshippers?
You may have listened to conversations Many people in our
like the following: country worship and pay
reverence to gods in large
Lakshmi: In recent months, my children
temples, churches or
have been falling ill repeatedly.
mosques. On the other
Ankamma : My husband also had been hand, people also worship
unwell for one month. many village deities. Who are these popular
deities and how, when and by whom are they
worshipped?
Satthemma: I think our goddess There are a large number of village
Muthyalamma is angry with us. We should deities – some of them belong to particular
offer her a special worship to appease castes, or particular villages or even
particular families. Some of the more
her. Let us take Bonalu and sacrifice a
common goddesses are as follows:
cock to the Goddess.
Pochamma: Pochamma is the most
*** popular folk goddess of Andhra Pradesh. In
every village, there is a small shrine
Rama Krishna : My daughter is very weak
dedicated to her. This is distinct from
and does not eat properly.
temples to Gods like Rama or Shiva. A very
simple temple under a neem tree with
Suresh: Why don’t you go to the Pir
goddess in the form of a stone inside, is
Baba’s dargah and ask the Maulvi to tie
built. In modern towns and cities, these
a tawiz ? She will become all right.
temples are built with some architecture
and with a stone idol inside.

--- PAGE 182 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 20.1 & 20.2 Here are two idols of Pochamma.
In villages, on special occasions, of all Maisamma: She is believed to protect
castes go to the shrine with bonalu. They
the cattle. Among the cattle sheds, a niche
wash the deity and clean the shrine area.
is whitewashed and decorated with
There are no priests and people pray
“Kumkuma” and called as ‘Maisamma
according to their customs and traditions
Goodu’. In many places, Katta-Maisamma
with flowers, etc. in their own language:
is also worshipped as a goddess of water
“Mother, we have seeded the fields, now
and is worshipped in the form of a small
you must ensure good crop.” “My daughter
stone on the tank bund. People believe that
is sick, you must cure her.” “Mother, keep
she will ensure that the tank is full. Thus,
away all infectious diseases and evils from
due to her blessings the crops flourish.
our family.” They offer a part of the bonam
Gangamma: She is a water goddess who
and sometimes also offer a chicken or a
protects fishermen who go out into the sea.
sheep.
It is believed that the poor and the orphans
are protected by the goddess Gangamma.
Yellamma: Yellamma is also called as
Polimeramma, ‘Mariaemma’, ‘Renuka’
Mahankali, Jogamma, Somalamma and by
other names. It is believed that she guards
the boundaries of the village and will not
allow any disease or evil to enter the village.
People mainly pray to her to prevent
epidemics like cholera.
Potharaju: The farmers of Andhra Pradesh
believe that Potharaju looks after their
agricultural lands and crops and protects the
crops from dreadful diseases, thieves and
Fig 20.3 Maisamma animals. The farmers keep a small stone
174 Religion and Society

--- PAGE 183 ---
www.apteachers.in
It is a general
practice to offer animal
sacrifice in most of the
folk festivals. This
results in the killing of
thousands of such
animals. . Tp prevent
this, the sacrifice of any
animal or bird in any
religious worship is
banned in our State.
Fig 20.4 Yellamma Fig 20.5 Potharaju
painted white in a corner of their fields. The Community Worship of Folk Deities
worship of Potharaju is very simple.
Many of the folk gods and goddesses
Prayers are offered to the deity when the
were actually local heroes who either died
crop is harvested. He has sisters who are fighting in defence of their people or were
called by various names like Peddamma. themselves wronged by the powerful people
of their times. Common people believed
Beerappa and Katama Raju: They are
that such persons attained special powers
worshipped by cowherd and shepherd
to help people or cause problems if not
communities. They are considered
worshipped. Two such folk heroines who
protectors of cattle and sheep. Have you
laid down their lives in defence of the tribal
heard of the story of Beerappa and
people were Sarakka and Sammakka in
Akkamankali – how Beerappa, a poor
whose honour a Jatara is conducted.
shepherd, worked and fought to marry
Kamarathi and how his sister helped him? Sammakka, Sarakka (Medaram) Jatara: It
Have you heard of the story of Katama Raju is a celebration by the tribal people of
who fought against the kings of Nellore for Taadwai mandal in Warangal District at
the grazing rights of the animal herders? Medaram village. People from Telangana
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh, Odisha, Chattisgarh, and Jharkhand
 You may have participated in the
assemble to celebrate the jatara. Nearly
worship of many of these village
one crore people attend it.
and community deities and may
also have been to some of the
temples of Shiva or Vishnu. Can
you compare how the worship is
conducted in these places? What
are the similarities and
differences? Discuss them in the
class.
Fig 20.6 Scenes from Medaram Jatara
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Folk - Religion 175

--- PAGE 184 ---
www.apteachers.in
Sirimanu Utsavam - Vijayanagaram festival is celebrated during the month of
September or October.
From the past, in the rural areas,
after reaping the harvest, the villagers spend “Tolella utsavam” is an important
their time in leisure from the month of aspect in this festival. The farmers place
April till the first showers of monsoon in their seedlings infront of the deity, seeking
June. During that time, they used to her blessings to give a good crop. The word
celebrate festivals (jataras) of village “Toli Yerulu” which means ploughing the
deities. All villagers would attend and pay land, later turned into tolella festival.
their offerings to the village dieties. Thousands of people participate in this
“Sirimanothsavam” is one of such festivals. festival. These festivals give life to the
It was started at the time of Vijayanagara fading folk art forms like Puli Vesham,
Kings in North Andhra region and still Karra Saamu, Katti Saamu, Burra Katha
continues. It is also known as “Pyditalli which are exhibited during the celebration
ammavari utsavam”. Siri means lean and of the festival as an entertainment for the
small and manu means stump or stick.. It people.
got the name as the deity, Pyditalli is placed Moharram (Peerla) and Urs
on sirimanu during the celebration of the
The Muslims too pay respects to the
festival.
heroes who fought against evil. One such
The villagers treat the pujari as
festival is Moharram, which
Pyditalli and decorate him with a saree and
commemorates the battle of Karbala (in
make him sit on sirimanu. They throw coin
Iraq) in which the grandson of Prophet
and bananas at the diety on sirimanu. This
Mohammad was killed. Processions
(Peeri) with decorated Tazias are taken out
in which people of all communities
participate. A peeri is prepared with
bamboo strips in a dome shape. It is covered
with glittering clothes. A bamboo pole is
fixed in the dome to handle the peeri and
at the top metallic crescent or palm shape
is attached to it. Finally, it is garlanded with
flowers and coconuts.
Similarly, Urs or anniversaries of
Muslim saints, who lie buried in various
parts of the state, are celebrated. People
visit the dargahs in large number, offer
flowers and chadars( sheets on the grave)
and listen to the singing of Qawwalis. They
believe that in this way they will receive
the ‘barkat’ or blessings of the pir or saint.
People who seek some specific blessings
Fig 20.7 Sirimanu Utsavam
176 Religion and Society

--- PAGE 185 ---
www.apteachers.in
like children or job, etc. come to the of communal harmony. On these days
dargahs and pray there. Hindus and Muslims visit the Bara Shaheed
Darga to make their wishes. After
Dargah is built on the tombs of Sufi
fulfillment of their wishes they exchange
saints who propagated Sufism. The tomb or
‘rotis’ to one another at Nellore Tank
dargah of a sufi saint becomes a place of
(Swarnala Chervu). Hence it is called
pilgrimage to which thousands of people of
“Rottela Panduga.”
all faiths throng. Often people attribute sufi
masters with miraculous powers According to the story told by the local
(Karamaths) that could relieve others of people, 12 warriors (Bara Shaheed) came
their illnesses and troubles. to India from Mecca Shareef, when Nellore
Ameenpeer Dargah – A symbol of
Religious Tolerance
Ameenpeer Dargah in Y.S.R Kadapa
District, which is Khajapeerullah Hussaini’s
tomb, was founded around 400 years ago.
In memory of his great grandson, Syed
Shah Arifullah Hussainy, Urs is celebrated
for seven days in which both Hindus and
Fig 20.9 Bara Shaheed Darga
was under the rule of Nawabs. A battle was
fought near Gandavaram Tank in
Kodavaluru Mandal in Nellore District
between Tarakmans and Non Muslims. The
12 tarakmans sacrificied their lives in the
battle. The horses brought the torsos of the
martyrs to the Dargamitta tank in Nellore
Fig 20.8 Ameenpeer Dargah and left there. The piligrims constructed
their tombs and began to worship them.
Muslims participate. Offerings of sandal
Lakhs of people attend the Urs (Gandha
wood paste (Gandhapu Chandanam) on the
Mahotsavam) from different parts of India
first day, ‘Chadar’ offer on the second day
every year in the month of Moharrum.
and ‘Mushaira’ on the third day take place in
this seven day Urs in a grand manner. Qawwali
programme is held during the nights.
Rottela Panduga - Nellore :
“Rottela Panduga” or Rotiyaan ki eid is
an annual three days Urs (festival) held at
Bara Shaheed Dargah in nellore in Andhra
Pradesh. It starts from the 11th day of
Moharram month. This festival is a symbol Women Exchanging Rotis
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Folk - Religion 177

--- PAGE 186 ---
www.apteachers.in
Bonalu religion or economic status. For example,
Bonalu is one of the folk festivals even Muslim farmers participate in many
popular in the Telangana region of Andhra of the rituals of village gods. Similarly,
Pradesh. The Godesses are worshipped by people of all religions throng to the dargahs
offering food, which is later shared among to seek the blessing of the peers. They tie
the family members. strings on a tree or on the walls of the
dargah making a vow in return for the wishes
Women folk participate in the
granted. They request the pirzadas to
procession carrying ‘Ghatams’ or
prepare tawiz for them to drive away evil
ornamented pots filled with flowers on
spirits.
their heads.
The intermixing of Village deities
 If you have participated in any of
and High Religious traditions
these jataras or urs or bonalu,
describe them in your class room In India, there has
and discuss their important been a constant process
of interaction between
features.
different kinds of people
 How are these different from the
and their religions
worship of village deities or
leading to intermixture
worship in large temples or of traditions. Thus
mosques? religious beliefs, which
originate in folk worship and folk wisdom,
The antiquity of Folk Traditions are adopted by higher religions and the folk
religious beliefs adopt a lot from the higher
Many historical books religions.
tell us that such folk gods Thus high religious traditions too
were worshipped in very worship peepul tree, snakes and the mother
old times too. We learn goddess. This is how the integration of
about the worship of snakes, trees animals, and birds in the
nagas (snakes), trees, present Puranic religion took place.
yakshas and yakshinis Gradually the village deities became part
even some 2500 years ago. The Palnati of the worship of deities like the Buddha,
Virula Katha written by Srinatha around Shiva or Vishnu or Durga. You can see
1450s mentions the worship of Potharaju. snakes, lions, nandi, and trees being
In turn, Vallabharaya’s Kridabhiramamu worshipped as part of their worship too.
written around the same time describes in In the case of Islam, this took a different
detail the worship of the Palnati Veeras, form. The high religion of Islam believes
Mailara and many mother goddesses in in strict monotheism or worship of one and
Warangal. only God – Allah. However, the folk
You would have noticed by now that the followers of Islam began to revere Sufi
folk deities are worshipped quite saints and believed that worshipping at the
differently from the Gods in large temples, darghas will solve their problems. So a very
mosques or churches. strong tradition of pilgrimages to darghas
Most of these deities are worshipped by and urs developed in which people of all
people irrespective of their caste or faiths participate.
178 Religion and Society

--- PAGE 187 ---
www.apteachers.in
Folk Wisdom and Higher Religion “Bald heads, matted hair, daubing ashes,
recitations, religions dress! No man is a
Many saints like Kabir, Yogi Vemana and
saint who is not pure in heart.”
many sufi saints who came from the
common people expressed their deeper Such ideas and wise sayings became
religious ideas. They also combined the part of ordinary people’s thinking.
ideas preached by the higher religions with
Key words :
that of the common people. Read the
following lines of Yogi Vemana who lived 1. Folk Deities
about 300 years ago and composed poems
2. Jatara
of great wisdom in Telugu.
3. Urs
4. Peeri
“Without personal experience, the mere
repetition of scriptures will not remove 5. Bonamu
fears just as darkness is never dispelled by a
Project :
mere painted flame.”
“The six tastes are diverse, but taste is 1. Get detailed information from your grand
one; various are the creeds regarding the parents about any Jatara of your area.
truth, but truth is one; and saints differ Prepare a report.
among themselves, while he on whom they
2. Collect stories and songs about any of the
meditate is one.”
folk deities of your area and prepare a small
booklet about it.
Improve your learning
1. What are the common elements in the worship of most of the village deities? AS
1
2. When people go to towns and settlethere, do they continue to worship their old village deities?
How do they do it? AS
1
3. Why do people use different languages while worshipping different kinds of deities? AS
1
4. Do you think the way people worship the village deities is changing now? What kind of changes
do you see? AS
4
5. Point out the Main places of important jataras and urs in Andhra Pradesh Map? AS
5
6. Read the fourth paragraph of page 186 and comment on it. AS
2
7. Collect the following particulars by talking to the people of different religions of your area. AS
3
S.No. Name Religion practised God worshipped Festivals celebrated
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Folk - Religion 179

--- PAGE 188 ---
180 Religion and Society
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
21
Devotional Paths
to the Divine
You may have seen people perform rituals of worship, or singing bhajans, kirtans or
qawwalis, or even repeating the name of God in silence. Haven’t you noticed that
some of them are so moved that they burst into tears? Such intense devotion or love of
God is the legacy of various kinds of bhakti and Sufi movements that have evolved
since the eighth century. In class VI, you would have read about the Bhakti poems of
Alvars and Nayanars who worshipped Vishnu and Siva, respectively. Soon kings and
chiefs built large temples for these gods, made land grants, and other gifts to perform
various rituals. Temple worship became elaborate, complex and expensive. Specially
trained priests performed the rituals. People belonging to some castes were not allowed
to enter the temples. Soon, a reaction set in against such rituals and inequalities. New
ideas on devotion to god emerged. Read on to know about it.
Philosophy and Bhakti
Ramanujacharya, born in South India in
the eleventh century, was deeply influenced
Shankaracharya, one of by theAlvars. According to him, the best
the most influential means of attaining salvation was through
philosophers of India, was intense devotion to Vishnu. Vishnu in His
born in Kerala in the eighth grace helps the devotee to attain the bliss of
century. He was an advocate union with Him. Ramanjua also ensured a
of Advaita or the doctrine place for people of lower castes in temple
of the oneness of the individual soul and the worship. He propounded the doctrine of
Supreme God, which is the Ultimate Reality. Vishishtadvaita or qualified oneness
He taught that Brahman, the only or Ultimate according to which the soul even when
Reality, was formless and without any united with the Supreme God remained
attributes. He preached renunciation of the distinct. Ramanuja’s doctrine greatly
world and adoption of the path of inspired the new strand of bhakti, which
knowledge to understand the true nature of developed in north India subsequently.
Brahman and attain salvation.

--- PAGE 189 ---
www.apteachers.in
Basavanna’s Virashaivism The Saints of Maharashtra
We noted earlier the connection
From the thirteenth to
between the bhakti movement and temple
the seventeenth centuries,
worship. This in turn led to a reaction that
Maharashtra saw a great
was best represented in the Virashaiva
number of saint-poets,
movement initiated by Basavanna and his whose songs in simple
companions like Allama Prabhu and Marathi continue to inspire
Akkamahadevi. This movement began in people. The most important among them
Karnataka in the mid-twelfth century. The were Jnaneshwar, Namdev, Eknath and
Virashaivas argued strongly for the equality Tukaram as well as women like Sakkubai and
of all human beings and against Scriptural the family of Chokhamela, who belonged to
the “untouchable” Mahar caste. This regional
ideas about caste and the treatment of
tradition of bhakti focused on the Vitthala (a
women. They were also against all forms
form of Vishnu) temple in Pandharpur, as
of ritual and idol worship.
well as on the notion of a personal god
These are vachanas or sayings attributed
residing in the hearts of all people.
to Basavanna:
The rich
Will make temples for Shiva.
What shall I,
A poor man
Do?
My legs are pillars,
The body the shrine,
The head a cupola
Of gold.
Listen, O Lord of the meeting rivers,
Things standing shall fall,
But the moving ever shall stay.
 What were the major ideas
expressed by Basavanna?
 What is the temple that Basavanna
is offering to God?
Fig 21.1 A fireside gathering of ascetics.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Devotional Paths to the Divine 181

--- PAGE 190 ---
www.apteachers.in
These saint-poets rejected all forms of You made us low caste,
ritualism, outward display of piety and Why don’t you face that fact, Great Lord?
social differences based on birth. In fact,
Our whole life – left-over food to eat.
they even rejected the idea of renunciation
You should be ashamed of this.
and preferred to live with their families,
You have eaten in our home.
earning their livelihood like any other
How can you deny it?
person, while humbly serving fellow human
Chokha’s (son) Karmamela asks
beings in need. A new humanist idea
Why did you give me life?
emerged as they insisted that bhakti lay in
sharing others’ pain. As the famous Gujarati
saint Narsi Mehta said, “Vaishnavas are  Discuss the ideas about the social
those who understand the pain of others.” order expressed in these
compositions.
This is an abhang (Marathi devotional
hymn) of Sant Tukaram: Nathpanthis, Siddhas and Yogis
Many religious
He who identifies
groups of this period
with the battered and the beaten,
criticised the ritual and
Mark him as a saint,
other aspects of
For God is with him.
conventional religion and
He holds
the social order using
Every forsaken man
simple, logical arguments.
Close to his heart,
Among them were the Nathpanthis,
He treats
Siddhacharas and Yogis. They advocated
A slave renunciation of the world. To them, the path
As his own son. to salvation lay in meditation on the
Says Tuka, formless Ultimate Reality and the
realisation of oneness with it. To achieve this,
I won’t be tired
they advocated intense training of the mind
to repeat again,
and body through practices like
Such a man
yogasanas, breathing exercises and
Is God meditation. These groups became
In person. particularly popular among low castes.
Their criticism of conventional religion
created the ground for devotional religion
 Why do you think Tukaram
to become a popular force in northern
considers the friends of the poor
India.
and suffering as the real devotees
Islam and Sufism
of God?
The saints had much in common with the
Sufis, so much so that it is believed that
Here is an abhang composed by
they adopted many ideas of each other.
Chokhamela’s son: Sufis were Muslim mystics. They rejected
outward religiosity and emphasised love
182 Religion and Society

--- PAGE 191 ---
www.apteachers.in
and devotion to God and compassion Rumi and Sadi. Like the Nathpanthis,
towards all fellow human Siddhas and Yogis, the Sufis too believed
beings. that the heart can be trained to look at the
Islam propagated strict world in a different way. They developed
elaborate methods of training using zikr
monotheism or submiss
(chanting of a name or sacred formula),
ion to one God. It also
contemplation, sama (singing), raqs
rejected idol worship and
(dancing), discussion of parables, breath
considerably simplified
control, etc. under the guidance of a master
rituals of worship into collective prayers.
or pir. Thus emerged the silsilas, a
At the same time, Muslim scholars
genealogy of Sufi teachers, each following
developed a holy law called Shariat. The
a slightly different method (tariqa) of
Sufis often rejected the elaborate rituals
instruction and ritual practice.
and codes of behaviour demanded by
Muslim religious scholars. They sought A large number of Sufis from Central
union with God much as a lover seeks his Asia settled in Hindustan from the eleventh
century onwards. This process was
beloved with a disregard for the world. Like
strengthened with the establishment of the
the saint-poets, the Sufis too composed
Delhi Sultanate, when several major Sufi
poems expressing their feelings, and a rich
centres developed all over the
literature in prose, including anecdotes and
subcontinent. The Chishti silsila was
fables, developed around them. Among the
among the most influential orders. It had a
great Sufis of Central Asia were Ghazzali,
long line of teachers like Khwaja
Moinuddin Chishti of Ajmer,
Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki of Delhi,
Baba Farid of Punjab, Khwaja
Nizamuddin Auliya of Delhi and
Bandanawaz Gisudaraz of Gulbarga.
The Sufi masters held their
assemblies in their khanqahs or
hospices. Devotees of all
descriptions including members of
the royalty and nobility, and ordinary
people flocked to these khanqahs.
They discussed spiritual matters,
sought the blessings of the saints in
solving their worldly problems, or
simply attended the music and dance
sessions.
Often people attributed Sufi
masters with miraculous powers that
could relieve others of their illnesses
and troubles. The tomb or dargah of
a Sufi saint became a place of
Fig 21.2 Mystics in ecstasy.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Devotional Paths to the Divine 183

--- PAGE 192 ---
www.apteachers.in
pilgrimage to which thousands of people ThallapakaAnnamacharya (1408 – 1503)
of all faiths thronged. was a popular saint-composer of Andhra
Pradesh and is revered as ‘pada kavita
 If you have ever been to a Dargah pitamaha’. Annamayya dedicated his life
describe it to your friends in the for composing and singing the glories of
class. How do people show
Lord Venkateswara of Tirupati. His
respects to the Pir and what do they
compositions were mostly extempore in
pray for?
spoken dialect, unlike the classics of the
age, which were written in the classical
New Religious Developments in
(Grandhika) style. In ‘Annamacharya
India Charitramu’, it is said that Annamayya
composed thirty two thousand keertanas
The period after the
on Lord Venkateswara.
thirteenth century saw a
In his keertanas, he took up subjects
new wave of the bhakti
such as morality, dharma and righteousness.
movement in North India.
He was one of the first few who opposed
This was an age when
the social stigma towards the untouchable
Islam, Hinduism, Sufism,
castes in his era. In his sankeertanas,
various strands of bhakti, and the
Nathpanths, Siddhas and Yogis influenced “Brahmam Okkate Parabrahmam
one another. We saw that new towns and Okkate...” and “E Kulajudainanemi
kingdoms were emerging, and people were Evvadainanemi...”, he describes that the
taking up new professions and finding new relationship between God and human is the
roles for themselves. Such people, same irrespective of the later’s color, caste
especially crafts persons, peasants, traders and financial status, in beautiful yet
and labourers, thronged to listen to these powerful usage of words.
new saints and spread their ideas. Some of
them like Kabir and Baba Guru Nanak
‘·+<äHêq ÄVæ≤ ` ‘·+<äHêq|ü⁄¬s
rejected orthodox customs and beliefs.
‘·+<äHêq uÛÑfi≤ ` ‘·+<äHêq
Poets like Bammera Potana,
Annamacharya, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu,
ÁãV≤üàyTÓTøÿ£f …|süÁ¡ãV≤üàyTÓTøÿ£f …|sü¡
Tulsidas and Surdas accepted existing
ÁãVü≤àyÓTTø£ÿf… |üs¡ÁãVü≤àyÓTTø£ÿf… ...
beliefs and practices but wanted to make
theem accessible to all.
ì+&Üs¡ sêE ìÁ~+#·T ìÁ<äj·TT H=ø£fÒ
Potana, who lived the life of a peasant
n+&ÉH˚ ã+≥T ìÁ<ä n~j·TT H=ø£fÒ ...
in the village Bammera near Warangal,
composed the famous Mahabhagavatamu yÓT+&Ó’q ÁãVü≤àDT&ÉT ` yÓT≥TºuÛÑ÷$T jÓTTø£fÒ
in Telugu. Potana was called a ‘Sahaja #·+&Ü\T&ÉT+&˚{Ï dü]uÛÑ÷$T jÓTTø£fÒ ...
Kavi’, a natural poet. He wrote to express
- Annamacharya Keertana
his natural devotional feelings in lucid
poetry.
184 Religion and Society

--- PAGE 193 ---
www.apteachers.in
Tulsidas conceived of God in the form
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (1486–1534)
of Rama. Tulsidas’s composition, the
was a Vaishnava saint and social reformer
Ramcharitmanas, written in Awadhi (a
in eastern India (present day Bangladesh and
language used in eastern Uttar Pradesh), is
West Bengal). Chaitanya was a notable
important both as an expression of his
proponent for the Vaishnava school of
devotion and as a literary work. He was a
Bhakti yoga (meaning loving devotion to
contemporary of Shankaradeva of Assam
Krishna/God) based on the philosophy of
(late fifteenth century) who emphasised
the Bhagavata Purana and Bhagavad
devotion to Vishnu, and composed poems
Gita. He propagated community singing of
and plays in Assamese. He began the
Bhajans and dancing with devotion. He
practice of setting
worshipped the forms of Krishna and up namghars or
popularised the chanting of the ‘Hare houses of
Krishna’ mantra. recitation and
prayer, a practice
Kancherla Gopanna (1620 - 1680),
that continues to
popularly known as Bhakta Ramadasu, was
date.
a 17th century devotee of Sri Rama and a
This tradition
composer of Carnatic music. He is one
also included
among the famous vaggeyakaras (same
saints like Dadu
person being the writer and composer of a
Dayal, Ravidas and
song) in the Telugu language. He is
Mirabai. Mirabai
renowned for constructing a famous
was a Rajput
temple for Sri Rama at Bhadrachalam. He
princess married
composed devotional lyrics to Rama, which
into the royal
are popularly known as Ramadaasu family of Mewar
Keertanalu. He wrote Dasarathi in the sixteenth
Fig 21.3 A painting
Shatakamu, a collection of nearly 108 century. Mirabai
of Mirabai.
poems dedicated to Lord Rama. became a disciple
of Ravidas, a saint from a caste considered
@ rs¡T>∑ qqT <äj·T #·÷#Ó<äy√, Çq e+XÀ‘·ÔeT sêe÷ “untouchable”. She was devoted to Krishna
and composed innumerable bhajans
Hê ‘·s¡e÷ uÛÑe kÕ>∑s¡MT<äqT, q[q <äfi‚ø£åD sêe÷
expressing her intense devotion. Her songs
Áos¡|òüTTq+<äq d”‘ê s¡eTD≤, Á•‘·»q b˛wüø£ sêe÷
also openly challenged the norms of the
ø±sT¡D≤´\jT· uøÑÛ Ô£es<¡ äìqT, øq£ ï~ ø±qT|⁄ü sêe÷...
“upper” castes and became popular with the
masses in Rajasthan and Gujarat.
- Ramadasu Keertana
A unique feature of most of the saints is
that their works were composed in regional
 Can you name some vaggeyakaras languages and could be sung. They became
and their Keertanas? immensely popular and were handed down
orally from generation to generation.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Devotional Paths to the Divine 185

--- PAGE 194 ---
www.apteachers.in
Usually the poorest, the most deprived information about his
communities and women transmitted these life. We get to know of
songs, often adding their own experiences. his ideas from a vast
Thus, the songs as we have them today, are collection of verses
as much a creation of the saints as of called sakhis and pads
generations of people who sang them. They said to have been
composed by him and
have become a part of our living popular
sung by wandering bhajan singers. Some of
culture.
these were later collected and preserved in
 Have you listened to any such old the Guru Granth Sahib, Panch Vani and
bhajans in your mother tongue? Bijak.
Find out who composed them. Kabir’s teachings were based on a
Write down some of them and complete, indeed vehement, rejection of the
discuss their meaning in the class. major religious traditions. His teachings
openly ridiculed all forms of external
A Closer Look: Kabir worship of both Hinduism and Islam, the
pre-eminence of the priestly classes and the
Kabir, who probably lived in the
caste system. The language of his poetry was
fifteenth-sixteenth centuries, was one of
a form of spoken Hindi, widely understood
the most influential saints. He was brought
by ordinary people.
up in a family of Muslim julahas or Kabir believed in a formless Supreme
weavers settled near the city of Benares God and preached that the only path to
(Varanasi). We have little reliable salvation was through bhakti or devotion.
Kabir drew his followers from among both
Hindus and Muslims.
Here is a composition of Kabir:
O Allah-Ram present in all living beings
Have mercy on your servants, O Lord!
Why bump your head on the ground,
Why bathe your body in water?
You kill and you call yourself “humble”,
But your vices you conceal.
Twenty-four times the Brahmana keeps
the ekadasi fast,
While the Qazi observes the Ramzan.
Tell me why does he set aside the eleven
months
To seek spiritual fruit in the twelfth?
Hari dwells in the East, they say
And Allah resides in the West,
Search for him in your heart, in the heart
of your heart;
21.4 A painting of Kabir working on a loom. There he dwells, Rahim-Ram
186 Religion and Society

--- PAGE 195 ---
www.apteachers.in
A Closer Look:
Guru Nanak
We know more about
Guru Nanak (1469-
1539 AD) than Kabir.
Born at Talwandi
(Nankana Sahib in
Pakistan), he travelled
widely before establish
ing a centre at Kartarpur
(Dera Baba Nanak on the
river Ravi). Irrespective
of their form creed,
caste or gender, his
followers ate together
in the common kitchen
(langar). The sacred
space thus created by
Guru Nanak was known
as dharmsal.
Fig 21.5 Guru Nanak as a young man, discussion with holy men.
The number of Guru Nanak’s followers caste, creed or gender was irrelevant for
increased through the sixteenth century attaining liberation. His idea of liberation
under his successors. They belonged to a was not that of a state of inert bliss but
number of castes, but traders, rather the pursuit of active life with a strong
sense of social commitment. He himself
agriculturists, artisans
used the terms nam, dan and isnan for the
and craftsmen
essence of his teaching, which actually
predominated. This may
meant right worship, welfare of others and
have something to do
purity of conduct. His teachings are now
with Guru Nanak’s
remembered as nam-japna, kirt-karna and
insistence that his
vand-chhakna, which also underline the
followers must be house
importance of right belief and worship,
holders and should adopt
honest living, and helping others. Thus,
productive and useful occupations. They Guru Nanak’s idea of equality had social and
were also expected to contribute to the political implications. This might partly
general funds of the community of explain the difference between the history
followers. of the followers of Guru Nanak and the
history of the followers of the other
The ideas of Guru Nanak had a huge
religious figures of the medieval centuries,
impact on this movement from the very
like Kabir, Ravidas and Dadu whose ideas
beginning. He emphasised the importance
were very similar to those of Guru Nanak.
of the worship of one God. He insisted that
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Devotional Paths to the Divine 187

--- PAGE 196 ---
www.apteachers.in
Key words :
1. Advaita 5. Bhakti
2. Salvation 6. Yogasanas
3. Alvars 7. Bijak
4. Nayanars 8. Abhang
Improve your learning
1. Fill in the blanks: AS
1
(a) Ramanuja was influenced by the —————.
(b) ————, ———— and ———— were advocates of Virashaivism.
(c) ———————— was an important centre of the Bhakti tradition in Maharashtra.
2. Describe the beliefs and practices of the Nathpanthis, Siddhas and Yogis. AS
1
3. What were the major ideas expressed by Kabir? How did he express them? AS
1
4. What were the major beliefs and practices of the Sufis? AS
1
5. Why do you think many teachers rejected prevalent religious beliefs and practices? AS
1
6. What were the major teachings of Baba Guru Nanak? AS
1
7. For either the Virashaivas or the saints of Maharashtra, discuss their attitude towards
caste. AS
1
8. Why do ordinary people still remember Mirabai? AS
6
9. Read the para under the title ‘A closer look: Kabir’ of page 195 and comment on it. AS
2
10. Write about a festival celebrated by the people together in your area. AS
6
Project :
1. Visit any dargahs, gurudwaras or temples associated with saints of the bhakti tradition
and describe what you saw and heard about them.
2. Get information about other works of the saint-poets mentioned in this chapter.
Sing those songs in your school programmes.
188 Religion and Society

--- PAGE 197 ---
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 189
RETPAHC
www.apteachers.in
22
Rulers and Buildings
Figure 24.1 shows the first balcony of Between the eighth and the eighteenth
centuries kings and their officers built
the Qutb Minar. Qutbuddin Aybak had
two kinds of structures: the first were
constructed this around 1199 AD. Notice
forts, palaces and tombs – safe, protected
the pattern created under the balcony by and grandiose places of rest in this world
the small arches and geometrical designs. and the second were structures meant for
public activity including temples,
Can you find two bands of inscriptions
mosques, tanks, wells, caravan serais and
under the balcony? These are in Arabic.
bazaars. Kings were expected to care for
Notice that the surface of the minar is
their subjects, and by making structures
curved and angular. Placing an inscription for their use and comfort, rulers hoped
on such a surface requires great to win their praise. Construction activity
was also carried out by others, including
precision. Only the most skilled
merchants. They built temples, mosques
craftspersons could perform this task.
and wells. However,
Remember that very few buildings were domestic architecture
made of stone or brick 800 years ago. – large mansions
(havelis) of
What would have been the impact of a
merchants – has
building like the Qutb Minar on observers
survived only from the
in the thirteenth century? eighteenth century.
Figure 22.1: Qutb
Fig 22.1
Minar is five storeys
high. The band of
inscriptions you see
are under its first
balcony. The first
floor was
constructed by
Qutbuddin Aybak
and the rest by
Iltutmish around
1229. Over the
years it was
damaged by
lightning and
earthquakes and
repaired by later
kings.

--- PAGE 198 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 22.2b Corbelled
technique used in the
Fig 22.2a Screen in the Quwaat al-Islam construction of an arch.
mosque, Delhi.
 This way of supporting the roofs
Engineering Skills and
required placing pillars near each
Construction
other and large open halls could not
be built. Can you figure out why?
Monuments provide an
insight into the
Temple Construction in the Early
technologies used for
construction. Take Eleventh Century
something like a roof for
The Kandariya
example. We can make
this by placing wooden Mahadeva temple
beams or a slab of stone across four walls. dedicated to Shiva was
But the task becomes difficult if we want constructed in
to make a large room with an elaborate 999 AD by King Dhanga
superstructure. This requires more deva.
sophisticated skills.
Fig. 24.3b is the plan of the temple of
Between the seventh and tenth centuries,
the Chandela dynasty. An ornamented
architects started adding more rooms,
gateway led to an
doors and windows to buildings. Roofs,
entrance, and the main
doors and windows were still made by
hall(mahamandapa)
placing a horizontal beam across two
where dances
vertical columns, a style of architecture
called “trabeate” or “corbelled”. Between w e r e
the eighth and thirteenth centuries, the
trabeate style was used in the construction
of temples, mosques, tombs and in
buildings attached to large stepped-wells.
 Visit old temples or Masjids near
your place and look for examples
of trabeate style (style in which the
roof is supported by beams placed
on pillars).
Fig 22.3a The Kandariya Mahadeva Temple of
lord shiva.
190 Culture and Communication

--- PAGE 199 ---
www.apteachers.in
performed. The
image of the
chief deity was
kept in the main
s h r i n e
(garbhagriha).
This was the Fig: 22.5a A ‘true’ arch.
place for ritual The ‘keystone’ at the
worship where centre of the arch
only the king, transferred the weight of
his immediate the superstructure to the
base of the arch.
family and
p r i e s t s
gathered. The
K h a j u r a h o
c o m p l e x Fig: 22.5b
contained royal True arch;
detail from
temples where
the Alai
Fig: 22.3b common people
Darwaza
were not
(early
allowed entry. The temples were decorated
fourteenth
with elaborately carved sculptures.
century).
The Rajarajeshvara temple at Thanjavur Quwwat al-
had the tallest shikhara amongst temples Islam
mosque,
of its time. Constructing it was not easy
Delhi.
because there were no cranes in those days
and the 90 tonne stone for the top of the
shikhara was too heavy to lift manually.
So the architects built an inclined path to
the top of the temple, placed the boulder A new way of building
on rollers and rolled it all the way to the
Two technological and
top. The path started more than four
stylistic developments
kilometres away so that it would not be too
are noticeable from the
steep. The path dismantled after the
twelfth century:
temple was constructed.
(1) The weight of the
superstructure above the
doors and windows was
sometimes carried by
arches. The roof too
used this principle and
was converted into vaults
and domes. This
architectural form is
Fig: 22.4 Brijadishwara Temple at Tanjore called “arcuate”.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 191

--- PAGE 200 ---
www.apteachers.in
 Compare Figures 24.2a and 24.2b  Do you think these new techniques
with 24.5a and 24.5b. could be used to build large halls
and tall buildings?
(2) Limestone cement was increasingly
used in construction. This was very high Building Temples, Mosques and
quality cement, which, when mixed with Tanks
stone chips hardened into concrete. This
made construction of large structures Temples and mosques
easier and faster. Arches, domes and were beautifully
limestone mortar were used extensively in constructed because they
were places of worship.
buildings after 1190 AD. Take a look at the
They were also meant to
construction site in Figure 24.6.
demonstrate the power,
 Describe what the labourers are wealth and devotion of the
patron. Take the example of the
doing, the tools shown, and the
Rajarajeshvara temple. An inscription
means of carrying stones.
mentions that it was built by King
Rajarajadeva for the worship of his god,
Rajarajeshvara. Notice how the name of the
ruler and the god are very similar. The king
took the god’s name because it was
auspicious and he wanted to appear like a
god. Through the rituals of worship in the
temple, one god (Rajarajadeva) honoured
another (Rajarajeshvara).
You may recall that the Kakatiya capital
city – Orugallu was so designed as to have
the temple of Svayambhu Shiva at the
centre. This was built by the Kakatiyas to
proclaim their power and status as
independent kings.
The largest temples were all constructed
by kings. The other, lesser deities in the
temple were gods and goddesses of the
allies and subordinates of the ruler. The
temple was a miniature model of the world
ruled by the king and his allies. As they
worshipped their deities together in the
royal temples, it seemed as if they brought
the just rule of the gods on earth.
The kings and nobles endowed the
Fig: 22.6 A painting from the Akbar
temples with land, gold and jewels so that
Nama (dated 1590-1595), showing the
worship of the gods could be carried on a
construction of water gate at Agra Fort.
192 Culture and Communication

--- PAGE 201 ---
www.apteachers.in
As each new dynasty came to
power, kings wanted to
emphasise their moral right to be
the rulers. Constructing places of
worship provided rulers with the
chance to proclaim their close
relationship with God,
Qibla - Direction
towards Mecca especially important in an age of
rapid political change. Rulers
also offered patronage to the
learned and pious, and tried to
Fig 22.7 Plan of the Jami masjid built by Shah Jahan in
transform their capitals and
his new capital at Shahjanabad 1650-1656.
cities into great cultural centres
grand scale. By 1200 AD, most of these that brought fame to their rule and their
temples had become elaborate institutions, realm.
which employed hundreds of artisans,
It was widely believed that the rule of a
dancers, musicians, priests, administrators,
just king would be an age of plenty when
servants, etc. They collected taxes from the
the heavens would not withhold rain. At the
villages, lent money on interest to traders,
same time, making precious water available
organised fairs and markets to which
by constructing tanks and reservoirs was
thronged buyers and sellers of goods.
highly praised. Sultan Iltutmish won
Several mathas of Saivaite and Vaishnavite
universal respect for constructing a large
sects were established around these
reservoir just outside Dehli-i kuhna. It was
temples. These temples thus became
called the hauz-i Sultani or the “King’s
centres of political and economic power.
Reservoir”.
Kings and rulers wanted to associate their
Rulers often constructed tanks and
names with these temples by organising
reservoirs – big and small – for use by
their coronation ceremonies in the temples
ordinary people.
and by making large gifts to them and by
adding to the constructions.
Muslim Sultans and Badshahs did not
claim to be incarnations of god but Persian
court chronicles described the Sultan as the
“Shadow of God”. An inscription in the
Delhi mosque explained that God chose
Alauddin as a king because he had the
qualities of Moses and Solomon, the great
law-givers of the past. The greatest law-
giver and architect was God Himself. He
created the world out of chaos and
introduced order and symmetry. Fig 22.8 Harmandar Sahib (Golden Temple)
with the holy tank in Amritsar.
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 193

--- PAGE 202 ---
www.apteachers.in
Kalingas of Odisha; and a Kali statue from
 You have read about the shrines of
the Palace of Bengal.
village gods and about elaborate
Sultan Mahmud of Ghazni was a
temples and mosques – why do you
contemporary of Rajendra I. During his
think they are so different?
campaigns in the subcontinent, he also
attacked the temples of defeated kings and
Why were Temples Destroyed?
looted their wealth and idols. Sultan
Because kings built Mahmud was not a very important ruler at
temples to demonstrate that time. But by destroying temples –
their devotion to God and especially the one at Somnath – he tried to
their power and wealth, it
win credit as a great hero of Islam. In the
is not surprising that
political culture of the Middle Ages, most
when they attacked one
rulers displayed their political might and
another’s kingdoms, they
military success by attacking and looting
often targeted these buildings. In the early
the places of worship of defeated rulers.
ninth century, when the Pandyan king
Shrimara Shrivallabha invaded Sri Lanka and
 In what ways do you think the
defeated the king, Sena I (831-851), the
policies of Rajendra I and Mahmud
Buddhist monk and chronicler Dhammakitti
of Ghazni were a product of their
noted: “he removed all the valuables... The
times? How were the actions of the
statue of the Buddha made entirely of gold
two rulers different?
in the Jewel Palace... and the golden
images in the various monasteries – all
Imperial Style of the
these he seized.” The blow to the pride of
Vijayanagara Period
the Sinhalese ruler had to be avenged and
the next Sinhalese ruler, Sena II, ordered
The city of Vijayanagara was developed
his general to invade Madurai, the capital
by the Rayas to act as the imperial capital
of the Pandyas. The Buddhist chronicler
of entire South India. Thus they wanted it
noted that the expedition made a
special effort to find and restore the
golden statue of the Buddha.
Similarly, in the early eleventh
century, when the Chola king
Rajendra I built a Shiva temple in his
capital he filled it with prized
statues seized from defeated rulers.
A list included: a Sun-pedestal from
the Chalukyas, a Ganesha statue and
several statues of Durga; a Nandi
statue from the eastern Chalukyas;
an image of Bhairava (a form of
Shiva) and Bhairavi from the
Fig: 22.9 Virupaksha Temple in Hampi.
194 Culture and Communication

--- PAGE 203 ---
www.apteachers.in
Fig 22.10a Lotus Temple. Fig 22.10b Queen’s Bath.
to reflect all the important the establishment of the Vijayanagara
imperial building Empire. The hall in front of the main shrine
traditions. They built large was built by Krishnadevaraya to mark his
temples for Sri accession. This was decorated with
Virupaksha, Rama delicately carved pillars. He is also
chandra, Krishna and
credited with the construction of the
Vitthala using a style that
eastern Gopuram.These additions meant
had been developed by Chola and Pandya
that the central shrine came to occupy a
emperors of Tamil Nadu. This included the
relatively small part of the complex.
Vimanas and the Gopurams. The Rayas
paid special attention to the Gopurams, which
The halls in the temple were used for a
were now built on a scale and height as never
variety of purposes. Some were spaces in
before. It consisted of a first floor usually
which the images of gods were placed to
built of solid granite and a series of upper
witness special programmes of music,
floors made of brick and sunnam. These
structures of immense scale must have dance, drama etc… Others were used to
been a mark of imperial authority that often celebrate the marriages of deities. And yet
dwarfed the towers on the central shrines, others were meant for showing the replica
and signaled the presence of the temple
of deities, which were distinct from those
from a great distance. They were also
kept in the small central shrine.
probably meant as reminders of the power
of kings, able to command the resources, While the Vijayanagara rulers built these
techniques and skills needed to construct temples on the Tamil Nadu models, they
these towering gateways. Other distinctive also built elaborate secular royal buildings,
features include mandapas or pavilions and
which were modelled on the style and
long, pillared corridors that often ran
techniques of the Sultanate architecture.
around the shrines within the temple
The famous Lotus Mahal (named so by
complex. Let us look closely at the
British visitors), Queen’s Bath and the
Virupaksha temple.
Elephant Stables are examples of this style.
The Virupaksha temple was built over
You can see the use of arches and domes in
centuries while inscriptions suggest that the
these buildings. They were covered with
earliest shrine dated to the ninth-tenth
Sunnam plaster and decorated with
century. It was substantially enlarged with
elaborate floral and bird designs. It appears
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 195

--- PAGE 204 ---
www.apteachers.in
that these were buildings in
which the kings and their
nobles lived and displayed
their wealth and cosmopolitan
taste. However, these
buildings do not just copy the
designs of the sultanate
buildings. They combined
Fig 22.10c Elephant’s stable.
designs and features of
southern temples with the
arches and domes. This can best be seen in  Why do you think emperors of
the Lotus Mahal, which was probably a large kingdoms tried to use
place where the kings held their meetings. different styles of buildings?
The most impressive remain of
Gardens, Tombs and Forts
Vijayanagara, the Mahanavami Dibba, is a
very high platform of 55feet, that is as tall Under the Mughals, architecture became
as a five floor building, and 11000 Sq.feet more complex. Mughal emperors were
in area. Its height was increased at least personally interested in literature, art and
three times during two hundred years. The architecture. In his autobiography, Babur
sides of the platform were covered with described his interest in planning and laying
out formal gardens, placed within
sculptures of various kinds. It did not have
rectangular walled enclosures and divided
a complete building on the top. The
into four quarters by artificial channels.
platform was covered by cloth shamiana or
pandal supported by wooden pillars. On this These gardens were called chahar
platform the Vijayanagara kings held their baghs, four gardens, because of their
Navaratri Puja and held their Dussera court symmetrical division into quarters.
Beginning with Akbar, some of the most
in which all their subordinate chiefs,
beautiful chahar baghs were constructed
nayakas and officers paid their tributes to
by Jahangir and Shah Jahan in Kashmir, Agra
the Emperor. Ambassadors from Europe
and Delhi (see Fig 22.11).
and other sultanates also attended the
There were several important
festival.
architectural innovations
during Akbar’s reign. For
inspiration, Akbar’s
architects turned to the
tombs of his Central Asian
ancestor, Timur. The
central towering dome
and the tall gateway
(pishtaq) became
Fig 22.10d Mahanavami dibba
196 Culture and Communication

--- PAGE 205 ---
www.apteachers.in
important aspects of Mughal architecture, first visible in
Humayun’s tomb. It was placed in the centre of a huge formal
chahar bagh and built in the tradition known as “eight
paradises” or hasht bihisht – a central hall surrounded by
eight rooms. The building was constructed with red sandstone,
edged with white marble.
Fig: 22.11
Mughal chahar baghs.
Fig: 22.12 A painting of Babur supervising workers
laying out a chahar bagh in Kabul. Note how the
intersecting channels on the path create the
characteristic chahar bagh design.
Fig 22.11a The chahar
bagh in Humayun’s Tomb,
Delhi
Fig 22.11b Terraced chahar
bagh at Shalimar gardens, Fig: 22.13 Tomb of Humayun, Can you see the water
Kashmir. channels?
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 197

--- PAGE 206 ---
www.apteachers.in
It was during Shah
Jahan’s reign that the
different elements of
Mughal architecture
were fused together in
a grand harmonious
synthesis. His reign
witnessed a huge
amount of construction activity especially
in Agra and Delhi. The ceremonial halls of
public and private audience (diwan-i khas
and diwan-i - aam) were carefully planned.
These courts were also described as chihil
sutun or forty-pillared halls, placed within
a large courtyard.
Shah Jahan’s audience halls were
specially constructed to resemble a Fig: 22.15 Tajmahal in Agra.
mosque. The pedestal on which his throne
resided together peaceably. The
was placed was frequently described as the
construction of Shah Jahan’s audience hall
qibla, the direction faced by Muslims at
prayer, since everybody faced that direction aimed to communicate that the king’s
when court was in session. The idea of the justice would treat the high and the low as
king as a representative of God on earth was
equals where all could live together in
suggested by these architectural features.
harmony.
The connection between royal justice
In the early years of his reign, Shah
and the imperial court was emphasised by
Shah Jahan in his newly constructed court Jahan’s capital was at Agra, a city where the
in the Red Fort at Delhi. Behind balcony nobility had constructed their homes on the
of the emperor’s throne were a series of banks of the river Yamuna. These were set
pietra dura inlays that depicted the
in the midst of formal gardens constructed
legendary Greek god Orpheus playing the
in the chahar bagh format. The chahar
flute. It was believed that Orpheus’s music
bagh garden also had a variation that
could calm ferocious beasts until they
historians describe as the “river-front
garden”. In this, the dwelling was not
located in the middle of the chahar bagh
but at its edge, close to the bank of the river.
Shah Jahan adapted the river-front
garden in the layout of the Taj Mahal, the
grandest architectural accomplishment of
his reign. Here the white marble
Fig: 22.14 A reconstruction from a map of
mausoleum was placed on a terrace by the
the river-front garden city of Agra. Note
edge of the river and the garden was to its
how the garden palaces of the nobles are
placed on both banks of the Yamuna. The south. The new city of Shahjahanabad that
Taj Mahal is on the left. he constructed in Delhi, the imperial palace
198 Culture and Communication

--- PAGE 207 ---
www.apteachers.in
commanded the river-front. Only specially
favoured nobles – like his eldest son Dara
Shukoh – were given access to the river.
All others had to construct their homes in
the city away from the River Yamuna.
 You are an artisan standing on a tiny
wooden platform held together by
bamboo and rope fifty metres
above the ground. You have to place
an inscription under the first
balcony of the Qutb Minar. How
would you do this?
Key words :
1. Inscriptions
2. Monuments
3. Dynasty
4. Architecture
Fig: 22.16 Decorated pillars and struts holding the
5. Coronation Ceremony
extension of the roof in Jodh Bai palace in Fatehpur Sikri.
These follow architectural traditions of the Gujarat region.
Improve your learning
1. How is the “trabeate” principle of architecture different from “arcuate”? AS
1
2. What is a shikhara? AS
1
3. What are the elements of a Mughal chahar bagh garden? AS
1
4. How did a temple communicate the importance of a king? AS
1
5. Read the second para of introduction part of page 197 and comment on it. AS
2
6. How did the Mughal court suggest that everyone – the rich and the poor, the powerful and the
weak – received justice equally from the emperor? AS
6
7. The rich and the powerful construct large houses today. In what ways were the constructions of kings and
their courtiers different from them? AS
4
8. Is there a statue or a memorial in your village or town. Why was it placed there? What purpose does it
serve? AS
6
9. Visit and describe any park or garden in your neighbourhood. In what ways is it similar to or
different from the gardens of the Mughals? AS
1
10. Locate the following in the India map. AS
5
a) Delhi b) Agra c) Amritsar d) Tanjavur e) Humpi f) River Yamuna g) Kujaraho
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 199

--- PAGE 208 ---
www.apteachers.in
ACADEMIC STANDARDS
Time should be spent in making sure that children comprehend the passages given in text. In
between questions are useful in this context. These questions are of different types that would
include the aspects reasoning, cause and effect, justification, mind mapping / concept mapping,
observation, analysis, thinking and imagination, reflection, interpreting etc. The key concepts
have been discussed subconceptwise in every chapter with examples and also given in the
form of keywords.
1) Conceptual understanding: Promoting learning of basic concepts through inquiry, discussion,
reflection giving examples through case studies interpreting, observation etc.
2) Reading the text (given), understanding and interpretation : Occasionally there are
case studies about farmers, labourers in factory, or images that are used in text which do not
directly convey the concept. Time should be given for children to grasp the main ideas, interpret
images etc.
3) Information skills: Textbooks alone cannot cover all different aspects of social studies
methodology. For example, children living in an urban area can collect information regarding
their elected representatives or children living in the rural area can collect information about the
way irrigation / tank facilities are made available in their area. This information may not exactly
match with that of the textbooks and will have to be clarified. Representing the information that
they have collected through projects are also an important ability. For example if they collect
information about a tank – they may decide to draw an illustration or map etc along with written
material. Or represent the information collected through images or posters. Information skill
includes, collection of information tabulation / records and analysis.
4) Reflection on contemporary issues and questioning: Students need to be encouraged to
compare their living conditions along with that of different regions or people from different times.
There may not be a single answer to these situations of comparison. Giving reasons for certain happening
process and justification of informatic and interpretative.
5) Mapping skills: There are different types of maps and pictures used in the textbook. Developing
ability related to maps as abstract representation of places is important. There are different stages of
developing this ability, from creating a map of their classroom to understanding height, distance as
represented in a map. There are illustrations, posters and photographs used in the textbook, these
images often relate to the text and are not merely for visual effect. Sometimes there are activities like
‘write a caption’ or ‘read the images’ that are about architecture etc.
6) Appreciation and Sensitivity: Our country has vast diversity in terms of language, culture,
caste, religion, gender etc. Social studies does take into consideration these different aspects
and encourages students to be sensitive to these differences.
200 Culture and Communication

--- PAGE 209 ---
Appendix
(The additional information and the maps are to be used wherever necessary).
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 201
paM
lacitiloP
dlroW
.1
www.apteachers.in

--- PAGE 210 ---
www.apteachers.in
2. Indian Political Map
202 Culture and Communication

--- PAGE 211 ---
www.apteachers.in
3. Andhra Pradesh Political Map
4. Andhra Pradesh Visiting Places Map
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 203

--- PAGE 212 ---
204 Culture and Communication
paM
eniltuO
dlroW
.5
www.apteachers.in

--- PAGE 213 ---
www.apteachers.in
6. Indian Outline Map
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 205

--- PAGE 214 ---
www.apteachers.in
7. Andhra Pradesh Outline Map
206 Culture and Communication

--- PAGE 215 ---
www.apteachers.in
Andhra Pradesh Fact Sheet
1. Country : India
2. Region : South India
3. Formation Day : November 1, 1956 (First time)
June 2, 2014 (Second time)
4. Capital : Hyderabad (New capital city Amaravathi is under
construction near Vijayawada).
5. No. of Districts : 13 (Srikakulam, Vijayanagaram, Vishakapatnam,
East Godavari, West Godavari, Krishna, Guntur,
Prakasam, Nellore, Chittor, Kadapa, Kurnool and
Anathapur).
6. Official Language : Telugu
7. No. of Assembly seats : 175
8. No. of Council seats : 58
9. No. of Lok Sabha seats : 25
10. No. of Rajyasabha seats : 11
11. Rivers : Godavari, Krishna, Tungabhadra, Penna,
Swarnamukhi
12. No. of Jilla Praja Parishads : 13
13. No. of Mandal Praja Parishads : 661
14. No. of Municipal Corporation : 13
15. No. of Municipalities : 73
16. No. of Revenue Divisions : 50
17. No. of Grama Panchayats : 1967
18. Total Population (2011) : 49,386,799
19. No. of Males : 24,738,068
20. No. of Females : 24,648,731
21. Sex ratio : 1000 : 996
22. Density of Population : 308/km2
23. Literacy : 67.41%
24. Male Literacy : 74.88%
25. Female Literacy : 59.15%
26. Area : 160,205 km2
27. Coastal Line : 972 kms
Free Distribution by Govt. of A.P. Rulers and Buildings 207

--- PAGE 216 ---
www.apteachers.in
208 Culture and Communication