--- PAGE 420 ---
14.18 < IndianEconomy
In January 2012, the government expanded this be subsumed under it. The new guidelines for
scheme to allowQFIs to directlyinvest in Indian RFPIsareasgiven below:
equity markets. Taking the scheme forward, (i) They may purchase and sell shares
as announced in Budget 2012 — 13, QFIs have and convertible debentures of Indian
also been permitted to invest in corporate debt companies through a registered broker
securities (CDSs) and MF debt schemes subject on recognised stock exchanges in India
to a totaloverallceilingof US $ 1 billion. aswellaspurchasesharesandconvertible
In May 2012 , QFIs were allowed to open debentures,whichareofferedto publicin
individual non-interest-bearing rupee bank termsof relevantSEBIguidelines.
accounts with authorized dealer banks in India (ii) Such investors can acquire shares or
for receiving funds and making payment for convertibledebentures in any bid for, or
transactions in securities they are eligible to acquisition of, securities in response to
invest in. In June 2012 , the definition of QFI an offer for disinvestmentof shares made
wasexpanded to includeresidentsof themember by the central government or any state
countriesoftheGulfCooperationCouncil(GCC) .
government
andEuropeanCommission (EC)astheGCCand
(iii) These entities would be eligible to invest
EC are members of the Financial Action Task
in government securities and corporate
Force (FATF).
debt, subject to limits specified by the
Thespeedier moves in thearea of promoting RBIandSEBIfrom timeto time.
higherforeigninvestment(FIs)in Indiashouldbe
— (iv) Such investors would be permitted to
seen in thelight of two broad perspectives trade in all exchange-traded derivative
(i) India’s rising current account deficit contractson thestockexchanges,subject
(whichcrossedanall-timehighof6.7per tothepositionlimitsasspecifiedbySEBI
cent by March 2013) which is creating from timeto time.
heavydrain offoreign exchange;and
(v) RFPI mayoffer cash or foreignsovereign
(ii) TheobjectiveofattractingmoreFIswhile securities with AAA rating or corporate
theWesterneconomiesareunderthespell bondsordomesticgovernmentsecurities,
of recession (cashingin theopprtunity). as collateral to the recognised stock
exchangesfortheir transactionsincashas
|
RFPIs wellasderivativesegmentof themarket.
In March 2014, the RBI simplified foreign All investments made by that FIIs/QFIs
portfolio investment norms by putting in place in accordance with the regulations prior to
an easier registration process and operating
registrationasRFPIshallcontinueto bevalidand
framework with an aim to attract inflows. Frow taken into account for computation of aggregate
limit.
now onwards, the portfolio investor registered in
accordancewiththeSEBIguidelinesshallbecalled
|
— PARTICIPATORYNOTES (PNs)
Registered Foreign Portfolio Investor (RFPI)
the existing portfolio investor class, namely, AParticipatoryNote(PNorP-Note)intheIndian
Foreign Institutional Investor (FII) and Qualified
context, in essence, is a derivative instrument
Foreign Investor (QFI) registered withSEBIshall
issuedinforeign jurisdictions,byaSEBIregistered

--- PAGE 421 ---
SecurityMarketinIndia t 14.19
foreign institutionalinvestor (FII),against Indian shares without incurring the time and
securities — the Indian security instrument may costs involved in investing directly. In
be equity, debt, derivatives or may even be an return, the foreign investor pays the PN
index. PNs are also known as Overseas Derivative issueracertainbasispoint(s)ofthevalueof
Instruments, Equity Linked Notes, Capped Return PNs traded byhim as costs . For instance,
Notes,and ParticipatingReturnNotes, etc . directlyinvestingin the Indian securities
The investor in PN does not own the marketsasan FII,hassignificantcostand
underlying Indian security, which is held by the
timeimplicationsfortheforeigninvestor.
FIIwhoissuesthePN.Thus, theinvestorsin PNs Apart from seeking FII registration,
derive the economic benefits of investing in the he is required to establish a domestic
securitywithout actually holding it.They benefit broker relationship, a custodian bank
from fluctuations in the price of the underlying relationship, deal in foreign exchange
securitysince the value of the PN is linked with and bear exchange rate fluctuation risk,
the value of the underlying Indian security. The pay domestic taxes and/or filing tax
PNholderalsodoesnotenjoyanyvotingrightsin return,obtain or maintainaninvestment
relation tosecurity/sharesreferenced bythePN. identity,etc .Theseinvestorswouldrather
look for derivatives alternatives to gain a
REASONSFORTHEPOPULARITYOFPNS cost -effective exposure to the relevant
market.
The reasons why PNs became such a popular
ruotefor foreign investors to invest in the Indian (iii) Besides reducing transactions costs, PNs
security market may be understood through the also provide customised tools to manage
followingpoints: risk, lower financing costs and enhance
portfolio yields. For instance, PNs can
(i) One of the primary reasons for the
also be designed for longer maturities
emergence of the PN (an ‘off-shore
derivative instrument’, i.e., an ODI) is
than aregenerallyavailablefor exchange-
traded derivative.
the restrictions on foreign investments.
Forexample,aforeigninvestorintending (iv) PNs also offer an important hedgingtool
to make portfolio investments in India to a foreign investor already registered
was required to seek FII registration for as an FII. For example, an FII maywish
which he is required to meet certain to obtain ‘long’ exposure to a particular
eligibility criteria. Lack of full Capital Indian security. The FII can hedge the
Account Convertibility further enhances downside exposure to the listed security,
the entry barriers from the perspective already purchased by purchasing a ‘cash
of a foreign investor. However, Since settled put option’. Although the Indian
January 2012 , The Indian government exchanges offer options contract, these
has taken a decision to give direct access contracts have a maximum life period
to such prospective ‘foreign individual of three months, beyond which the
investors’ who were hitherto banned to FII shall have to rollover its positions,
investinequityof Indian companies. i.e., purchase a fresh option contract .
(ii) The off-shore derivative market allows Alternatively, it can avail of a PN which
can becustomised to cater to its hedging
investors to gain exposure to the local
requirements.

--- PAGE 422 ---
14.20 4 IndianEconomy
(v) Potential investors who would like to be the authority to regulate that trade. PNs have
take direct Indian exposure in future, been used by Fils, since Fils were permitted to
—
maymakeinitialinvestmentsthroughthe invest in thesecurities market (1994) theywere
PN routeso as to get a flavour of future not specifically dealt with under the regulations
anticipatedreturns . until 2003. According to the SEBI Regulation,
(vi) Further, trading in ODI/PNs gives an 2004 (and further amended in 2008) with the
—
opportunity to offshore entities to have objectiveoftighteningregulationsinthisregard
acommission based businessmodel.This (i) PNs can be issued only to those entities
route provides ease to subscribers as it which are regulated by the relevant
bypasses the direct route which may be regulatory authority in countries of
resourceheavyfor them. their incorporation and are subject to
(vii) And lastly, it was a highly ‘safe and compliance of ‘know your client’ (KYC)
lucrative route’ to invest the
norms.
‘unaccounted’, ‘even illegal’ money into (ii) Down- stream issuance or transfer of the
theIndiansecuritymarketforhugeprofits instruments can also be made only to a
(during the booming period). Experts regulatedentity.
even imagined that it may be allowing (iii) Further, the Fils who issue PNs against
the‘black money’of India (stashed away underlying Indian securities are required
from India through ‘hawala’ kind of to reporttheissuedand outstanding PNs
illegal channels and deposited in the tax toSEBI in a prescribedformat.
havensof theworld in ‘Swiss Bank’kind
(iv) In addition, SEBI can call for any
of financial institutions) to get invested information from Fils concerning off
back in the market. Again, ‘terrorist ¬
shore derivative instruments (ODIs)
organisations’might havebeen usingthis issued byit.
route, too .
(v) In order to monitor the investment
PNsarethusissued,to provideaccess toaset through these instruments, SEBI on
of foreign investors who intend to reduce their October 31, 2001 , advised Fils to
overall costs and the time involved in making submit information regarding issuance
investmentsinIndia.Inotherwords,theattraction
of derivative instruments by them, on a
of investing in PNs is primarilyone of efficiency monthly basis. These reports require the
(from an infrastructure and time perspective) for
communication of details such as name
whichtheyarewillingtoforegocertainbenefitsof
and constitution of the subscribers to
directly holding the local securities (for example,
PNs, their location, nature of Indian
titleandvotingrights),whilstalsoassumingother underlyingsecurities,etc .
risks.
(vi) Fils cannot issue PNs to non-resident
REGULATIONOFPNS Indians (NRIs) and those issuing PNs
arerequired togivean undertakingtothe
PNs are market instruments that are created and effect.
traded overseas. Hence, Indian regulators cannot
(vii) SEBI has also mandated that QFIs
bantheissueofPNs.However,theycanregulated,
— (qualified foreign investors), the recently
asSEBIdoes whenaPNistradedonanoverseas
allowed foreign investor class, shall not
exchange, theregulatorin that jurisdictionwould
issuePNs.

--- PAGE 423 ---
SecurityMarketinIndia t 14.21
SEBI in consultation with the government in taking action against the Fils who were non-
had decided in October 2007, to place certain compliantandthosewhohadmisreportedoffshore
restrictions on theissue of PNs by Fils and their derivatives [as happened when SEBI took actions
sub- accounts .Thisdecisionwastakenwithaview againsttwoFils — BarclaysinDecember2009and
tomoderatethesurgeinforeigncapitalinflowsinto SocieteGenerateinJanuary2010]
thecountryand toaddressthe‘know-your-client’ At present, PNs are issued by large financial
concerns for PN holders. However, it was found sector conglomerates which not onlyhavestrong
that such restrictions were ineffective.Therefore, presence in the global investment banking arena
SEBIinOctober2008revieweditsearlierdecision but also have asset management arms which
and decided to remove these restrictions in the invest across a number of securities markets
light of theabovefactors. Rather, moreattention globally.Theseentitiesareoriginallyincorporated
is given to effective disclosures. As per a SEBI in well-regulated and developed jurisdictions
decision of October 2013, the Category III Fils like the US, UK, etc . Further, these entities also
arenot allowed to issue PNs. - possess the financial wherewithal to issue PNs,
complementedbyskilled personnelwhoareadept
THECONCERNSRELATEDTOPNS
at risk management and financial engineering
Being derivative instruments and freely tradable, activities.
PNs can be easily transferred, creating multiple
INTERNATIONALSITUATION
layers, thereby obfuscating the real beneficial
owner. It is in this respect that concerns about PN like products are not necessarily used to
theidentityofultimatebeneficialownerand the invest in restricted markets, but also reported
sourceoffundsarises.
to be available in the open developed/advanced
For the reason that such instruments are economies like Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore,
issued outside of India, these transactions are Australia,theUSAandUK.Inresponsetomarket
outsidethepurviewofSEBI’ssurveillanceanditis manipulation concerns, in December 1999,
theFII whichactsasmini-exchangeoverseas.The Taiwan Securities and Futures Commission had
actual transactions in the underlying securities amended its FII regulations to require periodic
are executed by the Fils only at its discretion, disclosurebyFilsofalloffshorederivativeactivities
as and when necessary and there is no one- to - linked to local shares, but this requirement was
one correspondence between transactions in the subsequently removed in June 2000 (as the
underlyinginstrumentsand issuanceof PNs. Ashok Lahiri Committee Report says). China’s
The ex-post reporting requirement enjoined Securities Regulatory Commission requires entities
upontheFIIin respectofPNsona monthlybasis to file reports related to these products with
effectively keeps the transactions in PNs out of minimal ‘reporting requirements that emphasize
the real time marketsurveillance mechanism and onlyon the quota utilised by them’. Other Asian
beyond theenforceability jurisdiction ofSEBI. countries like Hong Kong, Singapore and Japan
have reportedly ‘no restrictions’ or requirements
There are also concerns that some of the
on PNs. Malaysia, Indonesia and Philippines
moneycominginto the market via PNs could be
the ‘unaccountedwealth’camouflaged underthe which are restricted markets though, are having
guise of FII investment. However, this has not no reportingrequirementsin thisregard.
beenprovedsofar.SEBIhasindeedbeensuccessful

--- PAGE 424 ---
14.22 4 IndianEconomy
HEDGEFUND Opposite to bear, bull is a person who
This term has come up from another term speculatesshare pricestogo upinfuturesoeither
hedging, a process by which businesses insulate
stopssellingtheselectgroupofsharesforthattime
themselvesfromtheriskofpricechanges.14Hedge to be reached (heis basicallytakinglong position
fundsarethelotofinvestible(freefloatingcapital) on those shares) or starts purchasing that select
capitalwhich moveveryswiftlytowardsthemore
groupofshares.
profitablesectorsofaneconomy. Thus, a bear increases the number of shares
At present, such funds easily move from the in a stock market activating a general fall in the
stockmarketofoneeconomyto theother — away index — a bearish market. Opposite to it, a bull
fromthelowprofitfetchingtohighprofitfetching creates a scarcity of shares in the stock market
ones. As stock markets fall and rise such funds activatingageneralrisein thesharepricesand the
change markets accordingly. By nature they are index — a bullish market.
temporary . The period for which they continue Brokersplayasabearforsomestocksandasa
flowingintoaneconomythereisnaturallyaboom bullforsomeotherstocks , whilea bearbrokerisa
time. But when they quit for a more attractive non-entity, a bullis rememberedfor long timeto
—
economy,thesameeconomymightnot beableto come Harshad Mehta was known as the Great
manage the accelerated foreign currency outflow
Bull.
and there are chances of imminent foreign
currencycrisis.This has been in news for thelast BOOK BUILDING
twoyearsin Indiawherestockmarket hasbeenin A provision allowed bySEBI to all Initial Public
boom, ridingon the Fils inflowvia Participatory offers (IPOs) in which individual investors are
Notes (PNs). reserved and allottedshares bythecompany. But
theissuerhastodisclosetheprice(atwhichshares
|
SHORTSELLING have been allotted the size of the issue and the
numberofsharesoffered to thepublic).
Saleofasharewhichisnotowned.Thisisdoneby
,
someoneafterborrowingsharesfromstockbrokers D^
promising to replace them at a future date on
the hope (speculation) that the price will fall by Initial Public Offer (IPO) is an event of share
then. Hefetches profit if priceof theshare really issuingwhen acompanycomes upwithitsshare/
securitiesissuedfor thefirst time.
fell down by the future date of replacement and
sustains a loss if the price increased. Recently,
PRICEBAND
shortsellinghas been allowed in India bySEBI.
Aprocessofpublicissuewherethecompanygives
BEARANDBULL a price range (known as price band) and it is left
A person who speculates share prices to fall in i u t p — on th t e he hi s g h h a e r s e t a b p i p d l d i e c r a s nt g s e t t o tin q g uo th te e t s h h e a i r r e p s. ri T ce h s is o i n s
future and so sells his shares and earns profit is
a bear. He earns profit out of a falling market. avariantofshareissueatpremium butconsidered
Basically, hereheisshortsellingtheshares.
asaferchoice.
14. Samuelsonand Nordhaus,Economics,op.cit.,p.207.

--- PAGE 425 ---
SecurityMarketinIndia I 14.23
ECBPOLICY approval route).
A prospective borrower can access external (vii) The existing ECB limits under the
commercialborrowings(ECBs) undertworoutes, automatic route were enhanced from
namely the ‘automatic route’ and the ‘approval US $ 500 million to US$ 750 million
route’. ECBs not covered under the automatic for eligible corporates . For borrowers
route are considered on case-by-case basis by the in the services sector, the limit has been
RBI under the approval route . The High Level enhanced from US$ 100 million to US$
Committee on ECB took a number of decisions 200 million and for NGOs engaged in
in September 2011 to expand the scope of ECBs micro-finance activities from the existing
whichinclude: US$ 5 million to US$10million.
(i) High networth individuals (HNIs) who
(viii) INR (rupee) denominated ECBs would
fulfil the criteria prescribed bySEBI can
be permittedfrom foreign equityholders
investin IDFs. to ‘all eligible borrowers’ except in the
caseof ECBs availed of by NGOs under
(ii) IFCshavebeenincludedaseligibleissuers
theautomaticroute .
forFIIinvestmentinthecorporatebonds
long- term infracategory .
Duringthefinancialyear2014—15andearly
2015—16 the external commercial borrowings
(iii) ECBwould be permitted for refinancing
(ECB) policy was further liberalised via the
of rupee loans of infrastructure projects
followingsteps:
on the condition that at least 25 per
(i) Enhancingthelimitforrefinancingrupee
cent of such ECBs shall be used for
loans through ECB from 25 per cent to
repayment of thesaid rupeeloan and75
40 per cent for Indian companies in the
per cent invested in new projects in the
powersector;
infrastructuresector (but only under the
approval route).
(ii) AllowingECBfor capitalexpenditureon
the maintenance and operation of toll
(iv) Refinancing of buyer’s/supplier’s credit
systems for roads and highways so long
through ECBsfor the purchaseofcapital
as they are a part of the original project
goods bycompaniesin theinfrastructure
subjecttocertainconditions,andalsofor
sector was approved.This would also be lowcost housingprojects;
permittedonlyunder theapprovalroute .
(iii) Reducing the withholding tax from 20
(v) ECBs for interest during construction percentto5percentforaperiodofthree
(IDC) thataccumulatesona loan during
years(July2012
—
June2015)on interest
theprojectexecutionphaseforcompanies
paymentson ECBs;
in the infrastructure sector would be (iv) Introducing a new ECB scheme of
permitted. This would be subject to the US $10 billion for companies in the
condition that theIDCiscapitalisedand
manufacturingandinfrastructuresectors;
is part of the projectcost .
(v) Permitting the Small Industries
—
(vi) Renminbi(RMB) theChinesecurrency
DevelopmentBank(SIDBI)asaneligible
—
was approved as an acceptable borrower for accessing ECB for on-
currency for raising ECBs subject to/ lending to the micro,smalland medium
limitofUS$1billionwithintheexisting
enterprises (MSMEs);and
ECB ceiling (allowed only through the

--- PAGE 426 ---
14.24 4 IndianEconomy
(vi) Permitting the National Housing Bank Rs.4,000croreforeachoftheimmediate
(NHB)/Housing Finance Companies to past threeyears,willalso beeligible.
avail themselves of ECBs for financing (vi) Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and MFs
prospectiveownersoflowcost/affordable that have RGESS-eligiblesecurities have
housing units. also been brought under the RGESS.
| (vii) To benefit small investors, investments
RGESS
are allowed in instalments in the year in
On November23,2012 ,thegovernment notified which taxclaimsaremade.
a new taxsavingschemecalled the Rajiv Gandhi (viii) The total lock-in period for investments
EquitySavingsScheme (RGESS), exclusivelyfor will be three years including an initial
first-timeretailinvestorsinthesecuritiesmarket. blanketlock-inofoneyear.After thefirst
Thisschemeprovides50percentdeductionofthe year, investorswill beallowed to tradein
amountinvestedfromtaxableincomeforthatyear
thesecurities.
to newinvestorswho invest up to Rs.50,000and The broad provisions of the scheme and the
whose annual income is below Rs. 10 lakh.The income tax benefits under it have already been
RajivGandhiEquitySavingScheme(RGESS)will incorporated as a new Section-80CCG of the
give tax benefits to new investors whose annual IncomeTaxAct1961,asamendedbytheFinance
incomeisuptoRs.10lakhforinvestmentsuptoa Act 2012.The operationalguidelines were issued
maximum of Rs.50,000.Theinvestor willget 50 bySEBIon December6,2012 .
per cent deduction of the amount invested from
taxableincomeforthatyear.Salientfeaturesofthe | CREDIT DEFAULTSWAP (CDS)
schemeareasfollows:
CDSisin operation in IndiasinceOctober 2011
(i) Theschemeisopentonewretailinvestors — launched in onlycorporate bonds.The eligible
identifiedonthebasisoftheir permanent
participants are commercial banks, primary
account numbers (PAN).
dealers, NBFCs,insurancecompaniesandmutual
(ii) The tax deduction allowed will be over funds.
and above the Rs.1lakh limit permitted
CDSisacreditderivativetransactioninwhich
allowed under Section 80 C of the
IncomeTaxAct. two parties enter into an agreement, whereby
one party (called as the ‘protection buyer’) pays
(iii) In addition to the 50 per cent tax the other party (called as the ‘protection seller’)
deduction for investments, dividend
periodic payments for the specified life of the
incomeisalso taxfree. agreement . The protection seller makes no
(iv) StockslistedunderBSE100orCNX100, payment unless a credit event relating to a pre ¬
or stocks of public- sector undertakings determinedreferenceassetoccurs.Ifsuchanevent
(PSUs) that are Navratnas, Maharatnas, occurs,ittriggerstheProtectionSeller’ssettlement
and Miniratnaswill beeligible under the obligation, which can be either cash or physical
scheme. Follow-on public offers (FPOs) (India follows physical settlement). It means,
of thesecompanieswillalso beeligible. CDS is a credit derivative that can he used to
(v) IPOsofPSUs,whicharescheduledtoget transfercreditriskfromtheinvestorexposedto
listed in the relevant financial year and the risk (called protection buyer, ) to an investor
whose annual turnover is not less than willingtotakerisk(called protectionseller).

--- PAGE 427 ---
SecurityMarketinIndia t 14.25
It operates like an insurance policy. In an (iii) The protection seller will be able to
insurance policy, the insurance firm pays the diversifyhis portfolio, createexposure to
loss amount to the insured party . Similarly, the a particular credit, haveaccessto an asset
—
buyer of the CDS the bank or institution that which may not otherwise be available,
has invested in a corporate bond issue — seeks to andincreasetheyieldon his portfolio.
mitigate the losses it may suffer on account of a (iv) Banks can use it to transfer risk to other
default by the bond issuer. Credit default swaps risktakers,createcapitalformorelending.
allow one party to ‘buy’ protection from another (v) Distribute risk widely throughout the
partyfor losses that might be incurred as a result
system and prevent concentrations of
of default by a specified reference instrument (a risk.
bond issue in India). The ‘buyer’ of protection
Some analysts have serious apprehensions
pays a premium to the seller, and the ‘seller’ of about CDS. GeorgeAkerlof Nobel prize-winning
protection agrees to compensate the buyer for
economist, in 1993, predicted that the next
losses incurred upon the occurrence of any one
meltdown will be caused by CDS. In 2003
of the several specified ‘credit events’. Thus CDS
investment legend Warren Buffet called them as
offers the buyer a chance to transfer the credit risk
‘weapons of mass destruction’. The former US
of financial assets to the seller without actually Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, who
transferringownershipoftheassetsthemselves.
betted bigonCDSsaidafterthe‘sub prime’crisis
Let us try to understand it by an example. that ‘CDS are dangerous’. A leading US weekly
Suppose Punjab National Bank (PNB) invests
the Newsweek described CDS, ‘the monster that
in Rs. 150 crore bond issued by TISCO. If ate Wall Street’. Many Indian experts had the
PNB wishes to hedge losses that may arise from opinion that‘CDS will notstabilisetheeconomy
a default of TISCO, then PNB may buya credit rathercouldlead to destabilisation’.
default swap from a financial institute, suppose,
Templeton.PNBwillpayfixedperiodicpayments
can b
C
e
D
m
S
an
c
i
o
p
n
u
t
l
r
a
a
t
c
e
t
df
a
o
re
r m
d
i
a
s
n
c
g
h
e
ie
r
f
o
.
u
I
s
t’s
b
a
e
l
c
l
a
a
u
b
s
o
e
ut
th
th
ey
e
to Templeton, in exchangefor default protection
insurableinterestwhich isnever thereasit is used
(justlike premiumofaninsurancepolicy).
for speculation. A derivative that amounts to an
CDS can be used for different purposes in a
insurance contract with no insurable interest is
financialsystem, viz., bad.Butdothespeculatorshaveinsurableinterest?
(i) Protection buyers can use it to hedge No they don’t have any. The US ‘sub prime’
their credit exposure while protection crisis was a fallout of such CDS contracts — one
sellers can use it to participate in credit defaulting and another claiming the ‘protection’
markets, withoutactuallyowningassets . finallyresulting into thedefaulter of the insuring
—
(ii) The protection buyer can transfer credit company overnight the biggest US insurance
risk on an entity without transferring giant, AIG went bankrupt. So happened with
the under lying instrument, reap regular manyUS banksalso.
benefit in terms of lower capital charge, ThemostdamagingaspectofCDSisthatthe
seek reduction ofspecific concentrations credit risk of onecountry/region gets exported to
in credit portfolio and goshorton credit anothercountry/regionverysmoothlyandsilently
risk. —
thusthereisaseriouschanceof‘contagioneffect’

--- PAGE 428 ---
14.26 4 IndianEconomy
suppose there are defaulters there — the thing will need to paytaxon it.Meanwhile, the Union
which happenedduringtheUS‘sub prime’crisis. Budget2013 — 14has cleared the air on the issue.
Thereshould not beanyadditional income- taxif
|
SECURITISATION theincomedistributedbythetrustisreceivedbya
personwhoisexemptedfromtax .Thisisexpected
Thisistheprocessofissuing‘marketablesecurities’
to bringbackmutualfundsinto thesecuritisation
backed by a pool of existing assets such as auto market.
or home loans. After an asset is converted into
a marketable security, it is sold to an investor | CORPORATE BOND IN INDIA
who then receives interest and principal out of
the cash flow generated from servicing of the Economic vibrancy coupled with sophisticated
loan. Financial institutions such as NBFCs and state — of — the — art financial infrastructure has
microfinance companies convert their loans into contributed to rapidgrowth in theequitymarket
marketable securities and sell them to investors. in India. In terms of market features and depth,
This helps them get liquid cash out of assets the Indian equity market ranks among the
that otherwise would be stuck on their balance best in the world. In parallel, the government
sheets. securities market has also evolved over the years
Global experience shows that if the value of and expanded, given the increasing borrowing
the underlying asset falls then securitised assets requirements of the government . In contrast,
lose value as it had happened during the US the corporate bond market has languished both
‘sub-prime crisis’ — home loans against which in terms of market participation and structure .
securitisedassetsweresoldtoinsurancecompanies NBCsarethemainissuersandverysmallamounts
and banks lost value, which in turn resulted in a of finance are raised by companies directly. The
crisis. To prevent such crises, the RBI has taken EconomicSurvey2010—11 (p.116), cites many
some precautionary steps in this regard. It has reasons for the less-developed bond market in
—
asked companies to hold securities for a certain India
minimum period: (i) Predominanceof banksloans;
(i) While NBFCs need to keep assets for (ii) FII’s participation islimited;
six months, a minimum retention (iii) Pensions and insurance companies
—
requirement of 5 10 per cent to ensure and household are limited participants
that they have a continuingstake in the because of lack of investor confidence;
performanceofsecuritisedassets . and
(ii) Micro Finance Institutions (MFIs) need (iv) Crowdingout bygovernment bonds.
to hold themfor threemonths. The EconomicSurvey2011—12concluded15
SinceitwasallowedinIndiabytheRBI,ithas that there is now ample empirical research to
—
been in news whether the‘securitisations trusts’ corroborateSchumpeter’sconjecturethatfinancial
15. EconomicSurvey2011-12(p.34)quotesmanycontemporaryreferencestobringthepointhome-
a).R.Rajan,and L.Zingales(1998),'FinancialDependenceandGrowth,'AmericanEconomicReview,vol.88;b).S.Banerji,
K.Gangopadhyay,I.Patnaik,andA,Shah(2012),'NewThinkingonCorporateDebtinIndia',mimeo.;c).C.K.G.Nair,(2012)
'FinancialSectorReforms:RefiningtheArchitecture,'inR.Malhotra(ed.),ACriticalDecade:PoliciesforIndia'sDevelopment,
OxfordUniversityPress,NewDelhi;d).T.A.Bhavani,andN.R.Bhanumurthy(2012),FinancialAccessinPost - ReformIndia,
OxfordUniversityPress,NewDelhi,Chapter12;e).P.Bolton,andX.Freixas,'HowcanEmergingMarketEconomiesBenefit
fromaCorporateBondMarket?',inE.Borzenstein,K.Cowan,B.Eichengreen,andU.Panizza,(eds)(2008),BondMarketsin
LatinAmerica,MITPress.

--- PAGE 429 ---
SecurityMarketinIndia I 14.27
developmentfacilitatesrealeconomicgrowth.The from the private sector in the Twelfth Plan for
depth of the financial markets and availabilityof investment in theinfrastructuresector, havingan
diverse productsshould, therefore, not betreated activebondmarketwouldbeavaluableavenuefor
as mere adornment, but as critical ingredients of raisingmoney.
inclusivegrowth.
Therecan bemanyreasonswhy,despitethese
Banks in India accounted for 14.4 per cent advantages, the bond market has not developed
of thefinancingoflargefirmsin 2000 — 01, which adequately. One reason has to do with what
rosefurtherto17.8percentin2010 — 11.Thebond economists call ‘multiple equilibria’. Consider
market, on theother hand, has been minisculein a situation where the bond market is small. If
comparison.Thethinnessofthe bond market has someone buys bonds and later wish to sell these
beensomewhatcompensatedbyforeignborrowing off, he anticipates difficulty. Since the bond
done by Indians, which rose sharply over the market is not active, he maynot easily be able to
last decade. Further, India is characterised by a sellthebondsandthushewillholdsimplybecause
disproportionate amount of secured borrowing. he cannot find a buyer. Hence, this may lead to
The small size of unsecured borrowing may, at discouragesomeonefrom buyingthebondsinthe
firstsight, notseemto bea matterofconcern,but firstplace.Ifeverybodyreasonslikethis,thebond
itcouldbea reflectionoftheweaknessofcontract marketremainsthin.Hence,theneedisforapush
enforcementand lackofadequateinformation.If that nudges the market to another equilibrium,
contracts were quickly enforced and lenders had where people readily buy bonds because they
information on borrowers, they would be more know that they can easily sell these off and this
willing to give unsecured loans. This would give becomesaself-fulfillingprophesyandsustainsthe
a nimbleness to the financial markets which they largebond market.
presentlylack.
There is effort currently on to try to boost
Therearemanyreasonswhybondmarketsare India’s debt and bond markets, and success
important for an emerging economy. Prominent in this can give another fillip to growth. With
among these is the fact that they lead to more the intervention of the Patil Committee
efficient entrepreneurship and greater value recommendations, the corporate bond market is
creation. When an entrepreneur takes a loan or slowlyevolving.With bankfinancedrying upfor
issues bonds, all additional profit over and above long term infrastructure projects, in view of asset
the pre-fixed repayment amount accrues to the liability problems faced by the banking system,
entrepreneur . So he or she is better incentivised the need for further development of a deep and
to takesharper decisions. Byhavinga weak bond vibrant corporate bond market can hardly be
market, we may beforegoing thisefficiency.And overemphasised. Recent initiatives for further
further, this efficiency gap may well mean that developmentofcorporatebond markets, takenin
thereislesslendingandhencelessinvestmentand theyear2012—13areasgiven below:
entrepreneurship in theeconomythan is feasible. (i) Banksallowedtotakelimitedmembership
Further,asIndiatriestogarner500billiondollars in SEBI-approved stock exchanges for

--- PAGE 430 ---
14.28 4 IndianEconomy
the purpose of undertaking proprietary India) price. If no agreement is reached,
transactions in the corporate bond then unwinding has to be donewith the
markets. original protection seller at FIMMDA
(ii) To enhance liquidity in the corporate
price.
bond markets, the IRDA has permitted (vii) CDS shall be permitted on securities
insurancecompaniesto participatein the with original maturityup to oneyearlike
repomarket.TheIRDAhasalsopermitted CPs, certificates of deposit, and non-
insurance companies to become users of convertible debentures with original
‘creditdefaultswap' (CDS). maturitylessthan oneyear.
(iii) The minimum haircut16 (i.e., the Economic Survey 2012—13 comments:
difference between prices at which a A reasonably well-developed corporate bond
market makercan buyandsellasecurity) market is verymuch required in anyeconomy to
requirement in corporate debt repo have supplement bankingcreditand theequitymarket
been reduced from the existing 10 per andtofacilitatethelong- termfundingrequirement
cent; 12 per cent; 15 per cent to 7.5 per of corporate sector as well as infrastructure
cent; 8.5 per cent; 10 per cent for AAA/ development in the country . Though, the
AA+/AA-ratedcorporatebonds. development of the corporate bond market has
(iv) MFs have been permitted to participate been an important area and has received greater
in CDS in corporate debt securities, as policy attention in recent times, it is yet to take
users. offinasignificantmanner.Someoftheissuesthat
needtobeaddressedin thisregard include:
(v) Revisedguidelineson CDSfor corporate
bondsbytheRBIprovidethatinaddition (i) Drawing up a roadmap for a structural
to listed corporate bonds, CDS shall shift from a bank-dominated financial
also be permitted on unlisted but rated system to a morediversefinancialsystem
corporate bonds even for issues other wheretop-ratedcorporatesaccessfinance
than infrastructurecompanies. fromcapital markets;
(vi) Users shall be allowed to unwind17their (ii) Strengthening of the legalframework for
CDS-bought position with the original regulation of corporatedebt bynecessary
protection seller at a mutually agreeable amendmentsin rules/regulations,and
or FIMMDA (Fixed Income Money (iii) Relaxation of investment guidelines for
Market and Derivatives Association of pension, provident, and insurance funds
16. Haircutisthedifferencebetween pricesatwhichamarketmakercan buyandsellasecurity.Thetermcomesfrom
thefactthat marketmakerscantradeatsuch a thinspread.Italsomeansthatthe percentagebywhichanasset's
marketvalueisreducedforthepurposeofcalculatingcapitalrequirement,marginandcollateral.Whentheyareused
ascollateral,securitieswillgenerallybedevaluedsinceacushionisrequiredbythelendingpartiesincasethemarket
valuefalls.
17. Unwindisused tocloseouta positionthathasoffsettinginvestmentsorthecorrectionof anerror.Unwindsoccur
when,forexample,abrokermistakenlysellspartofapositionwhenaninvestorwantedtoaddtoit.Thebrokerwould
havetounwindthetransaction bysellingtheerroneouslypurchasedstockand buyingtheproperstock.Onetypeof
investingthatfeaturesunwindtradingisarbitrageinvesting(ashappensintheCDS).If,forthesakeofillustration,an
investortakesalongpositioninstocks,whileatthesametimesellingputsonthesameissue,hewillneedtounwind
thosetradesatsome point.Of course,thisentailscoveringtheoptionsand sellingthe underlyingstock.Asimilar
processwouldbefollowedbya brokerattemptingtocorrecta buyingorsellingerror.

--- PAGE 431 ---
SecurityMarketinIndia I 14.29
to enable the participation of longterm (WPI), which isa lessaccurategaugeofinflation.
investorsin thecorporate bond market. CPI is considered a more accurate gauge of the
Introduction of new products and making impactofinflation on consumers becauseit takes
nascentproductssuchascoveredbonds,municipal into account increases in the cost of education,
bonds,creditdefaultswaps,creditenhancements, food,transportation,housingandmedicalcare;in
andsecuritisation receipts moreattractivemaybe WPI, the emphasis is on measuring the prices of
consideredforpublicissuanceofbondsatreduced
tradedgoodsandservices.
cost . Improving the market infrastructure for Itwasin1997thattheIIBswereissuedforthe
—
enablingliquidity,transparencyinpricediscovery, first timein India named as theCapitalIndexed
and stimulating growth in trading volumes also Bonds (CIBs) . But there remains a difference
need to besuitablyaddressed. between these two bonds. While the CIBs
providedinflationprotectiononlytoprincipalthe
| -
INFLATIONINDEXED BONDS new product IIBs provides inflation protection
—
to both the components principal and interest
Toprotectthereturnsofinvestorsfromthevagaries
.
payments
of inflation, the Reserve Bank of India plans to
—
introduceinflation-indexed bonds (IIBs) it was |
GOLDEXCHNAGETRADED FUNDS
proposed by the Union Budget 2013—14. The
government hopesthiswillhelpincrease financial Gold Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) are open-
savingsinsteadofbuyinggold.In the recent years, ended mutual fund schemes that closely track the
the rate of return on debt investments has often price of physical gold. Each unit represents one
been belowinflation,whicheffectivelymeansthat gram of gold having 0.995 purity, and the ETF
inflation was eroding savings. Inflation indexed is listed on stock exchanges. The net asset value
bonds provide returns thatarealwaysin excessof of each unit is calculated based on the prices
inflation, ensuring that price rise does not erode of physical gold prevailing on that day and is
thevalueofsavings. designed to provide returns that would closely
In 2013-14, RBI launched two such bonds track thereturnsfrom physicalgold.
—
thefirstoneinJune2013linkedwiththeWPI -
EGOLD
which had a veryweak retail responseandsecond
one in December 2013 linked with CPI. The e-Gold is another purchase option, involving
latter oneiscalledasInflationIndexedNational investments in units traded on the National
SavingsSecurities-Cumulative (IINSS-C) with Stock Exchange (NSEL). Here, the investor is
a10yearstenure .Theseareinternationallyknown required to haveademataccountwithan affiliate
as inflation-linked securities or simply linkers. of NSEL. e-Gold’s brokerage and transaction
Interestrateon thesesecuritieswould belinked to charges are lower than gold ETFs as there are no
finalcombined consumer priceindex[CPI (Base: fund managementcharges.Onecan takedelivery
2010=100)]. Interest rate would comprise two ofgold orsellitin theexchange.
parts: fixed rate (1.3 per cent) and inflation rate, But there is also a negative point here from
basedonthree-monthlagtoCPI — thus,ifabond thetaxangle — under e-Gold,onehas to hold the
is being valued in December, the reference rate yellow metal for 36 months to enjoy long- term
willbeCPIofSeptember.Thenewofferingshould
capital gain benefits, and this is taxed at 20 per
attracthigherattentionfromsavers,especiallydue cent . For ETFs (Exchange Traded Funds) and
to itslink to CPI insteadofwholesale priceindex

--- PAGE 432 ---
14.30 4 IndianEconomy
gold funds, the holding period to be classified Thetenblue-chipPSUswhichmeettheabove
as long- term is only one year. After a year, ETF criteria and their weightages are: ONGC (26.72
andgoldfundswillsuffer 10per cent taxwithout per cent); GAIL (India) (18.48 per cent); Coal
indexation and 20 per cent after indexation. For India (17.75 per cent); REC (7.16 per cent); Oil
a small investor, gold ETF would appear to be India (7.04percent);IOC(6.82percent); Power
the best option, as it meets his needs without Finance Corp. (6.49 per cent); Container Corp.
difficulties in terms of creating a separate demat (6.40 per cent); Bharat Electronics (2 per cent)
account, taximplicationsand wealth tax . andEngineersIndia Ltd.(1.13per cent).
CPSE ETF will invest the corpus in the
|
CPSE ETF above-givencompaniesasperthegivenweightage.
Hence,subjectto thetrackingerrorandexpenses,
The Central Public Sector Enterprises Exchange
CPSEETF’sreturnswillcloselycorrespondtothe
Traded Fund (CPSE ETF) comprising the
CPSE Indexreturns .
shares of 10 blue chip PSUs was listed on the
BSE and NSE platforms on April 4, 2014. The ETFs were introduced in India in 2001. At
Government of India expected to raise a corpus present (byMay2014), thereareabout 33ETFs
of Rs. 3,000 crore through the fund while it got with assets under management of close to Rs.
over-subscribed to thetuneof Rs.4,300crores. 11,500 crore held by 6.20 lakh investors. Gold
ETFsdominatethemarketin India.
This scheme is conceived by the Gol as a
means to disinvesta part of its holding in Public |
PENSION SECTOR REFORMS
Sector Units (PSUs) and would be managed by
GoldmanSachsAssetManagement(India)Pvt. Pension has been theintegral part ofgovernment
Ltd., a mutual fund company that specialises in jobsin India.Pensionservestwoimportantsocio
¬
managingexchangetradedfunds.
economicobjectives
—
ETF is a security that tracks an index, a (i) Itfacilitatestheflowoflong- termsavings
commodityor a basket of assetssuch as an index for development, i.e., nation-building,
—
fund, but tradeslikeastockonan exchange the and
CPSE ETF tracks the CPSE Index (of 10 PSUs
(ii) Also helps establish a credible and
included in the ETF). CPSE Index has been
sustainable social security system in the
constructedbyincludingcompaniesthatmeetthe .
country
followingcriteria:
TheNewPensionSystem(NPS)wasintroduced
(i) Owned 33 per cent or more by the Gol for the new recruits who join governmentservice
andlistedon theNSE;
on or afterJanuary 1,2004.Although the NPS
(ii) Large PSUs (those having more than is perhaps one of the cheapest financial products
Rs.1,000 crores as average free float available in the country, in order to make it
market capitalisation for six months affordable for the economically disadvantaged,
periodendingJune2013);and the government in September 2010 introduced
(iii) With a consistent dividend payment a lower cost version, known as Swavalamban
record (at least 4 per cent for 7 years Scheme, which enables groups of people to
immediatelypriortoor7outof8/9years join the NPS at a substantially reduced cost . As
immediatelyprior toJune2013). per existing scheme under NPS, Swavalamban

--- PAGE 433 ---
SecurityMarketinIndia t 14.31
could be availed either in ‘unorganised sector’ or An apex level Financial Stability and
in ‘NPS LiteNPS Lite is a model specifically Development Council (FSDC) wasset up bythe
designed to bring NPS within easy reach of the Gol in December 2010, ‘in line with the G-20
economicallydisadvantagedsectionsofthesociety initiatives’with thefollowingobjectives:
—
it is extremely affordable and viable due to its (i) To strengthen and institutionalise the
optimised functionalities, available at reduced mechanism for maintaining financial
charges. Under the Swavalamban scheme, the stability,
government provides subsidy to each NPS (ii) Toenhanceinter-regulatorycoordination,
accountholderand theschemehasbeenextended
and
until2016 — 17.
(iii) to promotefinancial- sectordevelopment.
Acustomised versionofthecoreNPSmodel,
ThecouncilischairedbytheFinanceMinisterand
known as the NPS Corporate Sector Model was
also introduced from December 2011 to enable
hasheadsoffinancial- sectorregulatoryauthorities,
‘organised- sector’ entities to move their existing
the Finance Secretary and/or Secretary of the
Department of Economic Affairs, Secretary of
and prospective employees to the NPS under its
Corporate Model. All pubic sector banks have the Department of Financial Services, and the
Chief Economic Adviser as members. Without
been asked to provide a link on their website to
enableindividualsubscribersto open online NPS prejudice to the
—
autonomy of regulators, the
. Councilmonitors
accounts
As per the Economic Survey 2012—13 (i) macro-prudential supervision of the
>
economy, including functioning of large
the pension reforms in India have generated
_
financialconglomerates,
widespread interest internationally but before
universal inclusion of poorer sections of Indian (ii) inter-regulatory coordination and
society into the pension network is a reality, financial- sectordevelopment issues,and
the economy needs to solve the following major (iii) financialliteracyand financialinclusion.
challenges:
FINANCIALSECTORASSESSMENT
(i) Lower levels of financial literacy,
particularly among workers in the PROGRAMME(FSAP)
^^^^^
unorganisedsector;
The IMF Board decided in September 2010, to
(ii) Non-availability of even moderate include 25 systemically important economies,
surplus; including India, under the Financial Stability
(iii) Lukewarm response so far from most AssessmentProgramme(FSAP)formemberswith
of the state/UT governments to a co ¬ systemicallyimportantfinancialsectors .The joint
contributorySwavalambanScheme;and IMF-World Bank Financial Stability Assessment
(iv) Lack of awareness, on the supply side, Programme (FSAP) was conducted for India in
about the NPS and of access points for January 2013 which assessed Indian financial
peopletoopentheiraccountsindividually system in relation to the highest international
have been majorinhibitingfactors. standards. The assessment recognises that the
Financial Stability and Development Indian financial system remained largely stable
Council (FSDC) on accountofasound regulatoryandsupervisory

--- PAGE 434 ---
14.32 i IndianEconomy _
regime. However, the assessment identifies some wherever necessary,asitisacountrycharacterised
—
gapsin18 by complex and diverse socio-political and
(i) International and domestic supervisory
economicconditions.
informationsharingand co-operation;
FINANCIALSTABILITYANDDEVELOPMENT
(ii) Consolidated supervision of financial
COUNCIL(FSDC)
conglomerates;and ^^^ ^^
(iii) Somelimitson thedejureindependence As a follow-up to the announcement made
of theregulators (RBIand IRDA). in the Budget 2010 — 11, with the objective
Despite having reservations on few issues, to strengthening and institutionalising the
overall the Indian authorities expect the FSAP mechanism for maintaining financial stability
exerciseto playasignificantroleinshapingIndia’s and enhancing inter-regulatory coordination, an
post-crisis initiatives to strengthen the regulatory apex-level Financial Stability and Development
and supervisory architecture based on the Council under the Chairmanship of the Finance
evolvinginternationalconsensusaswellascareful Minister has beenset up.
examinationoftheirrelevanceintheIndia-specific Asub-committeeof the FSDC has also been
context . As a member of the FSB19, BCBS20 set up under the chairmanship of the Governor
and IMF21, India isactivelyparticipatingin post¬ RBI.UndertheaegisoftheFSDC,twoempowered
crisis reforms of the international regulatory and Technical Groups (i.e., Technical Group on
supervisory framework under the aegis of the Financial Literacy and Financial Inclusion and
G20. India remains committed to adoption of Inter-Regulatory Technical Group) have been
international standards and best practices, in a formed.
phased mannerandcalibratedtolocalconditions,
18. RBI,16thJanuary,2013
19. TheFSBwasestablishedinApril2009asthesuccessortotheFinancialStabilityForum(FSF).TheFSFwasfoundedin1999
bytheG-7forenhancingcooperationamongthevarious nationaland internationalsupervisory bodiesand international
financialinstitutionssoastopromotestabilityintheinternationalfinancialsystem.InNovember2008,theleadersoftheG-20
countriescalledforalargermembershipoftheFSF.AsannouncedintheG-20LeadersSummitofApril2009,theexpanded
FSFwasre-establishedastheFinancialStabilityBoard(FSB)withabroadenedmandatetopromotefinancialstability.TheFSB
ischairedbyMarkCarney,GovernoroftheBankofCanada.ItssecretariatislocatedinBasel,Switzerland,andhostedbythe
BankforInternationalSettlements.
Itsobjectiveistocoordinateattheinternationalleveltheworkofnationalfinancialauthoritiesandinternationalstandard
settingbodiesandtodevelopandpromotetheimplementationofeffectiveregulatory,supervisoryandotherfinancialsector
policies.[Source:FinancialStabilityBoardSecretariat,BankforInternationalSettlements,Basel,Switzerland].
20. TheBCBS(BaselCommitteeonBankingSupervision)providesaforumforregularcooperationonbankingsupervisorymatters.
TheCommittee’smembers,today,comefrom27nationsincludingIndia.ThepresentChairmanoftheCommitteeisStefan
Ingves,GovernorofSverigesRiksbank.ItislocatedattheBankforInternationalSettlements(BIS)inBasel,Switzerland.
Itsobjective istoenhance understanding of keysupervisory issuesand improvethe quality of bankingsupervision
worldwide.Itseekstodosobyexchanginginformationon nationalsupervisoryissues,approachesandtechniques,witha
viewtopromotingcommonunderstanding.Attimes,theCommitteeusesthiscommonunderstandingtodevelopguidelines
andsupervisorystandardsin areaswheretheyareconsidereddesirable.Inthis regard,theCommitteeisbestknownfor
itsinternationalstandardsonCapitalAdequacy(i.eBaselI,BaselIIandBaselIII,bynow);theCorePrinciplesforEffective
BankingSupervision;andtheConcordatoncross-borderbankingsupervision.
TheCommitteeencouragescontactsandcooperationamongitsmembersand other bankingsupervisoryauthorities.
Itcirculatestosupervisorsthroughout theworld both published and unpublished papers providingguidanceon banking
supervisorymatters.Contactshavebeenfurtherstrengthened byanInternationalConferenceofBankingSupervisors(ICBS)
whichtakesplaceeverytwoyears.[Source:BIS,Basel,Switzerlad).
21. SeeChapter16fordetaileddiscussionontheIMF(InternationalMonetaryFund).

--- PAGE 435 ---
—
SecurityMarketinIndia t 14.33
FINANCIALSECTOR LEGISLATIVE international standards for combating money
REFORMSCOMMISSION(FSLRC) launderingznd terroristfinancing.India joinedthe
FATFasits34thmemberinJune2010 . Atpresent,
Fulfilling the announcement of the Budget of theFATFhas36memberscomprising34countries
—
2010 11, to rewrite and harmonise financial and two organisations (European Union and Gulf
.
sector legislations, rules and regulations the Gol CooperationCouncil) .
constituted the FSLRC under the chairmanship
ofJustice(Retd.) B.N.Srikrishna in March2011 REAL ESTATESINFRASTRUCTURE
(tenure is 2 years). This had become necessary
INVESTEMNTTRUSTS
as the institutional framework governing India’s
financialsectorwas builtoveracentury . The SEBI firmed up regulations that will govern
There are over 60 Acts and multiple Rules/ Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs), and the
Regulations in the sector and many of them are Infrastructure Investment Trusts (InvITs).22 The
decades old, when the financial landscape was long-pendingproposalof2008,thetrustshavethe
very different from what it is obtaining today. objectiveofenablingthecash-strapped realestate
Large number of amendments made in in these andinfrastruturedevelopersto haveeasyaccessto
Acts over time has increased the ambiguity and funds. They create a new investment avenue for
complexityofthesystem . institutions and high net worth individuals, and
The commission would simplify and
eventuallyordinaryinvestors.
re-write financial sector legislations, including
REITS
subordinate legislations, to bring them in line
with the requirements of the sector to achieve Major provisions announced by the SEBI for the
harmonyandsynergyamongthem, makingthem REITsareasgiven below:
morecoherentand dynamicand helpcater to the (i) To be close-ended real estate investment
requirementsofalargeandfastgrowingeconomy schemes that will invest in propertywith
in tune with the changing financial landscape in the aim of providing returns to unit
an inter-connected financial world. In the long
¬
holders.
term, it would help usher in the next generation (ii) The returns will be derived mainly from
of reforms, contribute to efficient financial rental income or capital gains from real
intermediation enhancing the growth potential .
estate
of the nation. The commission handed over its
(iii) Allowed to invest in commercial real
reportend-March2013(seeChapter11sub-topic
‘Financial Regulators’). estate assets, either directly or through
special purpose vehicles (SPVs). In
FINANCIALACTIONTASK FORCE(FATF) SPVs, a REIT must have a controlling
interest of at least 30 per cent of the
TheFATFisaninter-governmentalpolicymaking
sharecapitalandwillhavetoholdatleast
body that has a ministerial mandate to establish
22. SEBIPressRelease,September26,2014.

--- PAGE 436 ---
14.34 4 IndianEconomy
80percentoftheir assetsdirectlyin in the real estate sector, equity shares of listed
properties. companies that deriveat least75 per cent of their
(iv) To raise funds only through an initial incomefrom realestate,governmentsecurities,or
offering and units of REITs have to be money market instruments. No REIT can invest
mandatorily listed on a stock exchange, morethan10percentin propertiesthatareunder
similar to initial public offering (IPO)
construction.
andlistingforequityshares.
JNVITS
(v) Required to have assets worth at least
Rs.500croreatthetimeofaninitialoffer The SEBI also announced the launch of InvITs
and the minimum issue size has to be which are somewhat similar to REITs. However,
Rs.250crore.Theminimumsubscription an initial offer will not be mandatory for InvITs
size for units of a REIT on offer will be thoughlistingwillbemandatoryforbothpublicly
Rs.2 lakh and at least 25 per cent of the and privately placed InvITs. Major provisions are
units haveto beoffered to the public. asgiven below:
(vi) Will be able to raise money through (i) It can invest in infrastructure projects,
follow-onoffers, rightsissuesor qualified eitherdirectlyorthroughanSPV(Specila
institutional placements and the trading Purpose vehicle). In case of public-
lotforsuch unitswill beRs. l lakh. private-partnership (PPP) projects, such
Accordingtothenorms,althoughaREITmay
investmentswillbeonlythroughanSPV.
raise funds from any type of investors, resident (ii) While listing, the collective holding of
or foreign, initially only wealthy individuals and sponsorsofan InvIThasto beatleast25
institutions will be allowed to subscribe to REIT per centforatleast threeyears.
unitoffers.ThemarketregulatorsaidaREITmay (iii) Requiredto havea holdingworthatleast
have up to three sponsors, with each holding at Rs.500croreintheunderlyingassets,and
least5percentandcollectivelyholdingatleast25 theinitialoffersizeoftheInvIThastobe
per cent for a period of at least three years from atleast Rs.250crore.
the date of listing. Subsequently, the sponsors’ (iv) AnyInvIT, which looks to investat least
combined holding has to be at least 15 per cent 80per cent ofitsassetsincompletedand
throughout thelifeofthe REIT. revenuegenerating infrastructure assets,
Similar to the practice in the US, Australia, has to raise funds only through a public
Singapore and other nations where REITs issue of units, with a minimum 25 per
are common, Sebi has decided to allow these centpublicfloatandatleast20investors.
trusts to invest primarily in completed revenue ¬ (v) The minimum subscription size and
generating properties. To ensure that REITs trading lot of such a listed InvIT has to
generatecontinuous returns, Sebisaid at least 80 beRs.10lakhand Rs.5lakh,respectively.
per cent of the REIT’s assets has to be invested A publicly offered InvIT may invest
in completed and revenue generating properties. the remaining 20 per cent in under ¬
And only up to 20 per cent of assets can be construction infrastructure projects and
invested in properties that are being developed, other permissibleinvestments.
mortgage-backed securities, debt of companies

--- PAGE 437 ---
SecurityMarketinIndia t 14.35
An InvIT that proposes to invest more than wheresingleholdingcannot bemorethan 25 per
10 per cent of its assets in under-construction cent .
infrastructureprojectscanraisefundsonlythrough —
The Union Budget 2014 15 promised a
private placement from qualified institutional friendlier tax norms for the REITs and InvTs.
buyers with a minimum investment and trading Theseareyettobeannouncedbythegovernment .
lot of Rs. l crore and from at least five investors,

--- PAGE 439 ---
1
C H A P T E R
<
-
/ im
I
m
EXTERNAL
SECTOR OF
kfiP
INDIA
^ Definition
Nocountry intoday'sglobalisedworld
o Forex Reserves
can befully insulated from what
=> ExternalDebt
happens in the global economy and
FixedCurrencyRegime India isnoexceptiontotherule . Asthe
FloatingCurrencyRegime country is increasingly integrated into
=> ManagedExchangeRates theworld,itcannotremain impervious
=> ForeignExchangeMarket todevelopmentsabroad.Theunfolding
=> ExchangeRateinIndia oftheEurozonecrisisanduncertainty
<=> TradeBalance surrounding theglobal economy have
=> TradePolicy impactedtheIndian economy causing
=> Depreciation
drop in growth,highercurrentaccount
deficitanddecliningcapital inflows. *
=> Devaluation
=> Revaluation
=> Appreciation
=> Current Account
*AswritestheMoF,EconomicSurvey2012-13,Got,N.Delhi,p.131.

--- PAGE 440 ---
o CapitalAccount
=> BalanceotPayment(BoP)
<=> Convertibility
=> LERMS
^ NEER
* REER
o EFF
<=> IMFConditionsonIndia
=> HardCurrency
=> SoftCurrency
=t> HotCurrency
=> HeatedCurrency
CheapCurrency
=> DearCurrency
<=> SpecialEconomicZone
o GAAR
o RisksinForeignCurrencyBorrowings
=> RecentRTAsbyIndia
=> Crude OilPrice Movements
"=> CompositionofTrade
o DirectionofTrade
<=> RecentStepstoPromoteTrade
=> NewForeignTradePolicy

--- PAGE 441 ---
ExternalSectorof India t 15.3
| DEFINITION to buy dollar, ultimately, leading to higher forex
buid-ups. The Chief Economic Advisor of the
All economic activities of an economy which Financeministry, however,clearlystatedthekind
take place in foreign currencyfall in sectorssuch of reserveaccretion thegovernment islookingat .
as export, import, foreign investment, external CitingtheexampleofChina,theEconomicSurvey
debt, current account,capitalaccount, balanceof 2014—15said Indiacould targetforeignexchange
payment,etc ., to nameafew{definition).1 reservesof US$750 billion to $1 trillion.
Today, China hasdefactobecomeoneof the
|
FOREX RESERVES lendersoflast resort togovernmentsexperiencing
financial troubles. China, in its own heterodox
Thetotalforeigncurrencies(ofdifferentcountries)
and multiple ways, is assuming the roles of both
an economy possesses at a point of time is its an IMFandWorld Bankasa resultofitsreserves.
‘foreign currency assets/reserves’.2 The Forex
The question for India, as a risingeconomic and
Reserves (shortfor‘foreignexchange reserves’) of
politicalpower,iswhetherit,too,shouldconsider
an economy is its ‘foreign currency assets’ added asubstantialaddition to itsreserves.
with its gold reserves, SDRs (Special Drawing
Rights) and Reserve Tranche in the IMF.3 In a While forex reserves act as insurance when
the rupee tends to be volatile against the dollar,
sense, the Forex reserves is the upper limit upto
therearecostsattachedtoit.When RBIpurchases
which an economy can manage foreign currency
in normal timesif need be. dollars in the spot, it leads to infusion of rupee
into the system which leaves inflationary effect
As per a RBI releaseonApril3, 2013, India’s on the economy. Since the RBI does not want
forex reserves was at US$ 341.37 (composed of such actions to create inflationary pressure, so, it
Gold Reserves of US$ 19,83 buillion; SDR of
convertsspotpurchasesintoforwards.Thisway,it
US$4 billion and ReserveTranche Position with is a direct cost because of the forward premiums.
the IMF at US$ 1.29 billion).As per tht Annual If RBI opts for open market operations (OMOs)
Reportof the IMF (releasedon March 11, 2015),
tomopupexcessliquidity,thatalsoinvolvescosts .
India’s forex reserves stood at 148 per cent of
RBI invests thesedollars in instrumentssuch
IMF’sreserveadequacy.
as US treasuries, which offer negligible returns,
-
OPTIMUM FOREX THERIDDLE owing to lower yields. But experts say these
are unavoidable costs . The returns from rupee
In recent times, there has been a debate over assets are much lower compared to returns from
India’s optimum level of the forex reserves. The dollar assets . But RBI is not into investment
RBIisawareofthedownsideriskstotheexchange
management, it is there to maintain stability in
rate, as is reflected by its action of buying the thesystem .
US dollar. Officially, the RBI targets neither a
In August 2014, RBI chief Raghuram Rajan
particular exchange rate nor foreign exchange agreed foreign exchange reserves came at a cost .
reserves,andmaintainssuchinterventionsbyit to
justreducevolatilityintheforexmarket.Butinthe
Indiaea
—
rnsnexttonothingfortheforeignreserves
itholds actually,thiswayIndiafinancesanother
processofsupportingweakeningrupee,RBIneeds
1. BasedonStiglitzandWalsh,Economics,op.cit.,pp.757 - 58.
2. BasedonSamuelsonand Nordhaus,Economics , op.cit.,p.604.
3. Ibid.,pp.605 - 07.

--- PAGE 442 ---
15.4 < IndianEconomy
countrywhen it hasasignificantfinancingneeds. SDR-denominateddebt (33.5 percent),whichis
It is very difficult to state the level of reserves attributableto borrowingfrom the International
considered adequate by RBI. Though there are DevelopmentAssociation (IDA),i.e.thesoftloan
costs involved, the costs to benefit cannot be windowoftheWorld Bank under the
quantified byanymodel.Globally,therehas been multilateralagencies, andSDRallocations bythe
no studyon the adequacyof reserves. In such an InternationalMonetaryFund (IMF).
environment, RBI will havetogo byexperiences. Over the years, India’s external debt stock
has witnessed structural change in terms of
|
EXTERNAL DEBT
composition (bySeptember2014):
After the BoP crisis of 1991, India’s prudent (cid:127) The proportion of concessional debt
external debt policies and management with a declined from — 42.9 per cent during the
focus on sustainability, solvency, and liquidity period 1991 2000 to 28.1 per cent in
—
havehelpedcontaintheincreaseinsizeofexternal 2001 10 and further to 9.8 per cent at
end-September 2014.
debt to a moderateleveland it iscompositionally
better with a longer term maturityprofile.India’s (cid:127) Thedominanceof non-government debt
total external debt stock stood at US$ 455.9 in total external debt is evident from the
billion bySeptember2014(3percenthigherover fact thatsuch debt accounted for 65.6
March 2014), as per the latest data (Economic per cent of total debt during the 2000s
Survey 2014 — 15) . The rise in total external debt decade,against45.3per cent in the
during the period was due to long- term debt, 1990s. Non-government debt accounted
particularlyNRIdeposits. for over 70 per cent of total debt in the
The maturity profileof India’sexternaldebt last five years and stood at 80.6 per cent
indicatesthedominanceoflong- term borrowings
atend-September 2014.
(bySeptember 2014): (cid:127) India’sforeignexchangereservesprovided
(cid:127) Long- term debt accounted for 81.1 per a cover of 68.8 per cent at end-March
cent of thetotalexternaldebt.
2014.
(cid:127) Short- termdebtintotalexternaldebtwas (cid:127) India’sexternaldebt hasremained within
18.9 percent,atend-September 2014. manageable limits as indicated by the
externaldebt to GDP ratio of 23.5
(cid:127) Governmentdebtsharewas19.4percent
per cent and debtservice ratio of5.9 per
8 w 0 h . i 6 le p t e h r e c n e o n n t . -governmentdebtsharewas cent in 2013 — 14.
The prudent external debt management
(cid:127) Currency composition: US dollar-
policy of the Gol has helped in containing rise
denominated debt in external debt stock
in external debt and maintaining a comfortable
continued to be the highest at 60.1 per external debt position. The policy continues to
cent, followed by Indian rupee (24.2 per —
focuson
cent), the SDR (6.5 per cent), Japanese
yen(4.5percent),andeuro(3.0percent)
(i) Monitoringlong-andshort- termdebt.
denominated. (ii) Raising sovereign loans on concessional
The currency composition of government
termswithlonger maturities.
(sovereign) debt indicates predominance of

--- PAGE 443 ---
ExternalSectorof India t 15.5
(iii) Regulating external commercial paymentcrisisoflate1960s.Lookingatthemajor
borrowings through enduse, all-in- cost, loopholes in this system, the UK government
and maturity restrictions. decided to switch over to the floating currency
—
(iv)Rationalizinginterest rateson NRIdeposits. regimein 1973 thesameyear the IMF allowed
anoption toitsmembercountriestogoforeither
Cross-countrycomparisonofexternaldebt based
of thecurrencysystems .
on the World Bank’s International Debt Statistics
2015, which contains the external debt data for
Inthefloatingexchangeratesystem,adomestic
the year 2013, indicates that India continues to currency is left free to float against a number of
beamongthelessvulnerablecountries.India’skey foreign currencies in its foreign exchange market
debt indicatorscomparewell withother indebted
anddetermineitsownvalue.Suchexchangerates,
developingcountries.Theratioof India’sexternal arealso called as marketdrivenor basedexchange
debt stock to gross national income at 23.0 per
rates, which are regulated by factors such as the
cent was the sixth lowest. In terms of the cover demand and supply of the domestic and the
foreign currenciesin theconcernedeconomy.
provided byforeign exchange reserves to external
debt, India’spositionwassixthhighestat64.7per
|
MANAGED EXCHANGE RATES
cent
| A managed-exchange- rate system is a hybrid or
FIXED CURRENCY REGIME4
mixture of the fixed and flexible exchange rate
A method of regulating exchange rates of world
systemsin which thegovernmentof theeconomy
currencies brought by the IMF. In this system attempts to affect the exchange rate directly by
exchange rate of a particular currency was fixed
buyingorsellingforeign currenciesor indirectly,
by the IMF keeping the currency in front of a through monetary policy6 (i.e., by lowering or
basket of important world currencies (they were raising interest rates on foreign currency bank
UK£, US $,Japanese ¥, German Mark DM and
accounts,affectingforeign investment,etc .).
the French FrancFFr). Differenteconomieswere Today, most of the economies have shifted
supposed to maintain that particular exchange to this system of exchange rate determination.
rate in future. Exchange rates of currencies were Almost all countries tend to intervene when the
modified bythe IMFfrom timeto time. markets becomedisorderlyor tht fundamentals
~ of economics arechallenged bytheexchange rate
| FLOATING CURRENCY REGIM of the time. Some of the major examples of the
managed exchange- rate system have been given
A method of regulating exchange rates of world below:7
currencies based on the market mechanism (i.e.,
(i) Some countries allow to free float their
demandandsupply).In thefollowupto thefixed
currenciesand allowthemarketforces to
currency system of exchange rate determination, determine their exchange rate with rare
it was the UK which blamed the system for its governmentintervention.Thisistheidea
4. Ibid.,pp.610 - 11.
5. Ibid.,pp.611 - 15.
6. Ibid.,p.615.
7. The discussion is based primarilyon Samuelson and Nordhaus, Economics , op.cit., pp.613 - 15and D.Salvatore,
InternationalEconomics , JohnWiley&Sons,NewJersey,USA,2004,pp.717 - 22.

--- PAGE 444 ---
15.6 I IndianEconomy
fromwhichthefloatingcurrencyregime regime or is a managed or hybrid exchange rate
basicallyemerged.The USAand the EU system . It is altogether not allowed either in a
arethemajor examplesin thiscategory . fixedcurrencysystemor a hardfix (in a hard fix
(ii) Some economies have managed but thishappensoncethecurrencyto which thehard
flexibleexchange rates, under which the fixhas beendoneitselfstartsfluctuating).
governments buy or sell its currency to
|
reduce day- to -day volatility of currency EXCHANGE RATE IN INDIA
fluctuations and sometimes go for
Indian currency, the ‘rupee’, was historically
systematic intervention for desired
linked with the British Pound Sterling till 1948
objectives. Canada and Japan fall in
which was fixed as far back as 1928. Once the
this category, besides many developing
countries. India too falls under this IMF came up, Indiashifted to thefixed currency
system committed to maintain rupee’s external
c re a g te i g m o e ry si w nc h e ic 1 h 9 f 9 o 2 ll — o 9 w 3 s f t i h n e an d c u i a al lc y u ea r r r . e 8 ncy value (i.e., exchange rate) in terms of gold or
the US ($ Dollar). In 1948, Rs. 3.30 was fixed
(iii) Someeconomies, particularlysmallones, equivalent to US$1.
peg their currencies to a major currency
In September 1973, India delinked rupee
or to a basket of currency in a fixed
— from the British Pound and the RBI started
exchange rate known as the peggingof
determining rupee’s exchange rate with respect
currencies.Attimes,thepegisallowedto
— to the exchange rate movements of the basket of
glidesmoothly upward or downward a
world currencies (£, $, ¥, DM, Fr.).This was an
system which is known as gliding or
arrangement between the fixed and the floating
crawling peg. Some economies have a
currencyregimes.
hardfixofacurrencyboard.Acurrency
—
board is working well in Hong Kong In 1992 93 financial year, India moved to
thefloatingcurrencyregimewithitsown method
while the same failed in Argentina in
which is known as the ‘dual exchange rate’12
2002.
Therearetwo exchangeratesfor rupee,oneis the
| FOREIGN EXCHANGEMARKET ‘official rate’ and the other is the ‘market rate’.
Here the point should be noted that it is the
The market where different currencies can be everyday’s changing market-based exchange rate
bought and sold is called the foreign exchange of rupee which affects the official exchange rate
market.9Out of thetradesin differentcurrencies, and not the other way round. But the RBI may
theexchangerateofthecurrencyisdeterminedby intervenein theforexmarketvia thedemandand
theeconomy.10Thisisaninstitutionalframework supplyofrupeeortheforeigncurrencies.Another
for the exchange of one national currency for point whichshould be kept in mind is that none
another.11Thisis particularlycorrecteither in the of the economies have till date followed an ideal
caseofafreefloatexchange(i.e.,floatingcurrency) free-floating exchange rate . They require some
8. LERMS,UnionBudget1992 - 93 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
9. StiglitzandWalsh,op.cit.,p.757.
10. Samuelsonand Nordhaus,op.cit.,p.604
11. D.Salvatore,2004,op.cit.,p.7.
12. LERMS , op.cit.

--- PAGE 445 ---
ExternalSectorof India t 15.7
mechanism to intervene in the foreign exchange government against any foreign currency, it is
marketbecausethisisahighlyspeculativemarket. called devaluation. It means official depreciation
isdevaluation.
|
TRADE BALANCE
|
REVALUATION
The monetary difference of the total export and
importofaneconomyinonefinancialyeariscalled A term used in foreign exchange market which
trade balance. It might be positive or negative, meansagovernment increasing theexchangerate
known to be either favourable or unfavourable, of its currencyagainst anyforeign currency. It is
respectivelyto theeconomy. officialappreciation.
| |
TRADE POLICY APPRECIATION
Broadly speaking, the economic policy which In foreign exchange market, if a free floating
regulates the export-import activities of any domestic currency increases its value against the
economy is known as the trade policy. It is also value of a foreign currency, it is appreciation. In
calledtheforeign tradepolicyor theExim Policy. domesticeconomy,ifafixedassethasseenincrease
Thispolicyneedsregularmodificationsdepending in its value it is also known as appreciation.
upon the economic policies of the economies of Appreciationratesfordifferentassetsarenotfixed
theworld or thetradingpartners .13 by any government as they depend upon many
factorswhichare unseen.
|
DEPRECIATION
|
CURRENTACCOUNT
This term is used to mean two different things.
—
In foreign exchangemarket, it isasituation when Ithastwomeanings oneisrelatedtothebanking
domestic currency loses its value in front of a sectorand theother to theexternalsector:
foreign currency if it is market-driven. It means (i) In the banking industry, a business
depreciation in a currency can only take place if firms bank account is known as current
the economy follows the floating exchange rate account .Theaccount isin thenameof a
.
system firm run byauthorised person or persons
In domestic economy, depreciation means in which no interest is paid by the bank
an asset losing its value due to either its use, on the deposits. Every withdrawal from
wear and tear or due to other economic reasons. the account takes place by cheques with
Depreciationheremeanswearandtear . Thisisalso limitations on the number of deposits
known as capital consumption. Every economy and withdrawals in a single day. The
has an official annual rates for different assets at overdraft facility or the cash-cum-credit
whichfixed assetsareconsidereddepreciating. (c/cAccount) facilityto businessfirmsis
offeredbythebanksonthisaccountonly.
|
DEVALUATION
(ii) In the external sector, it refers to the
accountmaintainedbyeverygovernment
In the foreign exchange market when exchange
of the world in which every kind of
rate of a domestic currency is cut down by its
13. D.Salvatore,2004,op.cit.,pp.235 - 36.

--- PAGE 446 ---
15.8 < IndianEconomy
—
current transactions is shown basically There is no deficit or surplus in this account
this account is maintained bythecentral like thecurrentaccount .
banking bodyof the economy on behalf
of thegovernment . Current transactions | BALANCEOFPAYMENT(BoP)
of an economy in foreign currency all
over the world are — export, import, The outcome of the total transactions of an
economy with the outside world in one year is
interest payments, private remittances
and transfers. known as the balance of payment (BoP) of the
economy.14 Basically, it is the net outcome of
All transactions areshown aseither inflowor
outflow (credit or debit). At the end of the year, the current and capital accounts of an economy.
It might be favourable or unfavourable for the
thecurrentaccountmight bepositiveor negative.
economy. However, negativity of the BoP does
The positive one is known as a surplus current not mean it is unfavourable. A negative BoP is
account, and the negative one is known as a
unfavourableforaneconomyifonlytheeconomy
deficitcurrentaccount . India hadsurplus — curre — nt lacks themeansto fill thegapof negativity.
accountsfor threeconsecutiveyears (2000 03)
theonlysuch period in Indian economichistory. The BoP of an economyis calculated on the
principles of accountancy (double-entry book-
Current account deficit is shown either
keeping)'i and looks like the balance sheet of a
numericallybyshowingthetotalmonetaryamount —
company every entry shown either as credit
of thedeficit,or in percentageof theGDPof the
(inflow) or debit (outflow). If there is a positive
economyfortheconcernedyear.Boththedataare
used in analysis as per the specific requirement. outcome at the end of the year, the money is
automatically transferred to the foreign exchange
As per a RBI release of April 2014, presently the
reserves of the economy. And if there is any
sustainable level of current account deficit for
India is 2.3per cent of theGDP. d n r e a g w at n ive fro o m utc t o h m e e c , o t u h n e tr s y a ’ m s e fo f r o e r x ei r g e n se e rv x e c s h . an If ge th i e s
| forex reserves are not capable of fulfilling the
CAPITALACCOUNT
negativity created by the BoP, it is known as a
Every government of the world maintains a BoP crisis and the economytries different means
capital account, which shows the capital kind to solve the crisis in which going for forex help
of transactions of the economy with outside from the IMFisthelast resort .
economies. Every transaction in foreign currency
|
CONVERTIBILITY
(infloworoutflow) consideredascapitalisshown
—
in thisaccount externallendingand borrowing,
An economy might allow its currency full or
foreigncurrencydepositsofbanks,externalbonds
partial convertibility in the current and the
issued bytheGovernmentofIndia, FDI, PISand
capital accounts . If domestic currency is allowed
securitymarket investmentof theQFIs (Rupeeis
fullyconvertiblein thiscase). to convert into foreign currency for all current
account purposes, it is a case of full current
accountconvertibility.Similarly,incasesofcapital
outflow, if the domestic currency is allowed to
14. Samuelsonand Nordhaus,op.cit.,p.601. —
15. It meansthateachexternaltransaction isrecorded/ente—redtwice onceasacreditandonceasadebitofanequal
amount.Thisisbecauseeverytransactionhastwosides wesellsomethingandwereceivepaymentforit,similarly
webuysomethingandwehavetopayforit(SeeSalvatore , op.cit.,p.432).

--- PAGE 447 ---
ExternalSectorof India t 15.9
convert into foreign currency, it is a case of full policy, enough reforms have been made and to
capital account convertibility. If the situation is certain levels of foreign exchange requirements,
of partialconvertibility, then the portion allowed it is an economy allowing full capital account
—
bythegovernment can beconverted into foreign convertibility
currency for current and capital purposes. It (i) Indian corporate are allowed full
should always be kept in mind that the issue of convertibility in the automatic route
currencyconvertibility is concerned with foreign upto $ 500 million overseas ventures
currencyoutflowonly. (investmentbyLtd.companiesinforeign
countriesallowed).
CONVERTIBILITYININDIA
(ii) Indian corporate are allowed to prepay
India’s foreign exchange earning capacity their external commercial borrowings
was always poor and hence it had all possible (ECBs) via automatic route if theloan is
provisionsto checktheforeign exchangeoutflow, above$ 500 million.
be it for current purposes or capital purposes (iii) Individualsareallowedtoinvestinforeign
(remember thedraconian FERA).But theprocess assets, shares, etc ., upto the level of $
ofeconomicreformshaschanged thesituation to 2,50,000per annum.
unidentifiablelevels.
(iv) Unlimited amount of gold is allowed to
CURRENT ACCOUNT be imported (this is equal to allowing
full convertibility in capital account via
Current account is today fully convertible currentaccountroute,butnotfeasiblefor
(operationalised on August 19, 1994). It means everybody) whichisnotallowed now.
that the full amount of the foreign exchange TheSecondCommitteeontheCapitalAccount
required bysomeonefor current purposes will be Convertibility (CAC) — again chaired by S.S.
madeavailabletohimatofficialexchangerateand
Tarapore
—
handed over its report in September
therecould bean unprohibitedoutflowofforeign
2006on whichtheRBI/thegovernmentishaving
exchange (earlier it was partially convertible). consultations.
India was obliged to do so as per Article VIII of
theIMFwhichprohibitsanyexchangerestrictions |
LERMS
on current international transactions (keep in
mind that India was under pre-conditions of the India announced the Liberalised Exchange Rate
IMFsince1991). Mechanism System (LERMS) in the Union
—
Budget 1992 93 and in March 1993 it was
CAPITAL ACCOUNT operationalised. India delinked its currencyfrom
After the recomendations of the S.S. Tarapore thefixedcurrencysystem and moved into theera
Committee (1997) on Capital Account offloatingexchange- ratesystem under it.
Convertibility, India has been moving in the Indian form ofexchangerateisknown asthe
direction of allowing full convertibility in this ‘dual exchange rate’, one exchange rate of rupee
account, but with required precautions. India is official and the other is market-driven.16 The
is still a country of partial convertibility (40:60) market-driven exchange rate shows the actual
in the capital account, but inside this overall tendencies of the foreign currency demand and
16. LERMS,op.cit.

--- PAGE 448 ---
15.10 4 IndianEconomy
supply in the economy vis-a-vis the domestic (iii) Excisedutytobeincreasedby20percent
currency. It is the market-driven exchange rate to neutralise the loss of revenue due to
which affects the official rate and not the other customcut .
wayround.
(iv) Government expenditure to be cut by
10 per cent per annum (the burden of
|
NEER salaries, pensions,subsidies,etc .).
TheNominalEffectiveExchangeRate(NEER)of
Theabove-givenconditionstowhichIndiawas
the rupee is a weighted average of exchange rates obliged were vehemently opposed by the Indian
before the currencies of India’s major trading
corporatesector,oppositionintheParliamentand
. majorityofIndians.Butbytheendof1999 — 2000,
partners
when India saw every logic in strengthening its
| REER BoP position therewas no ideologicalopposition
to the idea. It should always be kept in mind
When theweight ofinflation isadjusted with the that the nature of structural reforms India went
NEER, we get the Real Effective Exchange Rate through were guided and decided by these pre ¬
(REER) of the rupee.Sinceinflation has been on conditionsofthe IMF.
thehighersidein recentmonths,theREERofthe Thisishowthedirectionofstructuralreforms
rupeehas been moreagainst it than the NEER. of an economy are regulated by the IMF in the
process of strengthening the BoP position of the
|
EFF crisis-driven economy. The purpose has been
served in the Indian case. India has not only
The Extended fund Facility (EFF) is a service
fulfilled these conditions but it has also moved
provided by the IMF to its member countries
ahead.
which authorises them to raise any amount of
foreign exchangefrom it to fulfil their BoP crisis, |
HARD CURRENCY
buton theconditionsofstructural reformsin the
economyputbythebody.Itisthefirstagreement
It is the international currency in which the
of its kind. India had signed this agreement with highest faith is shown and is needed by every
theIMFin thefinancialyear 1981 — 82. economy. The strongest currency of the world is
one which has a high level of liquidity. Basically,
|
IMFCONDITIONSON INDIA
the economy with the highest as well as highly
diversified exports that are compulsive imports
The BoP crisis of the early 1990s made India
for other countries (as of high-level technology,
borrow from the IMF which came on some
defence products, life saving medicines and
conditions. The medium term loan to India was
petroleum products) willalsocreatehighdemand
given for therestructuringof theeconomyon the
foritscurrencyin theworldand becomethehard
followingconditions:
currency.It isalwaysscarce.
(i) Devaluationofrupeeby22percent(done
— Upto the second world war, the best hard
in two consecutivefortnights rupeefell
currency was the Pound Sterling (£) of the UK,
from‘21to‘27againsteveryUS Dollar). —
but soon it was replaced by the US Dollar at
(ii) Drastic custom cut to a peak duty of 30 present some experts believe that the Euroland’s
per cent from the erstwhile level of 130 currency ( ) might replace it, too . Some of the
per centforallgoods.

--- PAGE 449 ---
ExternalSectorof India t 15.11
besthardcurrenciesoftheworldtodayaretheUS |
DEAR CURRENCY
Dollar,theEuro( ),JapaneseYen (¥)and theUK
SterlingPound (£). This term was popularised byeconomistsin early
|
1930stoshowtheoppositeofthecheapcurrency,
SOFTCURRENCY whenagovermentissues bonds,themoneywhich
flows from the public to the government or the
Aterm usedintheforeignexchangemarketwhich
money in the economy in general is called dear
denotesthecurrencythatiseasilyavailableinany
currency,also calledasdearmoney .
economyin its forex market. For example, rupee
isasoft currencyin the Indian forexmarket. It is In the bankingindustry, it meansa period of
basicallytheoppositeterm for thehard currency.
comparativelyhigher/costlierinterestratesregime.
|
| SPECIAL ECONOMICZONE17
HOTCURRENCY
Hot currency is a term of the forex market and
Howdoes a countryof over a billion people take
is a temporary name for any hard currency. Due on the challenge of providing a better life to its
citizens? The question would naturally elicit a
to certain reasons, if a hard currency is exiting
an economyat a fast pace for the time, the hard million different responses having their roots in
currencyis known to be hot. As in thecaseof the several social, economic and political measures.
SEAsian crisis,theUSdollar had becomehot. No one today, however, doubts the efficacy of
faster and broad-based economic development
| HEATEDCURRENCY as a primary tool for providing the average
Indian a better deal. The country needs massive
A term used in the forex market to denote the investments in manufacturing, infrastructure
domesticcurrencywhichisunderenoughpressure development and in its productive capacities.
(heat) of depreciation due to a hard currency’s We also need to aggressively promote exports of
hightendencyofexitingtheeconomy(sinceithas goodsandservicesinaneversohighlycompetitive
become hot). It is also known as currency under global market place. This alone would lead to a
heator underhammering. strong edifice for sustained growth and creation
of productive employment. These were the very
|
CHEAPCURRENCY aims for which theGovernment of India mooted
theSpecialEconomicZone(SEZ) PolicyinApril
A term first used by the economistJ. M. Keynes 2000 which was further concretised through the
(1930s). If a government starts re-purchasing its SEZAct2003and theSEZ Rules2006 policy.
bonds before their maturities (at full-maturity
TheconceptofSEZisnotanewoneanditisan
prices) the moneywhich flows into the economy
improvementtotheconceptofExport Processing
is known as thecheap currency, also called cheap
money.
Zones.IndiawasoneofthefirstinAsiatorecognise
the effectiveness of the Export Processing Zone
In the bankingindustry, it meansa period of
(EPZ) model in promoting exports, with Asia’s
comparativelylower/softerinterest ratesregime.
first EPZset up in Kandla in 1965
—
seven more
17. BasedontheupdatedinformationsavailablewiththeMinistryofCommerce&Industry,Gol,N.Delhi,May11,2012.

--- PAGE 450 ---
15.12 4 IndianEconomy
EPZs wereset up thereafter. However, the EPZs support infrastructure. EverySEZ is divided into
were not able to emerge as effective instruments aprocessingareawherealonetheSEZunitswould
for export promotion on account of multiplicity come up and the non-processing area where the
of controls and clearances, absenceof world-class supporting infrastructure is to be created. The
infrastructure, and an unstable fiscal regime. In SEZ developer would be responsible for all civic
order to overcometheseshortcomingsandattract amenities and infrastructure including roads,
larger foreign investments in India, the SEZ sewerage, open spaces, green spaces, education
Policywas announced in April 2000.This policy facilities, power, watersupplyand housingetc .
wasintendedto makeSEZsanengineforeconomic —
growth supported by quality infrastructure
LANDACQUISITIONISSUE&SEZ
complemented by an attractive fiscal package, WhilethebenefitsofSEZsarevisibleandevident,
both at the Centre and the state levels, with the onemajorissuethathasoftenbeen raisedpertains
minimum possibleregulations. to the acquisition of agricultural land for setting
up SEZs. Acquisition of land is a matter that
WHATISSEZ?
comesunderthepurviewofthestategovernments
SEZ, or Special Economic Zone, is essentiallyan since land/land usage is a state subject. While
industrial cluster meant largely for exports . An there is a Central Land Acquisition Act of 1894
SEZ is governed by a special set of rules aimed extensively amended in 1971, the states have
atattractingdirectinvestmentforexport-oriented made modifications to the same and have their
production. SEZs, earlier known as Export own compensation and relief & rehabilitation
Processing Zones or Free Trade Zones, are duty measuresdepending upon their requirementsand
free enclaves which are treated as foreign territory necessities.
only for trade operations, duties, tariffs and Theneedofthehouristoformulateaworking
typically marked by the best infrastructure and landreformsandlandacquisitionlawwhichcould
least red tape .OthersalientfeaturesofSEZsare: address theemergingnewrealities (likeagitations
(i) manufacturing or service activities are byfarmersafterthelandhasalreadybeenacquired
allowed; and compensation paid to them) related to the
(ii) fullfreedom forsub-contracting; issue of land acquisition. The second thing is an
(iii) no routine examination by customs active and willing co-operation/participation
authoritiesofexport/importcargo; comingfromthestategovernments .Involvingthe
(iv) unitsinSEZshavetobecomenetforeign
PRIswillprovideamoredurableandeffectiveway
exchangeearnerswithin threeyears;and out to
thisissue.
(v) domestic sales from them are subject to
Meanwhile, ontheproposedandrevisedLand
full customs duty and the import policy Acquisition Bill,2013, a politicalconcensus has
—
inforce. been reached (on April 18, 2013) which paved
TheSEZconcept recognisestheissuesrelated the way for the Bill to get int
—
roduced in the
to economic development and provides for currentSession of the Parliament it will replace
developing self-sustaining industrial townships India’s existing Land Acquisition Act, 1894. The
so that the increased economic activity does not Bill is more careful, realistic and futuristic about
create pressure on the existing infrastructure. thecontemporaryandemergingchallengesofland
This issue is addressed in the SEZ policy by acquisition in the country . The major highlights
specifying a non-processing area for creation of of theBillareasfollows:

--- PAGE 451 ---
ExternalSectorof India t 15.13
(i) For the first time, resettlement and thelegalstructureoftheconcernedtransactionor
rehabilitationbothhavebeenemphasised arrangement .Itessentiallycomesintoeffectwhere
on thesamefooting; an arrangement is entered into with the main
(ii) Scrutiny of all private purchase of land purposeoroneof themain purposesofobtaining
between 2011 and 2013 (there has been ataxbenefitand whichalsosatisfiesatleastoneof
a concern among many that the land thefoliowingfourtests:
mafiashavegrabbed cheaplandfrom the (i) The arrangement creates rights and
farmersbeforetheproposed Billhas been obligations thatarenotatarm’slength,
passed bythegovernment); (ii) it resultsin misuseor abuseof provisions
(iii) A provision to enablestatelegislation on of taxlaws,
leasingin placeofacquisition ofland; (iii) lacks commercialsubstanceor is deemed
(iv) Insteadofacquisition,landtobeleasedto to lackcommercialsubstance,or
developers,sothattheownershipremains (iv) itisnotcarriedoutinabonafidemanner.
withfarmersand providesthema regular
Thus, if the tax officer believes that the
income. The government to amend the main purpose or one of the main purposes of an
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
arrangement is to obtain a tax benefit and even
Resettlement Bill,2011 , to providefor an if one of the above four tests are satisfied, the tax
enabling provision to states for enacting officerhaspowerstodeclareitasanimpermissible
laws in this regard (leasing of land is a avoidance arrangement and re-characterise
statesubject under theConstitution).
the entire transaction in a manner that is more
The new government at the centre has, conducive to maximising tax revenues. There
meanswhile, proposed a new Land Acquisition are many troubling aspects of this provision that
Bill,2015. The bill is faced with stiff opposition will make doing business in India even more
from the political parties in opposition farmers challenging, than what it already is from a tax
alikeand isstill to be passed bythe parliament. perspective —
IGAAR (i) It is presumed that obtaining tax benefit
is the main purpose of the arrangement
The GAAR (General Anti-Avoidance Rules), unless otherwise proved by the taxpayer .
originallyproposedintheDirectTaxesCode2010 , Thisisanonerousburdenthatunderafair
rule of law should be discharged by the
aretargetedatarrangementsor transactionsmade
specifically to avoid taxes . The government had revenue collector and not the taxpayer .
In fact, the Parliamentary Standing
decided to advance the introduction of GAAR
— Committee on DTC has specifically
and implement it from the financial year 2013
14 itself.Morethan30countrieshaveintroduced recommended that the onus of proving
GAAR provisions in their respective tax codes to theexistenceofa tax -avoidance motive
checksuch taxevasion. and a transaction lacking commercial
substance, should rest with the revenue
The objective of the GAAR provisions is to
invoking GAAR and not shifted to the
codify the doctrine of‘substanceover form’where
taxpayer
.Thisisessentiallytoensurethat
the real intention of the parties and purpose
the revenue authorities exercise proper
of an arrangement is taken into account for
discretion, proper application of mind
determiningthe taxconsequences, irrespectiveof

--- PAGE 452 ---
15.14 i IndianEconomy
and gather enough credible data and (iv) GAARisaverybroadbasedprovisionand
evidencebeforeattemptingtoinvokefar- can easily be applied to most tax -saving
reachingprovisionssuchasGAAR. arrangements .Manyexpertsfeel that the
(ii) An arrangement will be deemed to lack provision would give unbridled powers
commercial substance under GAAR if it to taxofficers,allowingthem to question
involves the location of an asset or of a any taxsaving deal. Foreign institutional
transaction or of the place of residence investors are worried that their
ofanypartythat would not have beenso investments routed through Mauritius
located for any substantial commercial could be denied tax benefits enjoyed
purpose other than obtaining tax by them under the Indo-Mauritius Tax
benefit. This again is an amazingly wide Treaty.The proposal (announcedon May
provision that provides a great weapon 8, 2012) had spooked stock market as
in the armoury of the tax authorities FIIinflowsdroppedonconcerns,andthe
to challenge almost every inbound or
rupeehitalowofRs.53.47totheDollar.
outbound transaction with respect to Meanwhile, the government has postponed
India, made through any of the GAAR to the next financial year (i.e., 2016 — 17).
favourable tax treaties that India has This will give a breather to tax payers and also
entered into.Thegovernments intention allow the government time to frame clear rules
becomes clear visibly by one of the after consultationswithstakeholders.
finance ministry replies to the Standing
Committee on DTC, where it has made RISKS IN FOREIGN CURRENCY
it clear that the GAAR provisions will BORROWINGS
check treaty shopping by the taxpayer for
avoidanceof paymentof taxin India. Corporateborrowersin Indiaandotheremerging
economiesarekeen to borrowinforeigncurrency
(iii) GAAR allows tax authorities to call a
to benefitfrom lower interestand longer termsof
business arrangement or a transaction
credit. Such borrowings however, are not always
‘impermissible avoidance arrangement’
helpful, especially in times of high currency
if theyfeel it has been primarily entered
into toavoidtaxes .Onceanarrangement
volatility.Duringgoodtimes,domesticborrowers
couldenjoytriple benefitsof
is ruled ‘impermissible’ then the tax
authoritiescan denytaxbenefits.Most (i) lower interest rates,
aggressive tax avoidance arrangements (ii) longer maturity,and
would be under the risk of being (iii) capitalgains
termed impermissible. It has a provision due to domestic currency appreciation.
accordingtowhichtheonustoprovethat This would happen when the local currency is
an arrangement is ‘impermissible’ will appreciatingduetosurge in capitalflowsand the
lie with the tax department. The GAAR debtserviceliabilityisfallingindomesticcurrency
panel, the final body that will decide on terms . The opposite would happen when the
the applicability of the law, will include domestic currency is depreciating due to reversal
an independent member. The rule can ofcapitalflowsduringcrisissituations,ashappened
apply on domestic as well as overseas duringthe2008globalcrisis .
transactions.

--- PAGE 453 ---
ExternalSectorof India t 15.15
Asharp depreciation in localcurrencywould unhedged, so as to profit from low international
meancorrespondingincreaseindebtserviceliability, interest rates . This is a dangerous gamble for
as more domestic currency would be required to reasonsdescribedaboveandshould beavoided.
buy the same amount of foreign exchange for
debtservicepayments .Thiswouldlead toerosion | RECENT RTAs BY INDIA
in profit margin and have ‘mark- to -market’
implications for the corporate . There would also SinceIndia becameoneofthefoundingmembers
of the WTO, its attention has grown towards
be‘debtoverhang’problem,asthevolumeofdebt
wouldriseinlocalcurrencyterms .Together,these the regional trade groupings. These groupings
factors could create corporate distress, especially give regional competitveness to the economy
because the rupee tends to depreciate precisely and strengthens it to compete at the global level
in a more organised way. Recent developments
when the Indian economy is also under stress,
and corporate revenues and margins are under with regard to India’s regional trade agreements
pressure. (RTAs) havebeengiven below:18
In thiscontext,itisfelt thatoneofthefactors
CACTA
contributing to faster recovery of the Indian
The SAFTA (South Asia Free Trade Area )
economyafter the 2008 global crisis was the low
level of corporate external debt. As a result, the Agreement came into force on January 1, 2006.
significant decline in the value of rupee did not Under it, India has granted zero basic custom
have a major fallout for the corporate balance- duty to all LDCs, viz., Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
sheets. Foreign currency borrowings, therefore, Bhutan, and Maldives, on all items except 25
have to be contracted carefully, especially when items relating to alcohol and tobacco. Under the
no‘naturalhedge’isavailable.Suchnaturalhedge SAFTAAgreement,IndiahasreducedtheSAFTA
would happen when a foreign currency borrower Sensitive List for non-LDCs from 878 to 6l4 by
also has an export market for its products. As a reduction of 264 tariff lines from September 6,
result, export receivables would offset, at least to 2012.As per thescheduleofTariff Liberalisation
Programme (TLP) under SAFTA, India has
some extent, the currency risk inherent in debt
servicepayments .Thishappensbecausefallin the broughtdownitspeaktariffratesto5thepercent
valueoftherupeethatleadsto higherdebtservice
fromJanuary1,2013.
payments is partly compensated by the increase cuc
in thevalueofrupeereceivables throughexports .
India-Thailand FTA, Early Harvest Scheme
When export receivables and the currency
of borrowings is different, the prudent approach (EHS) under the Framework Agreement for
is for corporations to enter currency swaps to re ¬ establishing India-Thailand FTA was signed on
denominateassetandliabilityinthesamecurrency October 9, 2003, which includes trade in goods
to create natural hedge. Unfortunately, too many trade in services, investment, and other areas of
Indian corporations with little foreign currency
economiccooperation,tobeconcludedasasingle
earnings leave foreign currency borrowings
undertaking. Under EHS, tariff has gradually
been eliminated on a list of 82 common items
18. DepartmentofCommerce,MinistryofCommerceandIndustry,Gol,NDelhi,April24,2013.

--- PAGE 454 ---
15.16 i IndianEconomy
simultaneouslybybothsidesbetween September BITA
1, 2004 and August 31, 2006. Under the India-
Fifteen rounds of negotiations and a number of
Thailand FTA, it is proposed to provideASEAN inter-sessionalandChiefNegotiatorlevelmeetings
plus tariff concessions. So far 26 rounds of the of BITA (India - EU Broad Based Trade and
India-Thailand Trade Negotiation Committee Investment Agreement) have been held till date.
(ITTNC) meetings have been held. The last The13throundwasheldin December4 — 7,2012
—
round was held on November 26 27, 2012 in in NewDelhi.Chief negotiator level meetingwas
New Delhi. heldonJanuary29 — 30,2013in New Delhi.
f'Cf' A r-
CTP
India-ASEAN Comprehensive Economic
The agreement establishing the GSTP (Global
Cooperation Agreement (CECA) Services and
System of Trade Preferences) among developing
InvestmentAgreementswassignedonAugust13,
countrieswassignedonApril13, 1988atBelgrade
2009 under the broaderframework of theCECA
following the conclusion of the First Round of
between India and ASEAN which has already Negotiations. Forty-three countries have ratified
come into force. Conclusions of negotiations for the agreement and become participants. India
theServicesAgreementandInvestmentAgreement
has offered tariff concessions on 70.08 per cent
have been announced during the ASEAN-India of dutiable tariff lines with an across-the-board
Commemorative Sum — mit held on December 20, margin of preference (MoP) of 20 per cent on
2012 in New Delhi legal scrubbing for these the applied tariffs prevailing on the date of
agreements were finalised in February 2013. import. India has also unilaterally offered special
The agreement will be signed during ASEAN concessions to LDC participants by granting
Economic Ministers (AEM)-India Consultations
- an MoP of 25 per cent on 77 per cent of all its
inAugust2013 dutiable tariff lines. The Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs (CCEA), in its meeting
RCEP
on August 23, 2012, has granted approval for
During the 20th ASEAN Summit held in implementing India’s schedule of concessions.
Cambodia in April 2012, ASEAN States Thetariffconcessionsaretobeimplementedin30
agreed to move towards establishing an RCEP days after a minimum of four participants ratify
(RegionalComprehensiveEconomicPartnership) their schedules of concessions. So far India and
Agreement among ASEAN + 6 (Australia, Malaysia haveratified theirschedules.
China, India, Japan, Korea, and New Zealand
involving ASEAN and its FTA partners . The | CRUDEOIL PRICEMOVEMENTS
objective of launching RCEP negotiations is to
achieve a modern, comprehensive, high-quality, Any major change in global commodity prices,
and mutually beneficial economic partnership
particularlycrudeoilprices,hasimplicationforthe
agreement among the ASEAN member States external sector as India is increasingly integrated
andASEAN’s FTApartners .TheRCEPwillcover with the rest of the world. India’s rising two -
tradeingoodsandservices,investment,economic way external- sector transactions have more than
and technical cooperation, intellectual property, doubled asa proportion of GDPover thelast ten
competition,disputesettlement,andother issues. years. Trade openness provides opportunities for

--- PAGE 455 ---
ExternalSectorof India t 15.17
higher growth through higher exports and makes and allied products (11.6 per cent);
available better quality products domestically at chemicals and related products (10.1 per
globallycompetitive prices. cent); transportequipment (8.5 per cent)
India’s large oil import dependence and the and machinery(6.3per cent).
sharp risein globalcrudeoil prices, thewidening
IMPORTCOMPOSITION
of theCADin 2011-12and 2012-13 maybean
atypicaloutcome .Changesincrudeoilpriceshave (cid:127) Oneof themajor itemsin India’simport
direct bearingon India’sCAD. basketisthePOLgroup,whichaccounted
Historically,crudeoilimportsaccountedfora for 36.6 per cent of India’s totalimports.
substantial portion of thecountry’stotalimports. POL imports surged with a growth of
—
Petroleum, oil, and lubricants (POL) imports 46.2 per cent in 2011 12, mainly on
accountedformorethanone-thirdofIndia’stotal account of significant increase in global
importsinrecentyears.In2013 — 14,POLimports crudeoil prices.
accounted for 36.6 per cent of total imports and (cid:127) Capital goods imports are another major
wasestimated to beover33 per cent in 2014 — 13. group which declined continuouslyfrom
The changes in trade deficit and by implication 2011 — 12 onwards.Within capitalgoods,
CAD in recent years are largelyexplained by the imports of machinery registered positive
changesin crudeoilprices. growthin 2014-15.
(cid:127) Gold and silver imports accounted for
|
COMPOSITION OFTRADE 11.4 per cent of India’s total imports in
2012-13and7.4 per cent in 2013-14.
The commodity composition of India’s trade
has undergone many changes since liberalization |
DIRECTION OFTRADE
and has been driven by trade policy, movements
in international prices, and the changing pattern Therehasbeensignificantmarketdiversificationin
of domestic demand. Main features of India’s India’s trade in recent years — a process that has
composition of trade, as per the EconomicSurvey helpedincopingwiththesluggishglobaldemand,
—
2014 15,areasgiven below: which owes to a great extent to the weakness in
the euro zone. Main features of India’s direction
EXPORTCOMPOSITION of trade, as per the Economic Survey 2014 — 15,is
(cid:127) Manufacturedgoodsconstitutethebulkof given below:
—
exports over63percentin recentyears,
followedbycrudeandpetroleumproducts
INDIASEXPORTS
(includingcoal) with a 20 per centshare, (cid:127) Region-wise, India’s export shares to
andagricultureandalliedproductswitha Europe and America have declined over
shareof13.7percentshare. the years — from 23.6 per cent and 20.1
—
(cid:127) The top seven product groups accounting per cent, respectivelyin 2004 05 to 18.6
for nearly 80.9 per cent of India’s total per centand17.2 per cent, respectively.
exports in were shared as: petroleum (cid:127) India’s exports to Asia and Africa have
products (19.4 per cent); gems and increased from 47.9 per cent and 6.7 per
jewellery (13.0 per cent); agricultureand cent, respectively in 2004-05 to 49.4
allied products (12.0 per cent); textiles

--- PAGE 456 ---
15.18 4 IndianEconomy
per cent and 9.9 per cent respectively in Major ones, as per theEconomicSurvey2014 — 15,
2013-14. areasgiven below:
(cid:127) The change in direction immediately (i) To promote domestic manufacturing
prior to the global financial crisis and capabilities, scrips issued under different
—
since 2010 11 indicates the process of schemes, namely FPS (Focus Product
diversification underway. Scheme), FMS (Focus Market Scheme),
(cid:127) Countrywise, India’s exports to the USA VKGUY (Vishesh Krishi & Gram
and UAE — major destinations with a Udyog Yojana), SFIS (Served From
share in India’s total exports of 12.3 IndiaScheme), AIIS (Agri Infrastructure
per cent and 9.7 per cent, respectively. Incentive Scheme), for import of goods
However, India’s exports to China (4.7 can be utilized for payment of excise
percentshare)and Belgium (2.0percent duty for domestic procurement . This
share) declined by14.7percentand10.7 is an important measure for import
per centduringthesame period. substitution and will help save foreign
exchange as well as create additional
INDIASIMPORTS employment.
(cid:127) The share of Europe in India’s imports (ii) Scrips issued under the FPS, FMS,
alsodeclinedfrom23.0percentin 2004- VKGUY can be utilized for payment of
05 to 15.8 per cent while the shares of servicetax .
Asia and Africa increased substantially (iii) To support export of products from the
from 35.6 per cent and 3.6 per cent in North Eastern Region (NER), exporters
—
2004 05 to 60.7 per cent and 8.1 per are entitled to additional incentives of
cent, respectively. 1 per cent of FOB19 value of exports in
(cid:127) The share of America in India’s imports addition to other benefits under the FTP
has also increased from 8.8 per cent to if exports are made from land customs
12.8 per cent . stationlocatedin the NER.
(cid:127) China is the major source of India’s (iv) TodiversifyIndia’sexports,7newmarkets
imports, accounting for 11.3 per cent of (Algeria, Aruba, Austria, Cambodia,
India’s total imports, followed by Saudi Myanmar, Netherlands Antilles, and
Arabia (8.1percentshare), theUAE (6.5 Ukraine) have been added to the FMS,7
percentshare),andtheUSA(5.0percent new markets (Belize, Chile, El Salvador,
share). Guatemala, Honduras, Morocco, and
Uruguay) to theSpecial FMS.
|
RECENTSTEPSTO PROMOTETRADE (v) Toboostexportofservices,thegovernment
has organised two editions of a ‘Services
Thegovernmenthastakensveralnewinitiativesto
promotetradeconditionsofIndiain recenttimes. C
w
o
h
n
ic
c
h
la
a
v
r
e
e
’
cr
in
uci
i
a
d
l
e
t
n
o
ti
I
f
n
ie
d
d
ia.
service sectors
19. FOB(FreeOnBoard)isatransportationtermrelatedtotheshippingofgoods.Normally,thetermFOBalongwithsome
pointrepresentsthesellersresponsibilitytothementioned point,henceforthallfreight,carriageandinsurancecosts
tobebornebythebuyer.Theterm isused byaseller'FOBChennai’meansthatthesellerwill payalltheexpenses
uptotheportofChennai(whichincludescostofloading,Customsclearance,origindocumentationcharges,andother
charges).Beyondthispoint,itwillbetheresponsibilityofthebuyertopayallthecharges.

--- PAGE 457 ---
ExternalSectorof India I 15.19
In the Conclave, barriers, if any, in the (a) Development of export strategy by
specificservice sectors are identified and thestategovernment,
issues relating to the reforms needed, (b) Appointment of an Export
India’s potential for enhancing exports Commissionerforcoordinationofall
in those sectors, and new markets for export-related activities by the state
exportingservicesarediscussed.
government,and
GlobalServicesExhibitionwasorganized (c) Institutingexportawards to motivate
—
inApril2015inNewDelhi asaplatform the leading exporters from the state
for enhancing strategic cooperation and and encourage them to bring in
developingsynergiesbetweencompetitive
greaterexport
revenues.
players of the services sector and their
globalcounterparts . | NEW FOREIGNTRADE POLICY
(vi) Indian Trade Portal was launched in
December 2014. This portal provides The Gol announced the new Foreign Trade
Policy 2015-20 on April 1, 2015. The new five
vital information to Indian industry —
on forty- two export markets and also year Foreign Trade Policy, 2015 20 provides a
a mechanism to take advantage of the framework for increasing exports of goods and
services as well as generation of employment
increasedmarketaccessprovidedthrough
various regional and bilateral free trade
and increasing value addition in the country, in
keepingwith theMakein India.Thefocus of the
agreements (FTA) and comprehensive
economic cooperation/partnership new policyis to support both the manufacturing
agreements
(CECA/CEPA). and services sectors, with a special emphasis on
improvingthe‘easeofdoingbusiness’.Thespecial
The information is provided in a user-
featuresof theFTP2015-20areasfollows:
friendly manner in four easy steps for
1. Two newschemeshave been intorduced,
exporters and importers to access the —
namely
portal, which will contribute to ease of
doingusinessfortradeandindustry.This (i) Merchandise Exports from India
portal makes available important data Scheme(MEIS)forexportofspecified
like: goodsto
specified markets.
(a) Mostfavoured nation (MFN) tariff,
(ii) Services Exports from India Scheme
(b) Preferentialtariff,
(SEIS) for increasing exports of
(c) RulesofOrigin (RoO),and
notifiedservices,inplaceofaplethora
(d) Non-tariffmeasures.
of schemes earlier, with different
(vii) In order to mainstream the states so that conditionsfor eligibilityand usage.
theyfocusexpresslyon boostingexports,
There would be no conditionality
the key steps required to be initiated by attached to anyscrips issued under these
them have been distilled and listed. A schemes. Dutycreditscripsissued under
fifteen-point matrix has been developed
MEIS andSEIS and thegoods imported
and sent to all states/union territories against thesescrips are fully transferable.
(UTs) to incorporatethefollowing: For grant of rewards under MEIS, the

--- PAGE 458 ---
15.20 4 IndianEconomy
countries have been categorized into 3 (b) The government has reduced the
Groups, whereas the rates of rewards number of mandatory documents
under MEIS range from 2 per cent to 3 requiredforexportsand
percent .UnderSEIStheselectedServices importstothree,whichiscomparable
would be rewarded at the rates of 3 per withinternational benchmarks.
centand 5 per cent . (c) A facility has been created to upload
2. Measures have been adopted to nudge documents in exporter/importer
procurement of capital goods from profile and the exporters will not
indigenous manufacturers under the be required to submit documents
EPCGschemebyreducingspecificexport repeatedly.
obligation to 75 per cent of the normal (d) Attention has also been paid to
export obligation.This will promote the simplify various Aayat Niryat Forms,
domestic capital goods manufacturing
bringinginclarityin
industry. Such flexibilities will help
different provisions, removing
exporters to develop their productive ambiguitiesandenhancingelectronic
capacities for both local and global governance.
consumption.
(e) Approved Exporter System (AES)
3. Measureshavebeen taken togivea boost
has been launched to enable
to exports of defense and hi-tech items. manufacturers to self-certify their
At the same time e-Commerceexports of
manufacturedgoodsoriginatingfrom
handloom products, books/periodicals,
India with a view to qualifying for
leather footwear, toys and customized preferential treatment under various
fashion garments through courier or forms of bilateral and regional trade
foreign post office would also be able agreements . This will help these
to get benefit of MEIS (for values upto manufacturer exporters considerably
INR 25,000). These measures would
in getting fast access to international
not onlycapitalizeon India’sstrength in markets.
these areas and increase exports but also
provideemployment. 6. A number of steps have been taken for
encouraging manufacturing and exports
4. In order to give a boost to exports from under 100 per cent schemes. The steps
SEZs, government has now decided include a fast track clearance facility for
to extend benefits of both the reward these units, permitting them to share
schemes(MEISandSEIS)tounitslocated
infrastructure facilities, permitting inter
in SEZs. It is hoped that this measure
unit transfer of goods and services,
will give a new impetus to development
permitting them to set up warehouses
andgrowthofSEZsin thecountry .
near the port of export and to use duty
5. Tradefacilitation and enhancing theease freeequipmentfor trainingpurposes.
ofdoi
—
ngbusinessaretheother majorfocus
7. Considering the strategic significance of
areas
small and medium scale enterprise in the
(a) One of the major objective of new manufacturingsectorandinemployment
FTP is to move towards paperless generation, MSME Clusters-108 have
workingin 24x7environment. been identified for focused interventions

--- PAGE 459 ---
ExternalSectorof India I 15.21
to boost exports .Outreach activities will infrastructure development and overall
beorganized in astructured wayat these enhancement of the trade ecosystem . It
clusters with the help of EPCs and other seeks to enable India to respond to the
willing Industry Partners and Knowledge challenges of the external environment,
Partners.
keeping in step with a rapidly evolving
8. NiryatBandhuSchemehasbeengalvanized international trading architecture and
andrepositionedtoachievetheobjectives make trade a major contributor to
ofSkillIndia. the country’s economic growth and
The FTP Statement describes the development. TheGol promised to have
regular interactionswithallstakeholders,
market and product strategy and
measures required for trade promotion, including State Governments to achieve
thenationalobjectives.

--- PAGE 461 ---
C H A P T E R
I
i
-
\
m
h
i
9 . M I
INTERNATIONAL
V
:s
m
N
iv
ECONOMIC %
-
/
ORGANISATIONS m
INDIA
£
‘Oh, East is East and West is West,
andnever thetwainshallmeet’.Thus,
in the year 1889, wrote Kipling in
=> InternationalMonetary System hisfamous Ballad ofEast and West .
=> Bretton WoodsDevelopment Littledid he know that globalisation
=> InternationalMonetary Fund was only less than a hundred years
WorldBank
away.*
=> AsianDevelopmentBank
o OECD
=> WorldTrade Organisation (WTO)
=> WTOMinisterialCoherences
o India’sNegotiations With WTOatBali
=> BilateralandRegionalCooperation
=> BRICS Bank
=> AsianInfrastructureInevstmentBank
*AstheUnionFinanceMinister,P.ChidambramquotesRudyardKiplingto
substantiate the opposite situation in the post-globalisation world in his
inauguralSpeechonTheRiseoftheEast:ImplicationsfortheGlobalEconomy'
DeliveredattheHarvardUniversity(April17,2013),MoF,Gol,NDelhi.

--- PAGE 462 ---
16.2 I IndianEconomy
| LIQUIDITY
INTERNATIONAL MONETARYSYSTEM
Itreferstotheamountofforeigncurrencyreserves
The international monetary system (IMS) refers available to settle the BoP crises of the nations.
to the customs, rules, instruments, facilities, and A good IMS maintains as much foreign reserves
organisations facilitating international (external)
to mitigatesuch crisesof thenationswithoutany
payments .Sometimes the IMS is also referred to inflationarypressureson thenations.
as an international monetary order or regime.1
IMS can be classified according to the way in CONFIDENCE
which exchange rates are determined (i.e., fixed
currency regime, floating currency regime or
Itreferstothefaiththenationsoftheworldshould
showthat theadjustment mechanism of the IMS
managed exchange regime) and the form foreign
reserves take (i.e., gold standard, a pure judiciary is working adequately and that foreign reserves
standardoragold-exchangestandard). will retain their absolute and relative values.This
confidenceis basedon thetransparent knowledge
An IMS is considred good if it fulfils the information about the IMS.
followingtwoobjectives2inanimpartialmanner:
DEVELOPMENT
(i) maximises the flow of foreign trade and | BRETTON WOODS
foreign investments,and
(ii) leads to an equitabledistribution of the
Asthepowerfulnationsoftheworldwerehopeful
gainsfromtradeamongthenationsofthe of a new and more stable world order with the
world. emergence of the UNO, on the contrary, they
were also anxious for a more homogenous world
The evaluation of an IMS is done in terms
financial order, after the Second World War.
ofadjustment,liquidityandconfidencewhichit
The representatives of the USA, the UK and 42
managesto weild.
other (total 44 countries) nations met at Bretton
ADJUSTMENT Woods, New Hampshire, USA in July 1944 to
decide a new international monetary system .
It refers to the process by which the balance-of- The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
payment (BoP) crises of the nations of the world the World Bank (with its first group-institution
(or the member nations) are corrected. A good —
IBRD) wereset up together popularlycalled as
IMS tries to minimise the cost of BoP and time the Bretton Woods’ twins’ — both having their
foradjustmentfor thenations. headquartersinWashington, DC, USA.
1. D. Salvatore, International Economics, John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey, USA, 2005, pp. 737 - 38; Samuelson and
Nordhaus,Economics,TataMcGraw -Hill,N.Delhi,2005,pp.609 - 12.
2. D.Salvatore,op.cit.,p.738.
—
3. For the new international monetary system, basically two plans were presented in the meeting one by the US
delegationled byHarryD.White(oftheUSTreasury)andtheBritishdelegationledbyJohnMeynardKeynes.Itwas
theUSplanwhichwasultimatelyagreedupon.
J.M. Keynes had proposed a more impartial, practical and over-arching idea via his plan at Bretton Woods. His
suggestionsbasicallyincludedthreethings:
(i) ProposaltosetupanInternationalClearingUnion(ICU),acentralbankofallcentralbanks,withitsowncurrency
(Keynesnamedthiscurrency'bancor')—tomitigatethebalanceofpaymentcrisesofmembernations.
Thisbankwassupposed topenalise[nosuchprovisionintheIMF)thecountriesholdingtradesurpluses(with
aglobaltaxofonepercentpermonth)onthegroundthatsuchcountrieswerekeepingworlddemandlowby
under-purchasingtheproductsproducedbyothercountries.Thecorpuscollectedviathistaxwastobeusedto

--- PAGE 463 ---
InternationalEconomicOrganisations8India t 16.3
| from each member country . For India, Finance
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
MinisteristheEx-officioGovernorwhiletheRBI
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) came
GovernoristheAlternateGovernorontheBoard.
up in 1944whoseArticlescameinto forceon the The day- to -day management of the IMF
December 27, 1945 with the main functions as is carried out by the Managing Director who is
exchange rate regulation, purchasing short- term Chairman (currently,MsChristineLagarde)of the
foreign currencyliabilitiesof themember nations Board of Executive Directors.Board of Executive
from around the world, allottingspecial drawing Directors consists of 24 directors appointed/
rights (SDRs) to the member nations and the elected by member countries/group of countries
most important one as the bailor to the member — is the executive body of the IMF. India is
economiesin thesituationofanyBoPcrisis. represented at the IMF byan Executive Director
Themainfunctions1of the IMF areasgiven (currently Arvind Virmani), who also represents
below: threeother countriesin India’sconstituency, viz.,
Bangladesh,SriLankaand Bhutan.
(i) to facilitate international monetary
cooperation;
INDIASQUOTA&RANKING
(ii) to promote exchange rate stability and
orderlyexchangearrangements; IMF reviews members’ quotas once in every
— —
five years last done in December 2010 here,
(iii) to assist in the establishment of a
India consented for its quota increase. After this
multilateral system of payments and
India’s quota (together with its 3 constituency
the elimination of foreign exchange
countries) has increased to 2.75 per cent (from
restrictions;and
2.44 per cent) and it has become the 8th (from
(iv) toassistmembercountriesbytemporarily
11th) largest quota holding country among the
providing financial resources to correct 24 constituencies. In absolute terms, India’s
mal-adjustment in their balance of
quota has increased to SDR 13,114.4 million
payments
(BoPs).
(from SDR 5,821.5 million) which is an increase
The Board of Governors of the IMF consists ofapproximatelyUS$11.5 billion or Rs.56,000
of one Governor and one Alternate Governor crore).While25percentofthequotaistobepaid
—
maintainan international bufferstockof primarygoods(i.e.,foodarticles) tobeused intheperiodsoffood
shortagesamongthemembernations.{Inplace , undertheIMFprovisionstradedeficitcountriesarepenalised . )
(ii) Forthe reconstruction of war-devastated Europe,a fundwasto beset up,on the basisof this planfor Relief and
Reconstruction(inplaceofittheUS-sponsoredMarshallPlantookcareoftheneedsofEurope).
(iii) TherewasaproposalofcreatingCommodityBufferStocktobeoperatedbyanInternationalTradeOrganisation(ITO).
Thisstockofprimarygoodswastobeusedtostabilisetheirpricesintheinternationalmarket.
TheoperationofthisITOmakingpurchaseswhentheworldpriceswerelowandsellingwhenthepricesbecamehigh.The
bufferstockoperations,however,weretobehelpfultothepoorcountries,Keyneswasprimarilyinterestedinstabilising
theinputpricesoftherichcountries.(ThoughthecharteroftheITOwasdrawnupandotherformalitiescompleted , it
wasneverbornbecauseofUSopposition.)ForfurtherreadingsseeD.Salvatore,InternationalEconomics , op.cit.,pp.
742-43;B.Dasgupta,Globalisation:India’sAdjustmentExperience , Sage,N.Delhi,2005,p.48.
4. BasicFactsAbouttheUnitedNations,UN,NewYork,2000,pp.55&137.

--- PAGE 464 ---
16.4 I IndianEconomy
incash(i.e.,in‘Reserve’currency),thebalance75 United Kingdom proposed to introduce after
per centcan be paidin securities.5 the Second World War. The proposed currency
Once a member nation has signed the EFF was, viz., be used in international trade as a unit
(ExtendedFundFacility)agreementwiththeIMF, of account within a multilateral barter clearing
borrowing6can bedonebythemember nation — system, the International Clearing Union, which
Indiasignedthisagreementinthefiscal1981 — 82. would also have to be founded. The Bancor was
Indiahas beenborrowingfrom the IMF due to to be backed by barter and its value expressed in
critical balance of payment (BoP) situations — weight of gold. However, this British proposal
once between 1981 — 84 (SDR 3.9 billion) and could not prevail against the interests of the
next during 1991 (SDR 3.56 billion). All the United States, which at the Bretton Woods
loanstakenfromtheIMFhavebeen repaid.India conferenceestablishedtheUS Dollarastheworld
is now a contributor to the IMF as it participates key currency. Milton Friedman9, the famous
in the Financial Transactions Plan (FTP)7of the US economist insisted that Keynes’ theories
IMF since September 2002 — at this time India were incorrect who believed that, ‘inflation was
wasinstrongbalanceof paymentsituationandin highlydestructive and that only monetary policy
acomfortableforexreserves position. could control it and that monetary policy is a
heavyweight instrument and cannot be used for
CURRENTUS/EUFINANCIALCRISES: short- term economicmanagement .’
CHALLENGESREGARDING INTERNATIONAL Since the outbreak of the financial crisis in
—
2008 Keynes’s proposal has been revived
PAYMENTS
^^^^^^^^^ in a speech delivered in March 2009 entitled
The recent financial crises of the US and the EU Reform the International Monetary System, Zhou
nationshaveraisedthequestionsofthechallenges Xiaochuan, theGovernor of the People’s Bankof
of international payments once again. At this ChinacalledKeynes’sbancorapproachfarsighted
crucial juncture, the world seems tossing the and proposed the adoption of International
idea of a reserved currency for all international Monetary Fund (IMF) special drawing rights
—
payments as if the famous Keynesian idea of (SDRs) as a global reservecurrencyas a response
such a currency (Bancor) is going for a kind of to the financial crisis of 2007 — 2010. He argued
revival.TheBancorwasasupranationalcurrency
thata nationalcurrencywasunsuitableasaglobal
thatJohnMaynardKeynesandE.F.Schumacher8 reserve currency because of the Triffindilemma10
conceptualised in the years 1940 — 42 which the — the difficulty faced by reserve currency issuers
5. Thesesecuritiesare non- interest bearing note purchase agreementsissued bythe RBI which can beencashed by
theIMFanytimeasperitsrequirement.TheydonotentailanycashoutgounlesstheIMFcallsupon Indiatoencash
a portion of these notes.The'Reserve'( paid in'cash')asset portion of thequotsiscounted asa partof country's
'Reserves’.
6. Such facilityfromitisavailableoncethe membercountryhassignedtheagreementwiththeIMFcalledastheExtended
FundFacility(EFF).Popularly,thisisknownasthe'ConditionalitiesoftheIMF'underwhichIndiastarteditsEconomicReform
Programmein1991-92onceitborrowedfromtheIMFinthewakeoftheBoPcrisisof1990-91.
7. FTPisthemechanismoftheIMFthroughwhichitfinances/repaysitsoperations-membernationscontributemoneyintoit
fromtheir'quotaresources’onwhichtheyget'interest'.
8. E.F.Schumacher,MultilateralClearingEconomica,NewSeries,Vol.10,No.38(May,1943),pp.150-165.
9. M.Friedman.,(1968)TheAmericanEconomicReview,Vol.58,No.1,1-17.
10. ZhouXiaochuan,(2009).'ReformtheInternationalMonetarySystem’,BISReview,BankofInternationalSettlements,Basel,
Switzerland,28thNov.2011.

--- PAGE 465 ---
InternationalEconomicOrganisations8India t 16.5
intryingtosimultaneouslyachievetheirdomestic power of2.91 percent (upfrom 2.77percent).15
monetary policy goals and meet other countries’ ,
demand for reserve currency.11 Asimilar analysis 2. nA
was articulated in the Report of the United The International Development Agency (IDA)
Nation’s Experts on Reforms of the International whichisalso knownasthesoftwindowoftheWB
Monetary and Financial System12as well as in a wassetupin1960withthebasicaimofdeveloping
recent
IMF’sstudy.13
infrastructural support among the member
nations,long- termlendingforthedevelopmentof
|
WORLD BANK economicservices. Itsloans, known ascreditsare
extendedmainlytoeconomieswithlessthan$895
The World Bank (WB) Group today consists of
per capita income. The credits are for a period
five closely associated institutions propitiating —
of 35 40 years, interest-free, except for a small
the role of development in the member nations
indifferentareas.Abriefaccount isasfollows:14 charge to cover administrative costs . Repayment
begins after a 10-year grace period.There was no
,
1
.
IPDn
humanangletoitslending.Butnowthereremain
no hardandfastdifferencesbetween thepurposes
The International Bank for Reconstruction and for the IBRDand IDAlending.
Development istheoldest of theWBinstitutions
Every year developing nations make enough
which started functioning (1945) in the area
diplomatic attempts to carve out maximum loan
of reconstruction of the war-ravaged regions
disbursal for themselves. India had been the
(World War II) and later for the development
biggest beneficiaryof the IDAsupport .Thetotal
of the middle-income and credit-worthy poorer
economies of the world. Human development
support(IBRD+IDA)forIndiahadbeen$91.81
billion tilldate.16
was the main focusof thedevelopmentallending
,
with a very low interest rate (1.55 per cent per 3. g^
—
annum) the areas of focus being agriculture,
irrigation, urban development, healthcare, family TheInternationalFinanceCorporation (IFC)was
welfare, dairy development, etc . It commenced set upin 1956 whichisalso known as theprivate
lendingfor Indiain 1949. arm of the WB. It lends money to privatesector
companies of its member nations. The interest
After the process of reforms started in the
World Bankin 2010, Indiawasallotedadditional
ratechargediscommercialbutcomparativelylow.
TherearemanyattractivefeaturesofIFC’slending.
shares in IBRD (now holds 56,739 shares
accounting to US $ 6,844.7 million). With this
It finances and provides advice for private-public
ventures and projects in partnership with private
India emerged as the 7th largest shareholder (up
investors and, through its advisory work, helps
from the 11th position) in IBRD with voting
governments of the member nations to create
11. ZhouXiaochuan,FinancialTimes,12thDec.2011.
12. Recommendations by the Commission of Experts of the President of the General Assembly on reforms of the
internationalmonetaryandfinancialsystem,UNO,20thMarch,2009.
13. ReserveAccumulationandInternationalMonetaryStability,IMF,WashingtonDC,13thApril,2010.
14. BasedonBasicFactsAbouttheUnitedNations,op.cit.,pp.52 - 55;India2004-2013,Pub.Div.,Gol,N.Delhi.
15. India2014,Pub.Div,Gol,NDelhi,p.322.
16. India2013,Pub.Div.,Gol,N.Delhi,p.415

--- PAGE 466 ---
16.6 I IndianEconomy
conditionsthatstimulatetheflowofbothdomestic withdraw their consent unilaterally. It settles the
andforeign privatesavingsandinvestment. investmentdisputesarising between theinvesting
It focuses on promoting economic foreign companies and the host countries where
development by encouraging the growth of theinvestments have been done.
productive enterprises and efficient capital India is not its member (that is why the
markets in its member countries. It participates Enron issue was out of its preview). It is believed
in an investment onlywhen it can makeaspecial that being signatory to it encourages the foreign
contribution thatcomplementstheroleofmarket investment flows into an economy, but risks
investors (as a foreign financial investor (FFI). independentsovereign decisions, too .
It also plays a catalytic role, stimulating and .
6 BIPA
mobilising private investment in the developing
world by demonstrating that investments there As part of the Economic Reforms Programme
too can be profitable. initiated in 1991, the foreign investment policy
We have seen a great upsurge in the IFC of the Government of India was liberalised
investments in India which has undoubtedly and negotiations undertaken with a number
strengthened the foreign investors’ confidence in of countries to enter into Bilateral Investment
theIndian economy. Promotion & Protection Agreement (BIPAs) in
. order topromoteandprotectonreciprocalbasis
4 iriA investmentoftheinvestors.GovernmentofIndia
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency have, so far, (as byJuly2012)signed BIPAs with
(MIGA), set up in 1988 encourages foreign 82 countriesout of which72 BIPAs havealready
investment in developing economies by offering comeintoforceandtheremainingagreementsare
insurance(guarantees) toforeign privateinvestors in the process of being enforced.17 In addition,
against loss caused by non-commercial (i.e., agreements have also been finalised and/or being
political) risks, such as currency transfer, negotiatedwitha number ofother countries.
expropriation, war and civil disturbance. It also Theobjectiveof the BIPAis to promoteand
provides technical assistance to help countries protect theinterestsofinvestorsofeither country
disseminate information on investment intheterritoryofothercountry .Suchagreements
opportunities. increase the comfort level of the investors by
. assuring a minimum standard of treatment in all
5
matters and provides for justifiability of disputes
The International Centre for Settlement of with thehost country(itshouldbe notedherethat
Investment Disputes (ICSID), set up in 1966 India is not a member of the World Bank group’s
is an investment dispute settlement body whose body, the ICSID, serving the same purpose. BIPA
decisions are binding on the parties. It was isIndias version .Whiletheformerisamultilateral
established under the 1966 Convention on the
body,thelatterisabilateralone) .
Settlement of Investment Disputes between
|
ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
States and Nationals of Other States. Though
recourse to the centre is voluntary, but once the The Asian Development Bank (ADB), with an
parties have agreed to arbitration, they cannot internationalpartnershipof63membercountries,
,
17. MinistryofCommerce&Industry Gol,N.Delhi,asonApril5,2015.

--- PAGE 467 ---
InternationalEconomicOrganisations8India t 16.7
was established in 1966 and has headquarters at Bhutan, Lao PDR and Tajikistan. The Finance
Manila,thePhilippines.Indiaisafoundermember Minister is India’s Governor on the Board of
of ADB. The Bank is engaged in promoting Governors of the Asian Development Bank and
economic and social progress of its developing Secretary(EA) is theAlternateGovernor.
member countries in the Asia-Pacific region. Its
|
principalfunctionsareasfollows: OECD
(i) To make loans and equity investments
The roots18 of the Organisation for Economic
fortheeconomicandsocialadvancement
Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris,
ofitsdevelopingmembercountries;
go back to the rubble of Europe after World
(ii) To provide technical assistance for the War II. Determined to avoid the mistakes of
preparationandexecutionofdevelopment
their predecessors in the wake of World War
projects and programmes and advisory I, European leaders realised that the best way
services;
to ensure lasting peace was to encourage co ¬
(iii) to respond to the requests for assistance operation and reconstruction, rather than punish
incoordinatingdevelopmentpoliciesand thedefeated.
plans in developing member countries; The Organisation for European Economic
and
Cooperation (OEEC) was established in 1947
(iv) to respond to the requests for assistance to run the US-financed Marshall Plan for
and coordinating development policies reconstruction of a continent ravaged by war.
and plans of developing member By making individual governments recognise the
countries.
interdependence of their economies, it paved the
India’s subscription to the Bank’s capital wayforaneweraofcooperationthatwastochange
stock is 7.190 per cent with a voting power of thefaceofEurope.Encouraged byitssuccessand
6.050 per cent (as per the ADB Annual Report, the prospect of carrying its work forward on a
2010), asquotedbyIndia2013
(cid:127)
global stage, Canada and the US joined OEEC
IndiastartedborrowingfromADB’sOrdinary members in signing the new OECDConvention
Capital Resources (OCR) in 1986. The Bank’s on December 14, I960. The Organisation for
lending has been mainlyin the energy, transport Economic Co-operation and Development
andcommunications,finance,industryandsocial (OECD) was officially born on September 30,
infrastructuresectors . 1961, when theConventionentered into force.
TheBankhasextendedtechnicalassistanceto Othercountries joinedin,startingwithJapan
India in addition to loansfrom itsOCRwindow. in 1964. Today, 34 OECD member countries
Thetechnicalassistance provided includesupport worldwide regularly turn to one another to
for institutional strengthening, effective project identify problems, discuss and analyse them, and
implementation and policyreforms as well as for promote policies to solve them.The track record
project preparation. is striking. The US has seen its national wealth
almosttriplein thefivedecadessincetheOECD
India holds the position of Executive
DirectorontheBoardof DirectorsoftheBank
— wascreated,calculated in termsofgrossdomestic
product per head of population. Other OECD
its constituency comprises India, Bangladesh,
18. India2012 , op.cit.,p.418

--- PAGE 468 ---
16.8 I IndianEconomy
countrieshaveseensimilar,andinsomecaseseven makes it difficult to bring on board more than a
morespectacular, progress. smallnumber of newmembersat thesametime.
There are many countries that a few decades ORGANISATIONlwrO
|
ago were still only minor players on the world WORLDTRADE )
—
stage China, India and Brazil have emerged as
TheWorldTradeOrganisation(WTO)cameinto
new economicgiants. Most of the countries that
beingasaresultoftheevolutionofthemultilateral
formed part of theformerSoviet blochaveeither
trading system starting with the establishment
joined the OECD or adopted its standards and
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
principles to achievethecommongoals.Russia is (GATT)in1947.TheprotractedUruguayRound
negotiating to become a member of the OECD, —
negotiations spanning the period 1986 1994,
and nowtheorganisation hasclose relationswith
which resulted in theestablishmentoftheWTO,
Brazil, China, India, Indonesia and South Africa
substantially extended the reach of multilateral
through its “enhanced engagement” programme.
rules and disciplines related to trade in goods,
Together with them, the OECD brings around
and introduced multilateral rules applicable to
itstable40countriesthataccountfor80percent
trade in agriculture (Agreement on Agriculture),
of world tradeand investment, givingit a pivotal
trade in services (General Agreement on Trade
role in addressing thechallengesfacing theworld —
in Services GATS) as well as Trade Related
economy.
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). Aseparate
ENLARGEMENTANDENHANCED understanding on WTO dispute settlement
mechanism (DSU) and trade policy review
ENGAGEMENT
^^^^^^^^ mechanism (TPRM) wasalso agreed upon.
In May 2007, OECD countries agreed to invite
Chile,Estonia,Israel,RussiaandSloveniatoopen
WTOANDINDIA
discussions for membership of the organisation India is a founder-member of both GATT and
and offered enhanced engagement to Brazil, WTO.TheWTOprovidesarulebased,transparent
China, India, IndonesiaandSouthAfrica. and predictable multilateral trading system .
Chile became a member of OECD on May The WTO rules envisage non-discrimination
7, 2010,Slovenia becamea memberon July21, in the form of National Treatment and Most
2010and Israel becamea memberon September Favoured Nation (MFN) treatment to India’s
7, 2010.On December 9, 2010, Estonia became exports in the markets of other WTO Members.
a member, once necessary formalities, including NationalTreatmentensuresthat India’s products
parliamentaryapproval, werecompleted. once imported into the territory of other WTO
Whileenhanced engagement is distinct from Members would not be discriminated vis-a-vis
accession to the OECD, it has the potential in the domestic products in those countries. MFN
thefuturetolead tomembership.Theapprovalof treatment principleensures that members do not
so-called‘roadmaps’markedthestartofaccession discriminate among various WTO members. If
talks with Chile, Estonia, Israel, Russia and a member country believes that the due benefits
Slovenia.Theaccession procedureiscomplexand are not accruing to it because of trade measures
can belong,asitinvolvesaseriesofexaminations byanotherWTO member, which areviolativeof
to assess a country’s ability to meet OECD WTO rules and disciplines, it may file a dispute
standards in a wide range of policy areas. This undertheDisputeSettlementMechanism (DSM)

--- PAGE 469 ---
InternationalEconomicOrganisations8India > 16.9
oftheWTO.Therearealsocontingencyprovisions Hong Kong ( December 13 — 18, 2005); Cancun
builtintoWTOrules,enablingmembercountries (September 10-14, 2003); Doha (November
to takecareof exigencies like balanceof payment 9-13, 2001); Seattle (November 30-December
problems and situations like a surge in imports. 3, 1999); Geneva(May18 — 20, 1998); Singapore
In caseof unfair trade practices causing injury to (December 9-13, 1996).The Ninth Ministerial
—
the domestic producers, there are provisions to Conference was held in Bali (December 3 7,
impose Anti-Dumping or Countervailing duties 2013).
as provided for in theAnti-DumpingAgreement
|
and the Subsidies and Countervailing Measures INDIA'SNEGOTIATIONSWITHWTOATBALI
Agreement.
In wake of the emerging external environment,
WTOMEMBERSHIP India continued to be engaged in WTO
negotiations that have an impact on the external
The present strength of WTO membership19 sector as well as overall economy. The Ninth
is 160. Against the backdrop of the challenging
MinisterialConferenceof theWTO took placein
world economic climate four countries acceded Baliduring3 — 7December2013.Ministersissued
to the WTO at the 8th Ministerial Conference,
— a DeclarationandtenDecisionswereadoptedon
Geneva in December 2011 The Russian
variousissuesincludingtradefacilitationandissues
Federation, Samoa, Montenegro and Vanuatu.
relating to agricultural trade rules, development,
Russian Federati — on joined it after an 18-year and least developed countries (LDCs). Amongst
accession process thesecountriesappliedto join
these decisions, two are of particular significance
theWTO in 1993-then theyentered a period —
for India the Ministerial Decision for an
of 18 years of bilateral negotiations with GATT/
Agreement on Trade Facilitation and the
WTO members concerning goods and services
Ministerial Decision on Public Stockholding for
and various systemic obligations. Significant FoodSecurityPurposes.MainfeaturesofIndia’s
divergence of views between Russia and the EU,
engagements with the WTO at this Conference
US and Georgia respectively were the source of —
(aspertheEconomicSurvey2014 15)aresummed
repeatedsetbacksin theaccession process.
up below:
| 1. TheTradeFacilitationAgreement(TFA),
WTOMINISTERIALCONFERENCE
which was also endorsed by India at the
—
The highest decision-making body of the WTO Conference, is basicallyaimedat
is the Ministerial Conference, which has to meet (a) Greater transparency and
atleastonceeverytwoyears.It bringstogether all simplificationofcustomsprocedures,
membersof theWTO, all of which arecountries (b) Use of electronic payments and risk
or separate customs territories. The Ministerial managementtechniques,and
Conferencecantakedecisionsonallmattersunder
(c) Faster clearancesat ports .
any of the multilateral trade agreements . Since
Trade facilitation was put on the
the coming into being of the WTO in January
agendamainlybythedevelopedcountries
1993, nine Ministerial Conferences have been
held, namely, Geneva (December 15 — 17, 2011); while theissueof rules relating to public
— stockholding for food security purposes
Geneva (30 November 30 2, December 2009);
19. AspertheWTOwebsite,May2014.

--- PAGE 470 ---
16.10 < IndianEconomy
was put on theagenda byG-33groupof (i) In the interim, until a permanent
46developingcountriesincludingIndia. solution is found and subject to
2. WTO’sagriculturaltraderules(explained certain conditions, Members were
inthe‘AgreementonAgriculture’)donot to be protected against challenge
barpublicprocurementandstockholding in the WTO under the Agreement
for food security. However, if food on Agriculture in respect of public
for such programmes is acquired at stockholding programmes for food
administeredpricesand not marketprices,
securitypurposes.
then thisisdeemedasupport tofarmers. (ii) Post Bali, the focus of the
As per WTO rules negotiated in developed countries was only on
the Uruguay Round, all such support the implementation of the TFA.
has to be kept within a limit of 10 per Concerned at this uneven progress
cent of the value of production of India took the stand in July 2014
the product in question. This cap can that without a firm commitment
constrain procurement and food aid to implement the other Bali
programmes in developing countries. Decisions, it would be difficult to
The WTO rules, made keeping the join theconsensuson the Protocolof
interests of the developed countries Amendment to incorporate the TFA
uppermost, haveoverlooked theinterests into the umbrellaWTOAgreement.
of the developing countries. The draft (iii) Despite the general campaign of
agriculture negotiating text of December misinformation that followed about
2008 seeks to change this. It contains a missing the deadline for the TFA
proposal to revise the rules, however, as and the effect of the impasse on the
the negotiations have not concluded, future of the WTO, India stood
this remains an unfinished agenda. firm.Concerted effortsweremade to
India,as partofacoalitionofdeveloping explain the concerns underlying the
countries (knownastheG-33), proposed stand taken and India worked with
anamendmenttotheWTO’sAgreement other WTO members to find a way
onAgricultureto changetheserules. forward.
3. The G-33 proposals, as well as various (iv) In November 2014, the General
alternativessuggested bytheGroup, met Council of the WTO adopted a
with resistance. Negotiations continued Decision on PublicStockholdingfor
during the Bali Ministerial Conference. Food Security Purposes, a Decision
The finallyagreed text of the Ministerial on the TFA and a Decision on Post
Decision provides for Members to put Bali Work. The General Council
in place an interim mechanism and Decision on Public Stockholding
to negotiate on an agreement for a for Food Security Purposes makes it
permanent solution for adoption by the clear that a mechanism under which
Eleventh Ministerial Conference of the WTO members will not challenge
WTO. Related developments regarding the publicstockholding programmes
itareasfollows — of developing country members for
foodsecurity