--- PAGE 300 ---
9.22 < IndianEconomy
benefits of their dynamism (this unlike investments. These measures would not
theformalmanufacturing).Theseservices justbenefitmanufacturing,butallsectors
areskill-intensivesectors while India has of theeconomy.
more unskilled labour. Construction (ii) The next category of means could be
is one service sector which is unskilled looselycalled — ‘industrial policy’.Under
labour-intensive, but it is fairly dynamic. this, the major required steps, for the
However, construction is not a tradable promotion of manufacturing,are —
sector, which limits its potential to be a (a) Providingsubsidies,
transformationalsector .
(b) Loweringthecost ofcapital,and
(iii) One policy conclusion is that efforts
(c) Creating special economic zones
shouldbemadetoimprovetheconditions
(SEZs)
for labour-intensive manufacturing with
rapid skill upgradation. This is need of The above-given measures should be
taken for all manufacturing industries
the hour as skill-intensive sectors are
dynamic sectors in India and sustaining to have the right benifit coming to the
economy.
their dynamism will require skilled
labour — otherwise even these sectors (iii) The next category of tools are related
could become uncompetitive. It means, to the is the ‘tradability’ factor of the
to make the ‘Make in India’ happen, manufacturing sector . The normal
India will first need to make‘Skill India’ tools applied by India might be called
—
happen. ‘protectionist’
India needs to use the right tools (means)to (a) Higher custom on imported
makethe‘MakeinIndia’happen.AspertheSurvey, manufacturedgoods,
these ‘means’ are as given below (in decreasing (b) Imposing the compulsions of
order of their effectiveness and increasing order local procurement on the foreign
ofcontroversy): companies,
(i) To attract enough investment from the (c) Providingexport-relatedincentivesto
privatesector(domesticaswellasforeign) domesticmanufacturing.
improvement in business environment is But such policy actions go against India’s
needed. For this, India needs to take the external obligations under the WTO and also
followingsteps: undermineitscredentialsofopenness.
(a) Regulatorysimplification,
INDIANSCENARIO&THERIGHTWAY
(b) Lessoneroustaxstructure,
(c) Buildinginfrastructure, India has been depending more on the last two
(d) Reforminglabourlaws,and
of the above-given ‘means’, which have been
(e) Enablingconnectivity. counterpro — ductive to the manufacturing sector
in general resulting into an environment of
The above-given measures, aimed at negativeprotectionto it.Together withimproving
improving the ‘ease of doing business’
the ‘business environment’ (which is difficult
would reduce thecost of doing business,
and a long- term process), India needs to impart
increase profitability, and hence
a competitive edge to its manufacturing industry
encourage the private sector to increase bytweakingitstaxregimewithoutcompromising

--- PAGE 301 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie > 9.23
on itsexternalobligations.Thepolicystepsin this an economy, i.e., primary, secondary or tertiary,
—
regardshould be suitable level of infrastructure presence is a pre
¬
(a) Eliminating the exemptions in the
requisiteforgrowthanddevelopment.Thisiswhy
countervailing duty (CVD) and special theGovernmentin Indiahasalwaysgivenpriority
additionalduties (SAD) on imports. tothedevelopmentalaspectsofthesector .Butthe
level of preparedness and performance had been
Tax theory accepts neutrality of
alwaysless than required bytheeconomy.Which
incentives between domestic production
and imports. This requires that all sector are called the infrastructure? Basically,
the goods and services usually requiring
domestic indirect taxes also be levied on
imports. So, if a country levies a sales higher investment, considered essential for the
tax, value added tax (VAT), or excise or properfunctioningofan economy is called the
GST on domestic sales/production, it
infrastructureofaneconomy.58Suchsectormight
should also be levied on imports. India’s be as many as required by a particular economy
currentindirecttaxsystem, however,acts such as power, transportation, communication,
sometimes to favour foreign production
watersupply,sewerage, housing, urbanamenities,
.
over domesticallyproducedgoods. etc
(b) Enactinga well-designedGST preferably There are three sectors which are considered
withone,internationallycompetitiverate
astheinfrastructure universallyaround theworld
andwith narrowlydefinedexemptions.
namelypower,transportationandcommunication.
Since, infrastructure benefitsthewholeeconomy,
In one stroke the penalties on domestic
it has been often argued by the economists that
manufacturing would be eliminated
thesectorshouldbefundedbythegovernmentby
becausetheGST(centralandstate)would
meansof taxation, partlynot wholly.
automatically be levied on imports to
ensure neutrality of incentives. In effect, Indian infrastructure sector is clearly
overstrained and has suffered from
India would be promoting domestic
manufacturing without becoming
underinvestment in the post-reforms period.59
Infrastructurebottlenecksarealwaysconstraintin
protectionistandwithoutviolatinganyof
achievinga highergrowthfor theeconomy.India
its international trade obligations under
needs massive investment, both from the public
the World Trade Organization (WTO)
or under FreeTradeAgreements (FTAs). and private sectors, to overcome infrastructure
bottlenecks.Investmentsbythepublicandprivate
|
INDIAN INFRASTRUCTURE
sectorsarenotalternatives, but complimentaryto
eachotherastherequiredinvestmentisveryhigh.
Publicinvestmentin thesector depends upon the
ANINTRODUCTION
ability to raise resources (capital) in the public
Infrastructure is the ‘lifeline’ of an economy sector and this in turn depends upon the ability
as protein is the lifeline of the human body. to collect the user charges from the consumers.
Whichever sector be the prime moving force of To make this happen following three factors are
extremelyimportant:
58 . OxfordDictionaryof Business,N .Delhi,2004 .
59 . IndiaInfrastructureReport , 1994 . GOI .,NewDelhi.

--- PAGE 302 ---
9.24 < IndianEconomy
(i) Reform of thepowersector, particularly without appropriate regulation, is
(ii) Introduction of road user charges (either also not likely to produce optimal outcomes .62
directlyviatollsorindirectlyviaacesson India, while stepping up public investment in
petroldiesel),and infrastructure,hasbeenactivelyengagedinfinding
(iii) Rationalisation of railwayfares. theappropriatepolicyframework,whichgivesthe
privatesector adequateconfidenceand incentives
Experts60 have suggested for expanding
to invest on a massive scale, but simultaneously
public investment in the sector supplemented
preserves adequate checks and balances through
duly by a vigorous effort of attracting private
investment (domesticaswellasforeign).Creating
transparency,competition and regulation.
The Eleventh Plan63emphasised the need for
the conducive environment to attract private
removing infrastructure bottlenecks for sustained
investmentin infrastructureshould include:
—
growth proposed an investment of US$500
(i) Simplification and transparency in the
billion in infrastructure sectors through a mix
clearance procedures;
of publicand privatesectors to reduce deficits in
(ii) Unbundling an infrastructure project so identifiedinfrastructuresectors .Asapercentageof
that the private sector may go for only thegrossdomesticproduct (GDP),investmentin
those unbundled segment of the project infrastructurewas expected to increase to around
whosetheyareableto bear;and 9 per cent . For the first time the contribution
(iii) Providing credible and independent of the private sector in total investment in
regulatoryframeworkso that the private infrastructurewas targeted to exceed 30 per cent .
playersgetfair treatment . Total investment in infrastructure during the
Eleventh Plan is estimated to increase to more
OFFICIALIDEOLOGY
than 8 per cent of the GDP in the terminal year
Putting in place the quality and efficient of the Plan, which was higher by2.47 percentage
infrastructure services is essential to realise the pointsascomparedtotheTenthPlan.Theprivate
full potential of the growth impulses surging sectorisexpectedtobecontributingnearly36per
through the Indian economy. There is now a centof thisinvestment.
widespread consensus61 (now clearly accepted An analysis64 of thecreation of infrastructure
by the Planning Commission) that exclusive in physical terms indicates that while the
dependenceon thegovernment for the provision achievementsinsomesectorshavebeenremarkable
ofallinfrastructureservicesintroducesdifficulties during the Eleventh Plan as compared to the
concerningadequatescaleofinvestment,technical previousFiveYearPlans,therehavebeenslippages
efficiency, proper enforcement of user charges, in somesectors .Thesuccess in garnering private-
and competitive market structure . At the same sector investment in infrastructure through the
time, complete reliance on private production, public-privatepartnership (PPP) routeduringthe
. ,
60. OneofsuchmajorsuggestionwasforwardedbyJeffreyD Sach AshutoshVarshneyand NirupamBajpai(Eds),India
,
intheEraofEconomicReforms OUP,N.Delhi,1999,p.79.
, - ,
61. EconomicSurvey 2006 07 Gol,N.Delhi.
,
62. IndiaInfrastructureReport2007 Gol,N.Delhi.
,
63. PlanningCommission,MidTermAppraisalofthe11thPan Gol,N.Delhi,releasedOctober2011.
64. PlanningCommission , whileannouncingtheApproachforthe12thPlan,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 303 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.25
Plan has laid solidfoundation for a substantial MW connects the northern, western, eastern,
step upin private- sectorfundingincomingyears. and north- eastern regionsin asynchronousmode
PPPsareexpectedtoaugmentresourceavailability operatingat thesamefrequencyand thesouthern
as well as improve the efficiencyof infrastructure region asynchronously operating in the same
servicedelivery. mode. This has enabled inter-regional energy
The Planning Commission65, in its aproach exchanges of about 39,275 million units (MUs)
—
paper has projected an investment of over Rs.45 duringApril November 2011, thus contributing
lakh crore (for about US $1 trilion) during the to better utilisation of generation capacity and
Twelfth Plan (2012 — 17). It is projected that at an improved power supply position. Proposals
least 50 per cent of this investment will come are under wayforsynchronousintegration of the
from the privatesector as against the36 per cent southern regionwithother regions.
anticipatedintheEleventh Planand publicsector Competition in the electricity sector has
investment will need to increase to over Rs. 22.5 been augmented byhavingan openaccesssystem
lakh crore as against an expenditure of Rs. 13.1 allowing a buyer to choose his supplier and a
lakh crore during the Eleventh Plan. Financing seller to choose his buyer. Open access at inter ¬
infrastructurewill,therefore, bea bigchallengein state transmission level is now fully functional.
thecomingyearsandwill equiresomeinnovative Thefacilitativeframework created bytheCentral
ideasand newmodelsoffinancing. Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) in
this regard has provided the desired regulatory
SECTORALSITUATION&INITIATIVES66 certaintyfordevelopersin termsofmarketaccess,
Power Deficit: The deficit in power supply andalso payment securityagainstdefault.Central
in terms of peak availability and total energy Transmission Utility (CTU) which is responsible
availabilitydeclinedduringtheEleventhFiveYear for granting connectivity, medium- term open
Plan.Whiletheenergydeficitdecreasedfrom 9.6 access, and long- term access, has received 141
per cent in the terminal year of the Tenth Plan applicationsforconnectivityinvolvinggeneration
(2006
—
07)to7.9percentduringApril
—
December
capacityof1,52,850MW.
2011, peak deficit declined from 13.8 per cent Trading of Electricity is enabled through
in 2006 — 07 to 10.6 per cent during the current electricity traders and power exchanges. Power
financial year (up to December 2011). Capacity trading helps generation resource optimisation
addition during the Eleventh Plan is, therefore, by facilitating trade and flow of power across
expected to beabout 50,000to 52,000 MW. the country with varied geography, climatic
conditions, and natural resource endowments. It
UltraMegaPowerProjects(UMPPs) Initiative
has helped in saleofsurplus power availablewith
for development of coal-based super critical
distributing utilities and captive power plants on
UMPPs,eachofabout4,000MWcapacity,under
CaseIIbiddingroute .NationalGridhelpstoeven
onehandandpurchaseofpowerbydeficitutilities
out supply-demand mismatches. The existing to meet sudden surges in demand. Short- term
inter-regional transmission capacity of 23,800
marketsalsoprovidegeneratorswithanalternative
65. PlanningCommission,Approachtothe12thPlan,Gol,N.Delhi.
66. AnalysesonthesectoralsituationsintheinfrastructuresectorofIndiaandthenewinitiativestakenbytheGolinrecent
timesare basedonthegovernmentsdocuments- EconomicSurvey 2011-12,pp.251 - 276;ApproachPapertothe
12thPlan,MidTermAppraisalofthe11thPlan;variousPapers/Documentspublished bythePlanningCommission;
anddifferentReleasesbytheconcernedCentralMinistriesoftheGol.

--- PAGE 304 ---
9.26 I IndianEconomy
tosellpowerother thanthroughlong- term power managers may help considerably in reduction of
purchase agreements (PPAs). The CERC grants AT&Closs.
inter- statetradinglicences. With the initiative of the Government of
National Electricity Fund (Interest Subsidy India and of the states, the Accelerated Power
Scheme) has been approved to provide interest Development &Reform Programme (APDRP)
subsidy (Rs. 8,466 crore) on loan to the state was launched in 2001, for the strengthening of
—
power utilities, both in the public and private sub transmission and distribution network and
sectors, to improve the distribution network. reductioninAT&Closses.Themain objectiveof
Thepreconditionsforeligibilitytoavailofinterest the programmewas to bringAT&Closses below
subsidy are linked to the reforms in the power 13 per cent in five years in urban and in high-
sectorandtheamountofinterestsubsidyislinked densityareas, thelossas a percentageof turnover
to the progressachieved in reforms. was reduced from 33 per cent in 2000 — 01 to
AT&C Losses: Due to lack of adequate 16.60 per cent in 2005 — 06.
investment on ‘transmission and distribution’
TheAPDRPprogrammehasbeenrestructured.
(T&D) works, the T&D losses have been The restructured APDRP (R-APDRP) was
consistently on the higher side, and reached to launched inJuly 2008 as a centralsector scheme
the level of 32.86 Per cent in the year 2000-01. for the Eleventh Plan (in order that reliable and
Thereductionoftheselosseswasessentialtobring verifiable baseline data of revenue and enegry
economicviabilityto thestate utilities (SEBs).As in APDRP Project areas is attained over an IT
theT&Dlosswasnotabletocaptureallthelosses platform and that AT& C loss reduction is
inthenetwork,conceptofAggregateTechnicaland achievedon asustained basis).
Commercial(AT&C)losswasintroduced.AT&C In December 2014, the APDRP was
losscapturestechnicalaswellascommerciallosses subsumed into the new launched Integrated
inthenetworkandisatrueindicatoroftotallosses Power Development Scheme (1PDS) with some
in thesystem . newfeatures.
High technical losses in the system are Development of Multi-functional Complex
primarily due to inadequate investments over (MFC):Anewconceptofdevelopmentof MFCs
the years for system improvement works, which with budget hotels was introduced in the Rail
has resulted in unplanned extensions of the Budget2009 — 10,so that important facilities may
distribution lines, overloading of the system be available to rail users in a separate complexin
elements like transformers and conductors, and the vicinity of the circulating area on station — a
lackofadequatereactive powersupport . totalof198stationshavebeenidentified bynow.
Thecommerciallossesaremainlydueto: In a major move to give further impetus to
(i) lowmeteringefficiency railways’modernisationplans,an ExpertGroup
(ii) theft,and has been constituted under the Chairmanship of
(iii) pilferages ShriSam Pitroda to recommend waysand means
of meeting the challenges of economic growth,
Thismaybeeliminatedbyimprovingmetering
theaspirationsof thecommon man, the needs of
efficiency, proper energy accounting & auditing
changing technology, and the expanding market,
and improved billing & collection efficiency.
whileatthesametimeensuringadequatefocuson
Fixing of accountability of the personnel/feeder

--- PAGE 305 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie > 9.27
addressing the social and strategic requirements NHAI partly in the form of grants and partly as
of the country consistent with Indian Railways’ loan.The NHAI has also availed a direct loan of
national aspirations. The terms of reference US$149.78millionfromtheADBfortheManor
of the group involve outlining strategies for ExpresswayProject.
modernisation of railways with focus on track, Special Accelerated Road Development
signalling, rolling stock, stations and terminals Programme for North-East region (SARDP-NE)
upgradation; using ICT for improving efficiency aims at improving road connectivity to state
and safety; augmenting existing capacities of capitals, district headquarters, and remote places
railways through indigenous development; of the north- east region. Development of roads
reviewingprojects;andaddressingPPPissues.The
in Left Wing Extremism (LWTJ-affected areas in
Expert Group is expected tosubmit its report by thestatesofAndhraPradesh,Bihar,Chhattisgarh,
March 2012. Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
In order to attract private capital for Odisha, and Uttar Pradesh is continuing; Prime
acceleratedconstructionoffixedrailinfrastructure, Minister’s Reconstruction Plan (PMRP) for
Gol has formulated PPP investment models. A Jammu and Kashmir, launched in November
comprehensivedraftpolicyis underconsideration 2004.
which would replace the existing Railways PradhanMantriGramSadakYojna(PMGSY):
Infrastructure for Industry Initiative (R3i) and Launched to provide single all-weather road
RailwaysPolicyforConnectivitytoCoalandIron
connectivity to eligible unconnected habitations
OreMines(R2CI)policiesforprivateinvestments
having population of 500 persons and above in
in railconnectivityprojects.
plainareasand250personsandaboveinhillstates,
National Highways Development Project tribal (Schedule V) areas, desert (as identified
(NHDP)s About 22 per cent of the total length in the Desert Development Programme) areas,
of National Highways (NHs) is single lane/ and LWE-affected districts as identified by the
intermediate lane, about 53 per cent is two lane Ministry of Home Affairs. Rural roads has also
standard,and the balance25 per cent isfour lane been identified as one of the six components of
standardor more. Bharat Nirman which has the goal of providing
Financing of the NHDP: A part of the fuel cess all-weather road connectivity to all villages with
a population of 1,000 (500 in thecaseof hillyor
imposed on petrol and diesel is allocated to
tribalareas).
the NHAI for funding the implementation
of the NHDP. The NHAI leverages the cess The Eleventh Plan had envisaged accelerated
flow to borrow additional funds from the debt effortstobringtheNHnetworkuptoaminimum
market. Till date, such borrowings have been two-lanestandardbytheendoftheTwelfthPlan
limited to funds raised through 54 EC (capital and for removing existing deficiencies. In order
gains tax exemption) bonds and the short- term to make a visible impact, the work would be
overdraft facility. Government has also taken taken up for upgradation on a corridor concept .
loans for financing projects under the NHDP These corridors would include strengthening (in
from the World Bank (US$ 1,965 million), adjoiningreaches)inadditiontowideningtotwo -
Asian Development Bank (US$ 1,605 million) lane/two -lane with paved shoulder standards in
and Japan Bank for International Cooperation order to have better facilityover longcontinuous
(32,060 million yen) which are passed on to the
stretches.

--- PAGE 306 ---
9.28 < IndianEconomy
CivilAviation:Airportinfrastructuredevelopment (iii) Proposed investment in major and non
¬
continuesto bea matterofconcern.Upgradation major ports by 2020 is expected to be
of many airports, including construction of new around Rs.2,96,000crore.
terminals, upgradation in 18 non- metro airports, (iv) Most of the investment to come from
for improving air navigation services the Airport the private sector including FDI ( up
Authorityof India (AAI) installing the new ATS to 100 per cent under the automatic
automation system . In order to address issues route is permitted for construction and
concerning viability of the civil aviation sector, maintenance of ports), around 96 per
particularlytheairlineindustry,aWorkingGroup cent, private sector to fund most of the
wasconstituted on12,December2011underthe projectsthroughPPPoron‘buildoperate
chairmanshipoftheSecretarycivilaviation.Their
transfer’ (BOT) or ‘build operate own
major recommendationswere: transfer’ (BOOT) basis.
(i) state governments should rationalise (v) Private- sector participation will not
the value added tax (VAT) on aviation only increase investment in the ports
turbinefuel (ATF), infrastructure, it is expected to improve
(ii) foreign airlines be permitted to invest in operations of the ports through the
domesticairlines undertakings, induction of the latest technology and
(iii) directimportofATF byairlinesfor their better management practices.
ownconsumption beallowed, (vi) Publicfundswill be mainlydeployed for
(iv) airlines should be asked to prepare their common use infrastructure facilities like
turnaround plans, deepeningof portchannels, railand road
(v) fare structure should be reviewed connectivity from ports to hinterland,
.
by airlines to cover the cost of their etc
operations. Urban Infrastructure: Jawaharlal Nehru
(vi) an economic regulatory framework National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM)
suggested with regard to excessive/ has been launched by the Ministry of Urban
predatorypricingby31, May2012. Development for a seven-year period (i.e., up to
March 2012) to encourage cities to initiatesteps
MaritimeAgenda2010-20:Theobjectiveofthe
— to bringaboutimprovementsina phased manner
Maritime Agenda 2010 20 is not only creating in existing civic service levels. The components
morecapacitybutsettingupportsonaparwiththe
under the sub-mission Urban Infrastructure and
bestinternational portsin termsof performance:
Governance (UIG) include urban renewal, water
(i) A target of 3,130 MT port capacity has supply(includingdesalination plants),sanitation,
beensetfor theyear 2020.Morethan 30
sewerage and solid waste management, urban
percentofthiscapacityistobecreatedin
transport, development of heritage areas, and
thenon-majorportsasthetraffichandled
preservation ofwater bodies.
by these ports is expected to increase to
The UIDSSMT (Urban Infrastructure
1,280 MT.
Development Scheme for Small and Medium
(ii) This enlarged scale of operation is
Towns) is a sub-component of the JNNURM
expected to reduce transaction costs for development of infrastructure facilities in all
considerably and make Indian ports towns and cities other than the 65 mission cities
globallycompetitive .
covered under UIG (Urban Infrastructure and

--- PAGE 307 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie > 9.29
Governance) sub-mission of theJNNURM. For |
ENERGY PRICING
obtaining assistance under the UIDSSMT, states
and urbanlocalbodies(ULBs)needtosignMoAs The economic role of rational energy pricing can
committingto implementationofthereforms. hardlybe under-estimated.Rationalenergyprices
Under the pilotscheme, UrbanInfrastructure providetherightsignalstoboththeproducersand
DevelopmentinSatelliteTownsaroundSevenMega- consumers, and lead to a demand-supply match,
—
Cities,launchedin2011 12tocontributetowards providing incentives for reducing consumption
amelioration of basicservices in these towns . For on the one hand and stimulating production on
thenorth- easternregion,theNorthEasternRegion the other. Aligning domestic energy prices with
Urban Development Programme was launched in theglobalprices,especiallywhenlargeimportsare
November 2009 with Asian Development Bank involved, maybean idealoptionasmisalignment
(ADB) assistance. The project aims to assist the could pose both micro and macroeconomic
states of Tripura, Mizoram, Sikkim, Meghalaya, problems.
and Nagaland to address challenges of urban At the microeconomic level, underpricing
developmentin their capitalcities. of energy to the consumer not only reduces the
UrbanTransport is one of the keyelements incentivefor beingenergyefficient, it also creates
of urban infrastructure. As compared to private fiscal imbalances. Leakages and inappropriate
modes of transport, public transport is energy use may be the other implications. Underpricing
efficient and less polluting. The public transport to the producer reduces both his incentive and
system helps improve urban-rural linkages and abilitytoinvestinthesectorandincreasesreliance
access of rural/semi-urban population in the on imports. Over the years, India’s energy prices
peripheryto citycentresfor the purposesofwork havebecomemisalignedandarenowmuchlower
without proliferation ofslumswithinandaround than global prices for many products.The extent
cities.NationalUrbanTransportPolicy(NUTP), of misalignment is substantial, leading to large
2006 aims to ensure accessible, safe, affordable, untargeted subsidies. Several initiatives have been
quick, comfortable, reliable, and sustainable taken by the Gol for rationalising the energy
— —
mobility for all under which several projects of pricesindifferentsectors
‘bus rapid transit system’ (BRTSs) and ‘Metro (i) TheIntegratedEnergyPolicyhasoutlined
RailProjects’havebeensanctioned byMay2012. the broad contours of the pricingsystem
Financing Infrastructure: Net bank credit to for coal. The pricingofcoalis done now
infrastructure had a healthy growth of 48.4 per on grosscalorificvalue (GCV) basiswith
cent per annum during 2006 — 11 but it turned effect from 31,January 2012, replacing
negative 2011 — 12 and was around 61 per cent the earlier system of pricing on the basis
of 2010 — 11 — power and telecom sectors saw of useful heat value (UHV), which takes
significant reduction.FDI inflows registered 23.6 into account the heat trapped in ash
per cent growth in 2011 — 12 with power (43.6 content also, besides the heat value of
per cent), non-conventional energy (338 per carboncontent .TherevisionintheGCV
cent) and telecommunications (499 per cent) the islikelyto increasethepricesofdomestic
preferredsectorsforforeigninvestors — thesectors, coaltosomeextent,butthisisadesirable
however, failed to share the buoyancy in FDI adjustment because domestic thermal
inflows. coal, adjusted for quality differences,
continuesto be underpriced.

--- PAGE 308 ---
9.30 i IndianEconomy
(ii) Incaseofpetroleumproductspricing,the (ii) A special purpose vehicle, the Dedicated
governmentdismantledtheAdministered Freight Corridor Corporation of India
PricingMechanismin2002.Thisdecision, Limitedhasbeenset uptoimplementthe
however, was notfullyimplemented and project. Out of 10,703 ha of land to be
domestic pass through of global price acquiredfortheproject,7,768ha (73per
increases remained low for petrol, diesel, cent) hasalreadybeenawarded under the
kerosene and LPG — in June 2010, the RailwayAmendmentAct (RAA) 2008.
government announced that the price (iii) The Eastern and Western DFC projects
ofpetrol was fully deregulatedand the oil are being funded through a mix of
companieswerefreeto fixit periodically. bilateral/multilateral loans, gross
(iii) In January 2013, the government budgetarysupport (GBS), and PPP.The
announced the new roadmap providing Western DFC is being funded by the
for a gradual price increase for reducing Japan InternationalCooperation Agency
dieselunder-recoveries . (JICA) upto77percentofthetotalcost .
(iv) Admissibility of subsidised number of (iv) The Ludhiana to Mughalsarai section
liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) cylinders (1,183 km) of the Eastern DFC is being
andpricesofLPG havealsorecentlybeen funded bytheWorld Bank up to 66 per
revised. Pricing of gas is presently done centof theprojectcost .
under the New Exploration Licensing (v) The Mughalsarai-Sonnagar sector (122
Policy (NELP). The government km) will be funded by Indian Railways’
provides theoperator freedom to sell the own resources. Civil construction work
gas produced from the NELP blocks of thissector isin progress.
at a market-determined price, subject (vi) TheDankuni-Sonnagarsection (334km)
to the approval of pricing formula. The oftheEasternDFCtobefundedthrough
government is reviewing pricing under PPP mode.
thePSC(pricesharingcontract)toclarify
(vii) After commissioning of the Eastern
the extent to which producers will have
thefreedom to market thegas. and Western DFCs, it is planned to
upgrade the speed of passenger trains to
| " 160 — 200 kmph on theexisting routes .A
DEDICATED FREIGHTCORRIDOR
feasibilitystudyfor upgradation ofspeed
—
The Eastern and Western Dedicated Freight of passenger trains to 160 200 kmph on
—
Corridors(DFC)area mega-railtransportproject the existing Delhi Mumbai route has
being undertaken to increase transportation been undertaken with co-operation from
capacity, reduce unit costs of transportation, and theGovernmentofJapanin 2012 — 13.
improveservicequality: Apart from the Eastern and Western DFCs,
(i) TheEasternDFC(1,839routekilometres a feasibility study has also been undertaken on
[RKM]) extends from Dankuni near four future freight corridors, viz., East — West
— —
Kolkata to Ludhiana in Punjab, while Corridor (Kolkata Mumbai), North South
theWestern DFC (1,499 RKM) extends Corridor (Delhi-Chennai), East Coast Corridor
—
fromtheJawaharLaiNehruPort(JNPT) (Kharagpur Vijayawada) and Southern Corridor
in Mumbaito Dadri /Rewari near Delhi. (Goa — Chennai). A pre-feasibility study of the

--- PAGE 309 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.31
Chennai — BangaloreFreightCorridorisalso being concessionaires. This is also true for
proposed. railways and in part, for ports (though
inter-terminal competition is possible)
|
RESTRUCTURINGTHE PPP andairports.
(iii) The default revenue stream is directly
The infrastructure scenario in India today is
collected user charges. Where this is
not encouraging. Many projects are financially
deemedinsufficient, bidderscanaskfora
stressed, accountingfor almost a third ofstressed
assets in banks. New projects cannot attract c v o ia n b s i t l r i u ty ct g i r o a n n . t, T ty h p is ica s l t l r y uc d t i u sb re urs l e ea d v d es uri t n h g e
sponsors, as in recent NHAI bids, and banks are
unwilling to lend. Given its riskiness, pension government with no leverage in the case
ofnon-performance,withfewcontractual
and insurance funds have sensibly limited their
remediesshort of termination.
exposure to these projects. This current state of
Fiscal reporting practices also affect
the public private partnership (PPP) model is
due to poorly designed frameworks, which need this choice in revenue stream . Current
restructuring67.TheEconomicSurvey2014 — 15has accounting rules treat future committed
highlightedthe‘flaws’in itand alsosuggested the expenditure as a contingent liability.
right‘remedies’for thesame. However, foregone future revenue is not
accountedfor.
FLAWSINEXISTINGDESIGN (iv) There are no ex- ante structures for
There are several in-built flaws in India’s design
renegotiation.Ifabureaucratrestructures
of the PPPsin infrastructure.Theycan beseen as a project, there are no rewards; instead
given below: it may lead to investigation for graft.
Failed projects lead neither to penalties
(i) Existing contracts focus more on nor investigation.Withsuch asymmetric
fiscal benefits than on efficient service
incentives, bureaucrats naturally avoid
provision. For example, in port and renegotiation.
airport concessions, the bidder offering
(v) Contracts are over-dependent on market
the highest share of gross revenue
collected to the government is selected.
wisdom,e.g.,biddersinultra-megapower
projects (UMPP) could index tariff bids
Thus, if thisshare is 33 per cent (higher
in many actual contracts), the user pays
tobothfuelpricesandexchangerates,but
almost all chose verylimited indexation.
30 per cent more than what is required,
When fuel prices roseand the rupeefell,
sincetheconcessionaireisableto provide
serviceeven though it getsonlyRs.1for these bids became unviable. To enforce
everyRs.1.50charged. market discipline and penalise reckless
bidding, these projectsshould have been
(ii) T
th
h
e
ey
en
n
ti
e
t
g
y
le
b
c
e
t
st
p
a
ri
b
n
l
c
e
ip
to
le
m
s
a
a
n
ll
a
o
g
c
e
at
i
i
t
n
.
g
In
r
s
is
te
k
a
t
d
o
,
allowed tofail.
unmanageable risks, e.g., traffic risk in Given the several flaws in the model of the
PPPs, India has seen significant investment in
highways,even thoughlargelyunaffected
by their actions, are transferred to
themfromtheprivatessector .TheSurveyindicates
theneededmodificationsin thefollowingway:
67. ParthaMukhopadhyay,CenterforPolicyResearch,NewDelhi,2014,Vol.1,pp.75- 76.

--- PAGE 310 ---
9.32 < IndianEconomy
(a) It is better to continue combining determined by regulators and a capacity
construction and maintenance charge.
responsibilities to incentivise building (d) Another option, without that drawback,
quality. In many projects, especially is the Least Present Value of Revenue
highways, maintenance costs depend (LPVR)68 contract, where the bid is
significantly on construction quality. the lowest present value (discounted
If a single entity is responsible for at a pre-announced rate) of total gross
both construction and maintenance, revenue received by the concessionaire.
it takes lifecycle costs into account . The concession duration is variable and
Separatingthese responsibilities provide continues until the bid present value
anincentivetoincreaseprofitsbycutting
amount
isreceived.
corners duringconstruction.Suggestions
A key advantage of this contract is that it
to let the public sector build assets and converts usage risk to risk of contract duration,
have the private sector maintain and which is more manageable for financial
operatethemignorethislinkage.
institutions.Since the bid is on gross revenue, it
(b) Risk should only be transferred to those alsoselectsbidderswhocanexecuteatlowcostand
who can manage it. In a highway or a demand relativelylower margins and by limiting
railwayproject,itisnotsensibletotransfer the scope for renegotiation to the remaining
usage risk since it is outside the control uncollectedvalueof theLPVRbid, it discourages
of the operator . But, it can be done in opportunistic bidding. Further, since the present
telecom projects and for individual port value is protected, this structure is suitable for
terminals that compete with each other, pension and insurancefunds.
where demand can respond to tariff and
quality. RESTRUCTURINGTHEEXISTING
(c) Financing structures should be able to CONTRACTS
attract pension and insurance funds,
To revive private interest and bank lending
which are a natural funding source for
long- term infrastructure projects. What existingPPPcontractsneed to restructuring,with
burdensharingamongdifferentstakeholders.The
does this mean for key sectors? First, —
finerpointsneed to betakeninto account
rather than prescribe model concession
agreements, states should be allowed (i) Lenders/banks may have extended credit
to experiment.For example, in ports, withoutnecessaryduediligence,assuming
terminals can be bid on the basis of an that projects were implicitlyguaranteed.
Without burden sharing, this behaviour
annual fee, with full tariff flexibility,
subject to competition oversight. For will be reinforced.
electricity generation, bids can be two - (ii) Many bidders may have assumed that
part, with a variable charge based on they could renegotiate in the event of
normative efficiency, or alternatively, negativeshocks.
68. (i) E. Engel, R. Fischerand A .Galetovic,'Highway Franchising:PitfallsandOpportunities',TheAmerican Economic
Review,87(2),1997, pp 68-72. (ii) Engel E. Engel, R . Fischer and A . Galetovic, 'Least-Present-Value-of-Revenue
AuctionsandHighwayFranchising',Journalof PoliticalEconomy,109(5),2001,pp993-1020.Vol.1,pp . 75-76.

--- PAGE 311 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie > 9.33
(iii) Thus, there was potentially adverse |
BOOSTING ENERGYSECTOR
selection of firms who felt they had the
capacityto renegotiate; rather than firms TheGol hastakenseveralstepsin recent times to
better at executing and operating the boost thetheenrgysector, particularlitythecrude
project. oilandnaturalgassectors .Majorstepsareasgiven
—
(iv) This may have limited participation by belowas per theEconomicSurvey2014 15:
foreign firms. (i) New Gas Pricing Formula: Approved in
(v) In the absence of burden sharing, such October2014throughwhichtheincrease
adverse selection would be supported. in priceofdomesticallyproduced natural
Thus, the guiding principle should be gas strikes a fine balance between the
to restructure contracts based on the expectations of investors and interests of
project’srevenues,differentiatingbetween consumers.
temporaryilliquidityand insolvency. (ii) Reforms in Production-Sharing Contracts
Theprivatesectorremainskeytorapiddelivery to push Investment in Exploration: It
of high quality infrastructure. Restructured has ironed out a number of rigidities in
PPP frameworks will revive their interest in production-sharing contracts to instil
infrastructureand bringin fundingfrom pension confidence among investors and ensure
and insurance funds. To make this happen the that work, which wasstuck in a number
—
right policystepscould be of blocks, takes off in right earnest and
(a) All stressed highway projects could be
withoutfurtherdelay.
switched to electronictolling. (iii) Reassessment of Hydrocarbon Potential:
(b) Revenues cango, as now, into an escrow An elaborate plan has been rolled out to
account, but with a revised order of reassess hydrocarbon resources in India’s
priority. sedimentary basins, which will provide
(c) Long- term bullet bonds, at the risk-free greater clarity to future investors on the
government rate, can be issued to the
prospectsof the basins.
extent of the debt in the project. After (iv) Project for Survey of Un-appraised
operations and maintenance, interest Sedimentary Basins of India: A project
paymentsonthesebonds,whichmayalso has been undertaken to appraise about
beguaranteedbytheUniongovernment, 1.5 million square kilometre area in
will befirstinorder of priority. twenty-four sedimentary basins where
(d) Lenderscanopttoswitchexistingdebtto scanty geo-scientific data is available.
thesebonds.Allocationsforrepaymentof Data generated under the project shall
their principal will have second priority be stored, maintained, validated at the
National Data Repository (NDR) which
and existing debt that has not been
switched, thenext priority. isbeingset upin theDirectorateGeneral
of Hydrocarbons (DGH).
(e) Equity can be the residual claimant. If
theprojectmakesmoneyoveritslifetime,
(v) Data Acquisition through Non Exclusive
Multi-Client Model: A policy for
equityholders will earn a return, though
somemayexit now,at adiscount. acquisition ofgeo-scientificdata through

--- PAGE 312 ---
9.34 < IndianEconomy
a non-exclusive multi-client model is speed rail, connecting major metros and
being implemented.This model replaces growthcentresof thecountry .
the earlier fiscal term of profit sharing (iv) Next Generation e-ticketing (NgeT)
after cost recoverywith the paymentof a application: The newly launched NgeT,
one-time projectfee.
developed by the Central Railway
(vi) Level Playing Field for Gas operations in Information Centre (CRIS) has enabled
the North East Region: For incentivizing sharp increase in online ticket booking
explorationand productionin the North capacity, number of enquiries per
East region, a 40 per centsubsidyon gas minute, as well as the capacityto handle
operations has been extended to private concurrentsessions.
companiesoperatingin theregion. (v) Premiumspecialtrains:Tomakesufficient
(vii) GasGridInfrastructure:Inadditiontothe berths available to passengers, and to
existing15,000kmgaspipelinenetwork, earn additional revenue, as compared to
another 15,000 km has been plannedfor trains operating on normal fares, IR has
completionof thegasgrid. introduced premiumspecial trains under
thedynamicfaresystem .
| ENGINT
RAILWAYSASGROWTH
(vi) Harnessing solar energy:The Rail Coach
Factory,RaeBareliispresentlyfunctioning
The Gol has taken a number of policy steps to completelyonsolar power.A30kwsolar
boost the railways to make emerge as a strong
planthasbeencommissioned,ontheroof
engine of growth promotion. The recent steps
top of Rail Bhawan at New Delhi and
taken in this regard, as per the Economic Survey
2014
—
15,areasgiven below:
provision ofsolar plantsatother Railway
buildings is being expedited, preferably
(i) Completion of Udhampur-Katra broad
under the public-private partnership
gauge line: The Udhampur-Katra broad (PPP) model.
gauge line in Jammu and Kashmir,
(vii) Wi-Fi Broadband service at select railway
bringing the state closer to the rest of
stations: Bengaluru and New Delhi
the nation, is an engineering marvel by
RailwayStationshavebeen providedWi
IR. Four train services up to Katra have Fi broadbandfacilities. ¬
commencedfromJuly2014.
(viii) e-cateringserviceintrains:IndianRailways
(ii) Meghalaya gets rail connectivity:
Catering and Tourism Corporation, has
Meghalaya got its first rail connectivity
beenentrustedthetaskofimplementation
withthecompletionofthenewDubhnoi-
ofe-cateringservicein trains.
MendipatharlineinAugust2014.Anew
routefromMendipatharinMeghalayato
(ix) CooperationwithChina:An MoUandan
Action Plan have been signed between
GuwahatiinAssam,gotconnectedbyrail
in November2014. the Government of India and People’s
Republic of China, for enhancing
(Hi) FLighspeedBullet Trains:Steps are under
technical cooperation in the railway
wayforintroductionofhighspeed bullet
sector
.Thepotentialcooperationareasin
trains in the country on the Mumbai-
theMoUinclude,i)traininginheavyhaul
Ahmedabad corridor, as part of the
freight transportation, ii) raisingspeed of
Diamond Quadrilateral network of high

--- PAGE 313 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie > 9.35
trains on existing routes, iii) station re ¬ per cent of principal repayment by the
development, iv) high speed rail, and v) state governments on the liability taken
setting upofa railwayuniversity. over by thestategovernments under the
(x) Early completion of coal transportation
scheme.
projects: Three rail connectivity projects
|
forcoalmovementinJharkhand,Odisha, IMPORTANT ISSUES
and Chhattisgarh have been put on fast
Infrastructural bottlenecks have been among
track.
the most important areas of concern for the
~
| government
.The‘bigpush’whichthegovernment
STATE DISCOMS
wanted to give to thesector has not been able to
The government in September 2012 approved bring desired results due to various reasons. The
the scheme for Financial Restructuring of State emerging issues and concerns outlined by the
—
Distribution Companies (Discoms). The salient Economic Survey2012 13and other government
featuresof theschemeareasfollows: documentsfor thesector areasgiven below:
(i) 50 per cent of the outstanding short ¬ (i) TheTwelfthPlanlaysspecialemphasison
term liabilities up to March 31, 2012 development of the infrastructure sector
to be taken over by state governments . including:
This shall be first converted into bonds (a) Energy, as the availability of quality
to be issued by Discoms to participating infrastructure is important not only
lenders,dulybackedbystategovernment for sustaining high growth, but also
guarantee . ensuringthat thegrowth isinclusive.
(ii) Takeoverofliabilitybystategovernments (b) The total investment in the
from Discoms in the next two to five infrastructure sector during the
years bywayof special securities and Plan, estimated at Rs. 56.3 lakh
repayment and interest payment to be crore (approx. US$1trillion), will be
donebystategovernmentstillthedateof nearlydoubletheamountcommitted
takeover. duringtheEleventh Plan.
(iii) Restructuring the balance 50 per cent (c) This step up in investment will be
short- term loan by rescheduling loans feasible primarilybecauseofenlarged
and providingmoratoriumon principal. private- sector participation that is
(iv) Therestructuring/reschedulementofloan
envisaged.
is to be accompanied by concrete and (ii) Unbundling of infrastructure projects,
measurableaction by the public private partnerships (PPP), and
Discoms/ states to improve their moretransparent regulatorymechanisms
operational performance. haveinduced privateinvestorstoincrease
(v) TheGol will provideincentive bywayof their participation in infrastructure
grant equalto the valueof the additional sectors:
energy saved by way of accelerated (a) Their share in infrastructure
AT&C loss reduction beyond the loss investment increased from 22 per
trajectory specified under the RAPDRP centin theTenth Plan to 38 percent
andcapital reimbursementsupportof25 in the Eleventh Plan and is expected

--- PAGE 314 ---
9.36 I IndianEconomy
to be about 48 per cent during the (c) TheTwelfthPlanaimstoaddanother
Twelfth Plan. 88,000 MW.
(b) Yet, more than half of the resources (d) Delivery of this additional capacity
requiredforinfrastructurewouldneed would critically depend on resolving
to comefrom the publicsector,from fuel availability problems, especially
thegovernment,and the parastatals. when about half the generated
(c) This would require not only the capacityisexpectedtocomefromthe
creation of the fiscal space but also privatesector .
useofa rationalpricingpolicy. (e) Theprivatedevelopersmaynotbeable
(d) Scalingupprivate- sectorparticipation to finance the projects if coallinkages
on a sustainable basis will require arenotresolvedandtherearedelaysin
redefining the contours of their finalisation offuelsupplyagreements
participation for the development of
(FSAs).
infrastructure sector in a transparent (f) Whilesomedecisionshavebeentaken
and objective manner with a for restructuring Discoms’ finances,
comprehensiveregulatorymechanism these may need to be monitored and
in place. implementedinspirit.
(e) From a macroeconomic perspective, (iv) Although India has large coal reserves,
a high level of investment in the demandforcoalissubstantiallyoutpacing
infrastructuresectorisessentialforthe its domesticavailability, with Coal India
overall revival of investment climate Ltd. not being able to meet its coal
which mayfinallylead to sustainable production targetsin theEleventh Plan:
growthinaneconomy.
(a) Domestic coal supplies are therefore
(f) However, in the current not assured for coal-based power
macroeconomic environment, to projects planned during the Twelfth
achieve this objective, there is need Plan. Thus, it is essential to ensure
to address sector -specific issues over that domestic production of coal
the medium- to -long- term horizon in increases from 540 million tonnes in
India. 2011-12 to the target of 795 million
(iii) Thereisanoverallshortageofpowerin the tonnesat theend of the12th Plan.
country both in terms of energy deficit (b) This increase of 255 million tonnes
and peakshortage: assumes an increase of 64 million
(a) At present, overall energy deficit is tonnes of captive capacity with the
about8.6 per cent and peakshortage
restbeingmetbyCoalIndiaLimited.
of powerisabout9.0 per cent . (c) However, even with this increase,
(b) TheEleventhPlanadded55,000MW there will be a need to import 185
—
ofgenerationcapacitywhichwasmore million tonnes of coal in 2016
than twice the capacity added in the 17, which may further add to the
Tenth Plan. financingcostof power projects.

--- PAGE 315 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.37
(d) Moreeffortmustbemadeforimproving (vi) The process of extending transparent
competitionandefficiencyinthecoal policies and mechanisms for allocation
sector, which may entail structural of scarce natural resources to private
reforms. companies for commercial purposes has
(e) Problems like delays in obtaining also beeninitiated:
environmental clearances, land (a) TheMines &Mineral (Development
acquisitions, and rehabilitation need and Regulation) Bill 2011 aims at
to be suitably addressed in fast-track providing a simple and transparent
mode to achieve the Twelfth Plan mechanism for grant of mining
targets for coal production, while lease or prospecting licence through
maintaining a balance between competitivebiddinginareasofknown
growth needs and environmental mineralisation and on first-in-time
.
concerns basis in areas where mineralisation is
(v) Progressof roadprojectshasalsosuffered not
known.
on accountofsimilarfactors: (b) However, in order to meet the
(a) Thecreationofa High-LevelCabinet objectiveof revenue maximisation in
Committee on Investment to anopen,transparentandcompetitive
quicken the pace of decision making manner, this should be preceded by
in critical infrastructure projects by detailed geological mapping of the
thegovernmentisexpectedto resolve mineralwealthof thecountry .
any issues involving inter-ministerial (c) Further, any policy prescription
coordination. regardingthe useof natural resources
(b) Oflate,financingofroadprojectshas must ensure that the process of
also run into difficulty as leveraged selection is fair, reasonable, non-
companies implementing road discriminatory, transparent, and
projects are unable to raise more aimed at promoting healthy
debt in the absence of fresh equity. competitionandequitabletreatment .
In current market conditions, these (vii) Owing to a number of external and
firmsare unableto raisenewequity . internal factors, viability of airline
(c) Exit route needs to be eased so that operationsinIndiahascomeunderstress .
promoters can sell equity positions (a) A high operating cost environment
after construction, passing on all owing to high and rising cost of
benefitsandresponsibilitiestoentities aviation turbine fuel (ATF) coupled
thatstepin. with rupee depreciation is making
(d) Promoters can then use the equity operations unviable for carriers in
thusreleasedfor newprojects. India.
(e) Steps are also needed to up-scale (b) The Expert Report of Nathan
projectsinPPPmodeforachievingthe Economic Consulting India Private
targetsenvisagedforthedevelopment Ltd. (Nathan India) which went into
of roadsin theTwelfth Plan. the question of pricing and the tax

--- PAGE 316 ---
9.38 i IndianEconomy
regimegoverningATFconcludedthat through non-GBSsourcesand nearly
ATF prices in India are significantly 20 per cent through private- sector
higher (at least 40 per cent) than in investment.
competinghubsin theregionsuchas (c) There is a need to draw up clear
Singapore, HongKongand Dubai. strategies to generate resources by
(c) Therefore, thereis need to rationalise identifying segments where Indian
the tax regime particularly value Railways can adopt a low- cost policy
added tax on ATF which is in the by playing on volumes and taking
—
range of 20 30 per cent in most of advantage of economies of scale
thestates . and segments where it can adopt a
(d) The Ministry of Civil Aviation is differentiationapproachbyproviding
of the view that ATF should be high-quality services and command
included under the declared goods premium prices.
categoryunder therelevant provision (ix) The Twelfth Plan document, a GDP
of theCentralSalesTaxActso that a growth rate of about 8 per cent requires
uniformlevyof3percentisachieved. agrowth rateof about6 per cent in total
(e) Equally important is the need for a energyusefromallsources:
transparentpricingregimeforATFin (a) Unfortunately, the capacity of the
India.A high tax regime for aviation economy to expand domestic energy
ingeneral,andATFinparticular,will supplies to meet this demand is
reduce the wider economic benefits severelylimited.
availablefrom aviation, resultingin a (b) Thecountryisnotwell-endowedwith
negativeimpacton economicgrowth energyresources,exceptcoal,and the
and overall government revenue existence of policy distortions makes
bases.
management of demand and supply
(viii) The Railways is another urgent priority moredifficult.
for theTwelfth Plan: (c) Accordingly, the short-run action
(a) Capacity in railways has lagged far needed to remove impediments
behind what is needed, especially to implementation of projects in
giventherequirementofshiftingfrom infrastructure, especially in the area
road transport to rail in the interests of energy, includes ensuring fuel
of improving energy efficiency supply to power stations, financial
and reducing carbon footprints in restructuringof Discoms, and clarity
development. in termsof the NELP.
(b) The funding pattern of the (d) At the same time, the long- term
Twelfth Plan clearly shows that the strategy should focus on issues like
modernisation of Indian Railways coal production, petroleum price
cannot be achieved by simply distortion, natural gas pricing,
relying on GBS (Gross Budgetary and effective management of the
Support) as about 62 per cent of the urbanisation process.
resourceswould have to begenerated

--- PAGE 317 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie > 9.39
|
BOOSTING PUBLIC INVESTMENT
around7to8 percentofGDPinthelast
four years (2010-14).
India is faced with ‘the balance sheet syndrome (iii) Even if some of these problems were
with Indian characteristics’ creating a web of solved, the PPP model at least in
difficult challenges that could hold back private infrastructurewillneedtobere-fashioned
investment. Private investment must remain the tobecomemoreviablegoingforward(the
primary engine of long-run growth. But in the institutionalchallenge) .
interim, to revivegrowth and to deepen physical (iv) Sinceasignificantportionofinfrastructure
connectivity, public investment, especiallyin the was financed by the banking system,
railways, will haveanimportant roleto play. especially the public sector banks, their
Aslew of economic reforms activated by the balance sheets have deteriorated.66 For
newcentralgovernmenthasledtoapartialrevival example,thesumofnon-performingand
of investor sentiment. Tentative signs that the stressed assets has risen sharply, and for
worstisoverareevident,forexample,indatathat the PSBs they account for over 12 per
shows that the rate of stalled projects has begun cent of total assets . Uncertainty about
to decline and that the rate of their revival is accountingandvaluation,andindeedthe
moving up.But increasingcapitalflowsareyet to historyof bankingdifficultiesacrosstime
translateintoadurablepick-upofrealinvestment, andspace,counselinfavorofover-rather
especially in the private sector . This owes to at thanunder-recognisingtheseverityofthe
leastfiveinterrelatedfactors that lead to what the problem.When banks’balancesheetsare
Mid-Year Economic Analysis 2014-15 called the stressed theyarelessableto lend, leading
‘balancesheetsyndromewithIndiancharacteristics’: to reduced credit for the private sector
(i) Under the pressuresof weak profitability (thefinancingchallenge) .67
and over-indebtedness, the Indian (v) InapeculiarlyIndiantwist,thisfinancing
corporatesector islimitedin itsabilityto problem is aggravated by generalised
invest going forward (the flow challenge) . risk-aversion (the challenge of inertial
One key indicator of profitability — the decision-making) . For the public sector
interest cover ratio (ICR), which if less banks in particular, which are exposed
thanoneimpliesfirms’cashflowsarenot to governmental accountability and
—
sufficient to pay their interest costs has oversight, lendingin asituation of NPAs
also worsened in recent years. Further, isnoteasybecauseofagenericproblemof
the debt-equity ratios of the top 500 caution, afflicting bureaucratic decision ¬
non-financial firms have been steadily making.
increasing,andtheirlevelnowisamongst
thehighestin theemergingeconomies. STEPSANDSUGGESTIONS
—
(ii) Weakinstitutions relatingto bankruptcy TheEconomicSurvey2014 15highlightsthefiner
means that the over-indebtedness pointsoftheinfrastructuresectorin thefollwoing
problem cannot be easily resolved (the way:
stockand‘difficulty-of-exit’challenge) . This
(a) Actions being undertaken by the
is reflected in the persistence of stalled government to enhance the supply of
projects, which have been consistently criticalinputssuchascoalandgas,aswell

--- PAGE 318 ---
9.40 i IndianEconomy
asregulatoryreform,willalleviatesomeof Therefore, as emphasized in the Mid
theabove-given constraints, especiallyin Year Economic Analysis 2014-15, it
the publicsector where the data identify seems imperative to consider thecasefor
them as being regulatory in character revivingtargeted public investment as
(clearancesandlandacquisition) . an engineofgrowth in theshort run not
(b) Steps are being taken to address the tosubstituteforprivateinvestmentbutto
institutionalproblem,bycreatingabetter
complementitandindeedtocrowditin.
frameworkforPPPsandforinfrastructure (e) Public sector implementation capacity
investmentingeneral.TheRBIismaking in India is variable. But analysissuggests
effortstoget banksto recognisetheir bad thattheIndianRailwayscouldbethenext
loan problems, and address them. But locomotive of growth. Greater public
the impact of these initiatives has so far investment in the railways would boost
beenlimited.Thestockofstalledprojects aggregategrowthandthecompetitiveness
remains extraordinarily high; firm ofIndianmanufacturingsubstantially.In
profitability, especiallyfor firms working part, these large gains derive from the
in theinfrastructuresector, remains low. current massive under-investment in the
So, questions on the pace and strength railways. For example, China and India
of recovery of private sector investment had similar network capacities until the
remainopen. mid-1990, but becauseit investedeleven
(c) If the weakness of private investment times as much as India in per-capita
offers one negative or indirect rationale terms, China’s capacity and efficiency
forincreased publicinvestment,thereare
havesurged.
also more affirmative rationales. India’s In contrast, stagnant investment has led to
recent PPP experience has demonstrated congestion, strained capacity, poorservices, weak
that given weak institutions, the private financialhealth,anddeterioratingcompetitiveness
sector taking on project implementation of logistics-intensive sectors, typically
risks involves costs (delays in land manufacturing. Congestion has effectively led to
acquisition,environmentalclearances,and the railways ceding a significant share in freight
variabilityofinputsupplies,etc . ) .In some traffic to the roads sector . This is not a welcome
sectors, the public sector may be better developmentsincerail transport is typicallymore
placedto absorbsomeof theserisks. costandenergyefficient.Theprofitsgenerated by
(d) Again, there continue to remain areas of freight services have cross-subsidised passengers
infrastructure — rural roads and railways services and Indian freight rates (PPP adjusted)
thatprovidebasicphysicalconnectivity — remainamongthehighestin theworld.
in which private investment will be The physical connectivity of the Indian
under-supplied. One irony is that while population needs strengthening which has
financial and digital connectivity are potential to bring enormous benefits in terms of
surgingahead,basicphysicalconnectivity higher standards of living, greater opportunities,
appearsto lagbehind. andincreased potentialfor human fulfillment.

--- PAGE 319 ---
C H A P T E R
-
mi
I
, k
V
I
I
SERVICE SECTOR
*
l
.
/
=> Introduction
=> InternationalComparison
^ India’sServicesSector
=> WTO Negotiations
India's dynamic services sector has
=> Bilateral Agreements grown rapidly in the last decade with
< => Services Employment almost 72.4 per cent of the growth in
Services Pertormance India’s GDP in 2014-15 comingfrom
=> RestrictionsAnd Regulations this sector . Unlike other developing
< => The Need of Reforms economies, the Indian growth story has
been led by services-sector growth which
is now indouble digits*
*EconomicSurvey2014-15,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi,Vol.2,p.106 .

--- PAGE 320 ---
10.2 < IndianEconomy
| INTRODUCTION The Survey has gone to quote several empirical
studies of recent times linking both services
India’sservicessector has not onlyoutperformed and manufacturing sectors to a great many real
—
othersectors of the Indian economy, but hasalso issues potential to create employment, need of
played an important role in India’s integration skilled and unskilled labour force, formality anf
with world trade and capital markets. India’s informality of the sector, etc . For this, the idea
liberalisation of services has been a challenging of ‘Make in India’ has acclaimed timely action
process in several sub- sectors, but clearly those from the government . Again, the importance of
services where integration through trade and expanding the Railways and enhancing public
FDI has gone further are also the ones that have investment in it have also been pointed out .2
exhibited more rapid growth along with positive These findings are also in line with several other
spilloverson therest of theeconomy. studiesof therecent times.3
There is, however, a concern1 about the
|
sustainability of a services-led growth process INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON
which largely stems from exports of skill-based
services. The prevailing view is that for services The features4 of the services sector, at the global
level, have been goingfor a kind ofshift in more
growth to besustained, thesector cannot remain
thanoveronedecade.Itscontributionincountries
dependent on external demand. It must also be
GDP,employment,tradetogether withinareaof
driven by internal demand. More broad-based —
attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) all
growth within the services is also required to
ensure balanced, equitable and employment- have gone for mixed changes.We will try to see
them briefly:
oriented growth, with backward and forward
linkagesto therestoftheeconomy.In thisregard WorldServicesGDPsTheservicessectorscenario
furtherinfrastructuraland regulatoryreformsand in recent yearshas beenasgiven below:
FDIliberalisationinservicescanhelpdiversifythe (cid:127) In 2013, in the US$ 73.6 trillion world
sources of growth withing India’s services sector GDP, the share of services improved
and providetherequired momentum . marginallyto 66.0 per cent whilegrowth
In recentyears, therehas beenadebatein the ratedeceleratedmarginallyto2.1percent
countryregardingtheselectionofthesectorwhich over 2012 (taken atconstant prices).
can lead the growth process in the country .This (cid:127) In the last twelve years, the share of
debate originated from the fact that the services services in world GDP has declined by
sector contributed over 62 per cent in thedecade 2.8 percentagepoints (pp).
2001 — 12. But the debate has been somewhat (cid:127) TheUSranksfirstinservicesGDPaswell
solved by the newly published Economic Survey asinoverallGDP, withChinaandJapan
2014 — 15 in favour of the manufacturing sector . adistantsecondand third.
1. Rupa Chanda,'Services - ledGrowth' in Kaushik Basu and Annemie Maertens(eds.)TheNewOxfordCompanionto
EconomicsinIndia,Vol.II,OxfordUniversityPress,N.Delhi,2012,pp.624 - 632.
2. FordetaileddescriptiontheEconomicSurvey2014 - 15,Vol.1maybeconsulted,though,thethemeoftheanalysishas
beenincludedinthisbookitself,intheChapter- 9titled'IndustryandInfrastructure'.
3. IndiaDevelopmentReport2012 - 13,OxfordUniversityPress,N.Delhi,2013,pp.116 - 131.
-
4. UNNationalAccountsStatistics2014;ILOandWTODatabasefor2014.

--- PAGE 321 ---
ServiceSector I 10.3
(cid:127) Among the world’s top 15 countries in World Services Trade: The situation of global
terms of GDP, India ranked 10th in tradeinservicesareasgiven below:
terms of overall GDP and 11th in terms (cid:127) During 2001-13 the CAGR of world
ofservicesGDPin 2013. commercial services exports was 10 per
(cid:127) Among the top 15 nations, in the period cent, with Indiaat thetopamongthetop
—
2001 13, maximum increase in services fifteen largesteconomiesat 20.1 per cent
sharetoGDPwasrecorded bySpain (8.6 followed byChinaat16.5 per cent .
pp)followedbyIndia(5.7pp)andChina (cid:127) In 2013, the US$ 4.6 trillion world
(5.6 pp). commercial services exports grew by 5.6
(cid:127) During 2001 — 13, with a compound per cent . Services exports of the United
annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8.7 per States, the largest exporter of commercial
cent,Indiahadthesecondfastestgrowing services, grew by 5 per cent while they
services sector, just below China’s 10.7 deceleratedforChina to7.5 per centand
per cent . India to 3.6 per cent due to decline in
(cid:127) Among the 15 countries, only China’s exportsoftransportservicesby3percent
share of services in its total GDP is less in bothcountries.
than 50 per cent . (cid:127) Services imports of India fell by 2.7 per
World Services Employment: As per the centandChina’sgrew by17.6 per cent .
InternationalLabourOrganization’s(ILO)Global FDI in World Services Sector: The FDI in
—
EmploymentTrends2014 servicesremainedsubdued:
(cid:127) Services accounted for more than half of (cid:127) In2014,globalFDIinflowsdeclinedby8
total global employment growth of 1.4 per cent to an estimated US$1.3 trillion,
per cent in 2013over2012. duetothefragilityoftheglobaleconomy,
(cid:127) The share of services in world income policy uncertainty, and geopolitical risks,
declined from 68.8 per cent in 2001 to as per the United Nations Conference on
66 per cent in 2013, while its share in TradeandDevelopment(UNCTAD) .
employmentincreasedfrom39.1percent (cid:127) China becametheworld’slargestrecipient
to 45.1percent . of FDI, with an increase of 3 per cent
(cid:127) Forthetop15countries,exceptIndiaand driven byFDIin theservicessectorwhile
China, the shares of both services GDP FDI in manufacturingfell.
and services employment are high and (cid:127) India’s FDI rose by around 26 per cent
closeto eachother. to an estimated US$ 35 billion also due
(cid:127) India’s services sector has a high share to inflows in the top services sector (as
in income and relatively low share in corroborated bythe Indiandata).
employment, while in China, the shares
|
of both services income and services
INDIA'SSERVICESSECTOR
employment are relatively low. But in
Services in India are emerging as a prominent
boththesecountries,thesharesofservices
sector in terms of contribution to national and
in both GDP and employment have
increased in thelast twelveyears. s e t m at p e l s o ’ y i m nc e o n m t. es T , h t e rad E e co fl n o o w m s i , c F S D u I rve in y flo 2 w 0 s 1 , 4 — an 1 d 5

--- PAGE 322 ---
10.4 < IndianEconomy
—
provides the latest information about India’s related services at 8.4 per cent in 2014
servicessector in thefollowingway: 15 thoughit waslower than the11.1per
centgrowthin 2013 — 14.
GDPANDGCF
-
STATEWISECOMPARISON
As per the new method of India’s National
AccountsStatistics, theservicessector accounting Theservicessectoristhedominantsectorin most
for 51.3 per cent of India’s gross value added states of India with a share of more than 40 per
—
(GVA) at basic prices (current prices) in 2013 cent in thegrossstate domestic product (GSDP)
—
14, grew by 9.1 per cent compared to 6.6 per in 2013 14 except for Arunachal Pradesh and
cent total GVA growth and 6.9 per cent GDP Sikkim. Chandigarh is at the top with a share of
growth at market prices. Including construction, 88.4 per cent followed by Delhi with 87.7 per
a borderline service, the services share is 59.6 cent .Specialfeaturesareasgiven below:
per cent and growth is 8.1 per cent . Some other (cid:127) Themajorservicesinmostofthestateswith
featureshavebeenasgiven below: highshareare:trade,hotels,andrestaurants
(cid:127) The services sector has the highest share followed by real estate, ownership of
(54.6 per cent) in the gross capital dwellingsandbusinessservices.
formation (GCF) of in 2013-14.This is (cid:127) Bankingand insurance has an important
owingtotheGCFinrealestate,ownership shareonlyinafewstates/unionterritories
of dwelling and professional services at (UT) like Delhi, Maharashtra, and
20.1 percent, thoughthesharehasfallen Chandigarh.
in the last two years, followed by trade (cid:127) As per thelatest data, in 2013-14, Bihar
and repair services (10.6 per cent) and
hadthehighestservicesgrowthof17.3per
public administration and defence (10.6
centandUttarkhandthelowestof5.5per
per cent) where there is improvement in
cent
.Biharhasbeenconsistentlyshowing
shares.
double-digitgrowthin theservicessector
(cid:127) The growth rate of services GCF at 3.1 inthelastfiveyearsduetohighgrowthin
per cent has also been higher than the trade, hotels,and restaurants .
totalGCFgrowth of1.4 per cent .Infact,
the positive GCF growth in services FDIINSERVICESSECTOR
led to positive growth in total GCF as There is some ambiguity in classifying FDI
GCF growth in agriculture and industry
— — in different activities under the services sector
was negative at 0.3 per cent and 0.6 continues. The Economic Survey 2014 — 15 puts
per cent, respectively. GCF growth in
financialand non-financialservices,construction,
—
m
5
a
.
n
4
u
p
f
e
a
r
ct
c
u
e
r
n
in
t .
gwaseven morenegativeat
s te o l f e tw co a m re m ,a u n n d ic h a o t t i e o l n s s a , nd co to m ur p i u sm ter un h d a e r r d t w he ar s e erv a ic n e d s
(cid:127) As per the Advance Estimates (AE) in sector (though it could includesome non-service
—
2014 15, growth of the services sector elements).Thus theshareof FDI in services have
accelerated further to 10.6 per cent as been asgiven below:
comparedto 9.1per centin 2013 — 14. (cid:127) 43.7per centshareduring2000-14.
(cid:127) There was also good growth in trade,
(cid:127) Theshareincreasesto53.8percentifsome
hotels, transport, communication, and
other services or service-related sectors

--- PAGE 323 ---
ServiceSector I 10.5
— —
are included trading, information (cid:127) Composition of services exports
and broadcasting, construction computer services (45.8 per cent share);
(infrastructure) activities, consultancy other business services (18.8 per cent
services, hospital and diagnostic centres, share) including professional and
ports, agriculture services, education, air consultingservices (10.2 per cent share),
transport includingair freight, and retail technical and trade-related services (7.8
tradingareincluded. per cent share) and R & D services (0.8
(cid:127) During 2014-15 the FDI inflows to per cent share); travel (11.8 per cent
services was estimated to grow by over share); transport (11.5 per cent share);
105 per cent compared to around 22 per and financial, insurance and pension
centgrowthin overall FDI inflows. services (5.8 per centshare).
(cid:127) During 2014 — 15, the top five services There are many market access barriers and
attracting FDI has been (in descending domestic regulations in India’s services sector
order) — telecommunications, hotel and (as highlighted by the Economic Survey 2012 — 13
tourism, financial and non-financial and 2013 — 14) . Given the potential of India’s
services,construction. servicessector, removal of manyof these barriers,
both domestically and internationally, is of vital
INDIASSERVICESTRADE importance. Services sector negotiations both
India’s services trade has been growing during at multilateral and bilateral/regional levels are,
the reform period.The main features of it are as therefore, of special significance to India. Two
follows:
recentdevelopmentsin India’sexportssector are:
(cid:127) India has 3.2 per cent share in global
(i) the rising foreign value added content,
and
services exports in 2013 (it was 1.2 per
cent in 2000). (ii) servicesvalueaddedcontent .
(cid:127) India ranks 6th in the world among the As per the Organisation for Economic
leadingservicesexportersin 2013. Cooperation and Development (OECD) TiVA
(tradein valueadded) data,domesticvalueadded
(cid:127) Services export growth rate was 3.7 per
cent duirng first half of 2014-15. After content in India’s gross exports was 78 per cent
in 2009, a little above the OECD average (76
being at a high of 31.2 per cent during
2002 — 09, it started declining in wake of per cent ), but 12 per cent lower than in 1995,
reflectingincreasingfragmentation of production
the global financial crisis, fell to 3.4 per
— andintegrationwithglobalvaluechains.
cent in 2011 13 and improved to 4 per
cent by2013-14. India is fifthhighestin terms ofservices value
(cid:127) Services trade has been a majorsourceof added content in its exports after Hong Kong,
Iceland, Singapore, and EU-27. This has been
financing India’s trade deficit in recent
years. Surplus on account of services
driven byincreasingdirectexportsofservicesand
exports financed 49.4 per cent and 49.3
morethan doublingofforeignservicescontentof
per cent of merchandise trade deficit exports also indicating greater integration with
globalvaluechains.
in 2013-14 and first half of 2014-15,
respectively. A study for the Ministry of Finance,
Government of India (Gol) by Indian Council

--- PAGE 324 ---
10.6 I IndianEconomy
forResearchonInternationalEconomicRelations council in February 2015, discussions
—
(ICRIER), quoted bythe EconomicSurvey2014 were held to operationalise the Bali
15,alsoshows risingshareofforeign valueadded decision on LDCserviceswaiver.
in India’sexports . India has been a generous partner for LDCs
and offered market access for contractualservices
|
WTO NEGOTIATIONS suppliers and independent professionals. An
exclusive quota of 250, only for tourist guides
From developing countries point of view,
from LDCs was offered. India has also agreed to
the provisions of the WTO have been quite
waive visa feefor LDC applicantsseeking Indian
controversial. There has been repeated deadlocks
businessoremploymentvisas.
in the negotiations of the tade body at almost
all of its Ministerial Conferences. Like every |
BILATERALAGREEMENTS
country, India has also been actively protecting
and promoting its trade interets on the platform India has been promoting its global economic
of the WTO. India’s stand at the WTO, as per interest with an effective economic diplomacy,
the latest information from the Gol, has been as speciallyinthereformperiod.Theprocessgotpace
given below: in the last decade. As per the latest informations
(i) The post Bali work programme has to fromtheGol,India’sglobaltiesandarrangements
be within the mandate of the Doha to promotetradeareasgiven below:
Development Agenda (DDA) and (i) India has signed Comprehensive Bilateral
valuable milestones such as the Annex Agreements(CBA)with theGovernments
C on ‘Services’ of the Hong Kong of Singapore, South Korea, Japan, and
MinisterialDeclaration (HKMD),which Malaysia.AFreeTradeAgreement(FTA)
contains the roadmap for conclusion of in services and investment was signed
theDoha Round. with theAssociation ofSouth EastAsian
(ii) Indiadoesnotsupportanycherrypicking Nations (ASEAN) inSeptember 2014.
of issues or sectors of interest to certain (ii) India has joined the Regional
economiesinthenameofconcludingthe Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Doha Round and the level of ambition (RCEP) plurilateral negotiations and is
acrossthenegotiatingpillarsincludingin continuously engaged in the bilateral
serviceswouldbegovernedbyagriculture.
FTA negotiations including Trade in
(iii) Since development is the central theme Services with Canada, Israel, Thailand,
of the Doha negotiations, commitments the European Free Trade Association
in areas of export interest to developing (EFTA),Australia,NewZealand,andthe
countries and least developed countries EU.
(LDCs) is crucial for the success of Negotiations with Canada and Australia
the round. In the past, India has been have not progressed much and modalitiesfor the
dismayed by the negligible progress in negotiationsarestillbeingdiscussed.Negotiations
Mode4offers.
with Thailand are at an advanced stage and with
(iv) Preferentialtreatmentfor the LDCs inthe EFTAaremoreorlessover.
WorldTradeOrganization(WTO):Atthe Indiaisalsoengagedinbilateraltradedialogues
HighLevelMeetingoftheWTOservices with the US under the India — US Trade Policy

--- PAGE 325 ---
ServiceSector t 10.7
Forum (TPF), with Australia under the India- |
SERVICES PERFORMANCE
Australia Joint Ministerial Commission (JMC),
—
with China under the India China Working- Someavailableindicators of the differentservices
Group on Services, and with Brazil under the in India for 2014 — 15 show reasonably good
—
India Brazil Trade Monitoring Mechanism performance of tourism, telecom, aviation, and
(TMM). railways. Estimates of the Centre for Monitoring
Indian Economy (CMIE) derived from limited
|
SERVICES EMPLOYMENT firm-level data indicates improved performance
in retail trading, aviation, telecom and transport
The pattern of the sectoral share of employment logistics.OtherestimatesliketheHSBC’sservices
has changed over the last two decades with the
PMI (Purchasing Managers Index) data indicate
share of agriculture falling and of industry and —
services rising steadily. As per the latest data improvement in services sector growth in 2014
provided by the Economic Survey 2014 — 15, the 15asthereadingwasabove50inallmonthssince
May2014andit wasat inJanuary2015.
situation ofemployment in theservicessector are
asgiven below: The performance of the services sector in
recent years has been reasonably good, despite
(cid:127) Servicesshar
—
ein employmentat 28.5per
thedifficult internationaland domesticsituation.
centin2011 12ishigherthaninindustry
However, the performance of different sectors
at 24.4per cent: varied.Abriefdescriptionisgivenbelowaboutthe
(cid:127) Among the
—
different s
—
ervices sectors,
performanceof themajorservicesin thecountry:
from 1993 94 to 2011 12, there was
continuous increase in employment
Tourism:As per theWorld Travel and Tourism
Council (WTTC), the US$ 7 trillion travel and
share in trade, hotels, and restaurants;
transport, storage, and communication; tourism sector’s contribution to world GDP
and financial, insurance, real estate and increased in 2013 to 9.5 per cent, creating 4.7
businessservices.
millionnewjobs.Thisresultedintotalemployment
in thissector of nearly266 million, that isonein
(cid:127) Employment share in community,
eleven jobs in the world.Thissector is estimated
social, and personal services has fallen
— togrow by4.3 per cent in 2014and generate6.5
continuously except in 2011 12 whe — n million new jobs.
therewasan increasecompared to2009
10and2004-05. The latest World Tourism Barometer of the
United Nation’s World Tourism Organization
(cid:127) Employment elasticity has increased for
— (UNWTO) also shows that international tourist
bothservicesand industryin 2009 10 to
— — — arrivalsreached1.1billionin2014,a4.7percent
2011 12comparedto2004 05to2009
increase over the previous year and for 2015 the
10, though industryhad relativelyhigher
employmentelasticity.
forecastisan increaseof3to 4percent .
France has the highest share in international
(cid:127) Among services, employment elasticity
touristarrivals(ITAs)and theUSininternational
was the highest in ‘financial, insurance,
tourism receipts (ITRs) in 2013.India’ssharein
real estate and business services’, and
‘transport,storage,and communication’.
c
IT
en
A
t
s
i
i
n
sa
Fr
p
a
a
n
l
c
tr
e
y
a
0
n
.
d
6
6
p
.
e
4
r
p
ce
er
nt
c
c
e
o
n
m
t i
p
n
ar
t
e
h
d
e
t
U
o
S
7
.
.8
Ev
p
e
e
n
r

--- PAGE 326 ---
10.8 I IndianEconomy
Vietnam and Indonesia have higher shares than Around 95 per cent of India’s trade by volume
India.However,in termsofITRs, India’sshareat and 68 per cent in terms of value is transported
1.5 per cent is better than those of Vietnam and by sea. By December 2014, India had a fleet
Indonesia though it iswaybelowtheshareof the strength of 1,209 ships with gross tonnage (GT)
USat14.5 per cent . of 10.3 million, with the public- sector Shipping
In India’sNationalAccountsStatistics(NAS), Corporation of India (SCI) having the largest
there is no separate heading for tourism. Some shareof around 31 per cent .Of this, around358
tourism activities like travel agent, tour operator, shipswith9.1millionGTcatertoIndia’soverseas
and other reservation activities are a part of the tradeand therest to coastaltrade.
broadcategoryadministrativeandsupportservice Despite having one of the largest merchant
activitiesand other professionalactivities. shipping fleets among developing countries,
As per theSecond TourismSatelliteAccount India’s share in total world dead weight tonnage
ofIndia(TSA),thecontributionoftourismtototal (DWT) is only 1.1 per cent . In 2013, as per
GDP during 2012-13 was6.9 per cent (3.7 per UNCTAD, India with 10.7 million twenty-
centdirectand3.1 per cent indirect) and to total foot equivalent units of container (TEUs) and a
employment12.4percent(5.3percentdirectand world share of 1.6 per cent ranked eighth among
7.0percentindirect).Afterpoorforeignexchange developing countries in terms of container ship
earnings (FEE) growth in dollar terms at 4.0 per
operations.
cent,despitegrowingforeigntouristarrivalsat5.9 India continues to be a leading ship breaking
percent,in 2013,therewasan increaseingrowth destination. It topped the list of ship recycling
of both foreign tourist arrivals (7.1 per cent) and countries in 2014 with a world share of 32 per
FEEs (6.6 per cent) in 2014. cent, scrapping 234ships. India supplied 60,000
In Union Budget 2014 — 15, the government crew(freshseamen) and44,500officersin 2014.
announcedseveralmeasuresforboostingtourism, There are certain concerns in the shipping
suchas: sectorofIndia:
(i) Streamlining of some service tax (i) It has been plagued by economic
bottlenecks hardships since 2008. In 2014, all
(ii) Focused effort for the development of a segments of shipping saw intermittent
globalscale Buddhistcircuit spikes, but there was no secular uptrend
inanyofthem.
(iii) Cleaning of the Ganga together with
creation of world class amenities to (ii) Internationally, deliveries of new ships
enhance the spiritual experience along areslated in 2015, which could dampen
theGanga. shippingfreight rateseven more.
(v) Easingof the Indian tourism visa regime (iii) The Baltic Dry Index, the barometer of
through the execution of tourist visa merchandise trade as well as shipping
on arrival enabled by electronic travel services, which had peaked to 11,793
authorisation (ETA) for forty-three on May 20, 2008 has been in the lower
countries will provide a major boost to rangesince then and is in the red at 530
tourism. byFebruary2015.
Shipping:Shipping is an important indicator of
(iv) Therehasalso beenasharpdeclinein the
bothcommodityandservicestradeofanycountry . share of Indian ships in the carriage of

--- PAGE 327 ---
ServiceSector I 10.9
India’s overseas trade from about 40 per The three ports-related performance
cent in the late 1980s to 9.1 per cent in indicators showed continued improvement with
2012-13.TheexistingIndianfleetisalso the average turnaround time and average pre
¬
ageing, with the average age increasing berthing detention time falling to 2.1 days and
from 13 years in 1999 to 17.7 by 2014 0.2 day respectively and the average output per
(43.1percentofthefleet isover20years ship berth day improving to 14,326 tonnes in
old and 10.7 per cent in the 16 — 19 age 2014 — 15 (April-November). The improvement
group). Thus, there is urgent need to in turnaround time and pre-berthing detention
increaseIndia’sshippingfleet. time could partly be due to mechanisation and
The Gol, recognising the need to encourage systemic improvements in ports and partly to
the growth of Indian tonnage, has taken several lower volume handled in some ports on account
policyinitiativesin recentyears: of global downturn. However, the improvement
(i) Indian shipping companies allowed to
inaverageoutputpershipberthdayindicatesthat
acquireshipsabroadandflagthemin the the performance parameters of Indian ports are
alsoimproving
countryof theirconvenience;
(ii) Accesstocheaperfinanceabroadallowed; IT and ITeS: Software development and
information technology enabled services (ITeS)
(iii) Exemption from customs and central
excisedutyleviableon bunker fuels used including business process management (BPM),
software engineering R&D services and product
in Indianflagvesselsfortransportationof
export and import items and on empty development has emerged as one of the most
containers between two or more portsin dynamicand vibrant sectors in India’s economy.
India;and
It hasgot aspecial position in theeconomy:
(iv) Elimination of registration requirement (cid:127) It is the single largest contributor to
of ship repair units (SRUs) with the services exports . As per AT Kearney’s
DirectorGeneralofShipping.
GlobalServicesLocationIndex2014,India
rankedfirstand remainsthepre-eminent
Port Services: The cargo traffic of Indian ports destination for offshore services, with
increased by 4.5 per cent to 975.7 million excellencein IT, BPO,andvoiceservices.
—
tonnesin 2013 14and by6.8 per cent in (April-
December) 2014-15. In the MaritimeAgenda, a (cid:127) The sector continues to be one of the
largest employersin thecountry, directly
targetof3,130milliontonnes(MT) portcapacity
employing nearly 3.5 million people as
has been set for the year 2020 with around Rs.
per the National Association of Software
2,96,000croreinvestment.Morethan 50percent
andServiceCompanies (NASSCOM).
of this capacityis to be created in the non-major
. (cid:127) AspertheCentralStatisticsOffice(CSO),
ports
computerandrelatedserviceswithashare
FDIupto100percentunderautomaticroute
of 3.3 per cent in India’s GDP grew by
is permittedfor construction and maintenanceof
ports . In 2013 — 14, 16 public private partnership 14.4per cent in 2013-14.
As per NASSCOM’s estimate the revenueof
(PPP) projectswereawardedforcapacityaddition
of 159.7 MT in the major ports comprising
the IT-BPM industr
—
yat US$119 billion grew by
construction of berths and terminals and 12 per cent in 2014 15, while theexport market
mechanisationofexistingberths.

--- PAGE 328 ---
10.10 < IndianEconomy
at US$ 98 billion grew by12.3 per cent owr the R&D Services:The Research and Development
previousyear. (R&D) sector has been growing consistently in
The BPM sector is being driven by greater double digits in the last few years with growth at
automation, expanding omnichannel presence, 20.8 per cent in 2012 — 13. Professional,scientific
andapplicationofanalyticsacrosstheentirevalue and technical activities including R&D grew by
chain. India is the fourth largest start -up hub in 14.0 per cent in 2013 — 14.
theworldwithover3100start -upsinthecountry . As per the Global R&D Service Providers
(cid:127) ThedomesticIT-BPMmarketisestimated (GSPR) Rating 2014, a report by Zinnov
at US$ 20.9 billion in 2014 — 13, with a Management Consulting, India’s R&D
growthof10percent . globalisation and services market isset to double
(cid:127) Software products and services revenues by 2020 to US$ 38 billion. The study estimates
— — the overall addressable R&D globalisation and
for 2015 16 is projected to grow at 12
14percent to reachUS$133-136billion
servicesopportunityatUS$170billionasof2014.
CurrentlyonlyUS$55billionofthisopportunity
as per NASSCOM. Export revenues are
isaddressedglobally.India’sshareoftheaddressed
projectedtogrow by12 to 14per cent to
— marketis33percentwithin-houseR&Dcentres
reach US$110 112 billionanddomestic
— contributingUS$11.3billionworthofservicesto
2 re 3 v — e 2 n 4 ue b s il b li y o 1 n 0 du 1 r 5 in p g e 2 r 0 c 1 en 5 t — 1 to 6. reachUS$ their parentcompanies.
As per the Global Competitiveness Report
In the Union Budget 2014-15, recognizing
2014-15:
the need for greater penetration of IT services
(cid:127) India’s capacity for innovation has been
domestically, the Digital India programme
was launched. This is an ambitious umbrella
lowerthanthatofmanycountrieslikethe
USA, UK, South Korea, and even other
programmeto prepareIndiafor knowledge-based
transformation.Thiswouldensure — BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India,
China,andSouthAfrica) except Russia.
(i) Broadbandconnectivityat villagelevel,
(cid:127) In quality of scientific research
(ii) Improved access to services through IT- institutions, India scores lower than
enabled platforms, China, Brazil, and South Africa. This is
(iii) Greater transparency in government also exhibited through its poor score on
processes,and university — industry collaboration on
(iv) Increased indigenous production of IT R&Dascompared tosomeother BRICS
hardwareandsoftware. nationslikeChinaandSouthAfrica.
One of the important components of this (cid:127) In terms of patents granted per million
programme is people’s empowerment through population, India fares badly compared
availabilityof entitlements on thecloud, coupled to other BRICScountries.
with Aadhaar Authentification Platform. A (cid:127) In terms of company spending on R &
National Rural Internet and Technology Mission D also India is far below China. Only
(NRITM)for services in villages and schools and in terms of availability of scientists and
E-Krantiforgovernmentservicedeliveryareother engineers, India scores better or is equal
initiatives.Recognising theimportanceof IT, the to other BRICScountries.
government’sMakeinIndiamissionhasincluded ConsultancyServices: Consultancy services
ITandBPMamongthetwenty-fivefocussectors .
areemergingasoneofthefastestgrowingservices

--- PAGE 329 ---
ServiceSector I 10.11
in Indiacuttingacrossdifferentsectorswithsome housing shortage is 18.8 million units of
overlapping.AccordingtoPlunkettResearch,global which 95.6 per cent is in economically
consulting industry revenues (including human weaker sections (EWS)/low income
resources), IT,strategy,operations, management, group (LIG) segments and requires huge
and business advisory services) increased to an financialinvestmentto overcome.
estimated $431 billion in 2014 compared to (cid:127) Institutionalcreditforhousinginvestment
US$413 billion duringthe previous year.India’s iswellbelowthatincountrieslikeChina,
outsourcing and consulting industryis estimated Thailand, and Malaysia though growing
atUS$86.4billionin2014,accountingforalmost at a CAGR of about 19 per cent per
20percentofglobalconsultingindustryrevenue, annum.
andisprojectedtoreachUS$99.0billionin2015.
(cid:127) Procedural delay is another major
India’s emergence as one of the fastest constraint in this sector . According to
growingconsultancymarketsworldwideislargely the World Bank’s Doing Business 2015,
attributable to increased investment activities India ranked 184 (outof189economies)
due to liberalisation of FDI, entry of many new in terms of construction permits,
players into the Indian market and low cost requiring on an average 27 procedures
sourcing. Indian consultants have good expertise to get permits ascompared to an average
particularly in engineering consultancy, which of 14 in South Asia and 12 in OECD
couldbeleveragedtoenhanceconsultancyexports . (OrganizationforEconomicCooperation
Real Estate and Housing: Real estate and and Development) countries.
ownership of dwelling constitute7.8 per cent of Some of the recent policy actions from the
India’sGDP.Bothdomesticandglobalslowdown government to strengthen thesector are as given
affected this sector with growth decelerating 6.0 below:
per cent in 2013-14 and FDI falling to US$703 (i) The amendment in the FDI policy
millionin 2014 (first7months).Mainfeaturesof (2013-14), reducing the minimum floor
thissectorstand asgiven below: area to 20,000 square metre from the
(cid:127) House prices have increased over the earlier 50,000 square mtre and bringing
years in many cities and towns as per down the minimum capital requirement
the National Housing Bank’s RESIDEX to US$ 5 millionfrom US$10 million.
index of residential prices in India. In (ii) Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs)
2014, out of 26 cities, 17 witnessed allowed in theUnion Budget2014-15 .
increase in prices over 2013 with the (iii) In order to encourage savings, the
maximum increase observed in Chennai
deduction limit on housing loan interest
(17 per cent) followed by Ahmedabad forself-occupied propertywas increased
(15 per cent ), while 7saw decline, with to Rs. 2 lakh (from Rs. 1.5 lakh) in the
the maximum fall witnessed in Meerut UnionBudget2014-15 .
—
( 16 per cent ) followed by Chandigarh
( — 8 per cent). (iv) Inordertopushdevelopmentofaffordable
housingandachievethetargetofhousing
(cid:127) The widening gap between demand and
for all by 2022, the RBI relaxed norms
supply of housing units and affordable for issue of long- term bonds by banks
housing finance solutions is a major forfinancingaffordablehousing,without
policyconcernforIndia.Atpresenturban

--- PAGE 330 ---
10.12 < IndianEconomy
thecompulsionofmaintainingCRRand thecomingyears.Majorfeturesof thesectorare:
SLR(2014-15) . (cid:127) With 161 million TV households, India
Internal Trades The trade and repair services istheworld’sthirdlargestTVmarketafter
contributes 11 per cent to India’s GDP and had Chinaand theUSA.
growth rate of 14.3 per cent in 2013 — 14. Trade (cid:127) There are about 826 satellite television
is the major item in this category as theshare of channels, 86 teleports, 243 FM radio
repairservicesinthiscategoryis just6 — 7percent . channels, and 179 community radio
AspertheATKearneysGlobalRetailDevelopment stationsoperatingin India.
Index(GRDI),India’sretailtraderankingslipped (cid:127) India’sbroadcastingdistributionnetwork
further to20thin 2014from 14thin 2013. comprises 6,000 multi — system operators
Theretailsectorwasaffected in 2013byhigh (MSOs), around 60,000 local cable
consumer price inflation, currency fluctuations, operators (LCOs), and 7 direct to home
and strict FDI policies. However, India remains (DTH) operators .
an attractive long- term retail destination for (cid:127) The Government has embarked on
several reasons, including its large population, an ambitious exercise of digitizing its
38.3percentofwhich is below30yearsand31.1 cable network in four phases leading to
per cent of which lives in urban areas with rising completeswitchoffo(AnalogTVservices
disposable incomes. Migration from traditional byDecember2016.
storestomodernretailcontinues,thoughthelatter
(cid:127) Indiaalsohasaliberalised FDIregimefor
accountsfor only8per centof thetotal market.
thebroadcastingsectorwhere26percent
India’s e-commerce market is expected to FDIisallowedincontentand74percent
grow by more than 50 per cent in the next five in various carriage services like DTH,
years. Inventory management, logistics planning, HITS (headend in thesky).
andresourceavailabilityareimportanthurdlesfor
(cid:127) India is emergingas the newfavouriteof
online retail in India. Consumer safeguard being international studios, with 100 per cent
another concern for consumers of e-commerce, FDIpermittedin thefilmsector .Disney,
the government proposes including sufficient Fox, Sony, and Warner Brothers have
provisions in the ongoing amendment to the enteredintocoproductionanddistribution
Consumer ProtectionAct 1986. deals with domestic production houses.
Mediaand EntertainmentServices:The Indian India has co-production treaties with ten
media and entertainment industry comprises countries. During the year 2014 — 15 (till
varioussegments which include television, print, December 2014), the government has
films, radio, music,animation,gamingand visual accorded permission for film shooting in
effects,anddigitaladvertising. India to21foreign production houses.
As per a report byFICCI-KPMG,the Indian
|
RESTRICTIONSAND REGULATIONS
media and entertainment industry grew by 11.8
percentin2013(Rs.918billion)andisprojected
Onemajorissueinservicesisthedomesticbarriers
to grow at a CAGR of 14.2 per cent by 2018. and regulations. Domestic regulations, in strict
Thissector has a share of 1.6 per cent in India’s
total FDI flows. Digital advertising and gaming
WTO terms, include licensing requirements,
licensing procedures, qualification requirements,
are projected to drivethegrowth of thissector in
qualification procedures, and technical standards

--- PAGE 331 ---
ServiceSector t 10.13
but here other restrictions and barriers are also bytheotherstates .
considered. While there are many domestic There is also lack of clarity on the role of
regulations in our major markets, which deny states as facilitators in the landacquisition policy
market access to us and therefore need to be resultingin increasingnumberofcourtlitigations
negotiatedatmultilateralandbilaterallevels,there adding to risk profileof builders/projects thereby
arealsomanydomesticregulationsin Indiawhich restrictinglendersfrom extendingfinancetosuch
hinder thegrowthof thissector . builders/ projects.
Since domestic regulations perform the role There are also restrictions on floor area ratio
of tariffs in regulating services, there is need to (FAR) in many states; and other restrictions
list the domestic regulations in India which need like the application of bye laws/regulations and
to be curbed to help growth of thesector and its its exemptions, e.g., increase in FAR which
exports,whileretainingthosewhichare necessary varies from project to project and is sometimes
forregulatingthesectoratthisstage .Anindicative discriminatory.Obtainingenvironmentclearance
list of some important domestic regulations in isanother major hindrance.
India which need to be examined for suitable
Accountancy Services: While the accountancy
policyreforms5in theservicessectorisasfollows:
professionals were hitherto allowed to operate
Trade & Transport Services: Some constraints either as a partnership firm or as a sole
in these sectors include restrictions on inter ¬ proprietorship firm or in their own name since
state movement of goods which could ease with the Indian regulations do not permit exceeding
the adoption of the model Agriculture Produce 20 professionals under one firm, the emergence
and Marketing Committee (APMC) Act by many of Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) structure
states; the Multimodal Transportation of Goods is likely to address this impediment. However,
Act1993which needsrevision toeasetheexisting the number of statutory audits of companies per
restrictionson transportationanddocumentation partner isrestricted to20.
throughdifferent modesoftransport, particularly
FDI is also not allowed in this sector and
restrictionsintheCustomsAct,whichdonotallow
foreign service providers are not allowed to
seamless movement of goods; and restrictions on undertake statutory audit of companies as per
freemovementofcargobetween InlandContainer the provisions of the laws in India. There are
Depots (ICDs), Container Freight Stations (CFSs)
also domestic regulations like prohibition on
and
Ports.
the use of individual logos for partnership and
Construction Development: In this sector, single proprietorship accounting firms. These
bottlenecksresultfromcontinuationofrestrictions regulations need to be relaxed and streamlined
under the Urban LandCeilingandRegulationAct to facilitatetie-upsand penetrateforeign markets
(ULCRA)insomestates namelyAndhra Pradesh, given the potentialfor exporting theseservices by
Assam, Bihar, and West Bengal, which have not theoutsourcingmode.
yet repealed it and the confusion in the process LegalServices:Inthissector,FDIisnotpermitted
required for clearance of buildings even after
and international law firms are not authorised
the repeal of ULCRA by passing of the Urban to advertise and open offices in India. Foreign
Land(Ceiling and Regulations) Repeal Act 1999
service providers can neither be appointed as
5. H.A.C.Prasadand R.Sathish,WorkingPaperNo.1/2010 - DEAonPolicyforIndia'sServicesSector,2010withupdates
fromconcernedDepartmentsandInstitutions.[Source:EconomicSurvey2012-13,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi,p.228]
,

--- PAGE 332 ---
10.14 4 IndianEconomy
partners nor sign legal documents and represent forservices has been set up to look into this. But
clients. The Bar Council is opposed to entry of services activities cover issues beyond trade and a
foreign lawyers/law firms in any manner. Indian more proactiveapproach and proper institutional
advocates are not permitted to enter into profit- mechanism is needed to weed out unwanted
sharing arrangements with persons other than regulationsandtaptheopportunitiesintheservices
Indian advocates. sectorinacoordinatedway.Thereisalso needfor
Education Services: These come under the
promotionalactivitiesforserviceexportslike,
Concurrent List with multiple controls and (a) setting upa portalforservices,
regulations bycentral and stategovernments and (b) showcasing India’s competence also in
statutory bodies. Regulations of minimum of 25 non-softwareservicesintradeexhibitions,
acresoflandtoestablishamedicalcollegerestricts c)engagingdedicated brandambassadors
the setting up of medical colleges in cities like andexperts .
Delhi. Patient load factor regulations related to Disinvestment: There is plenty of scope for
establishmentofnewmedicalcollegesalsoneedto
disinvestmentinservicesPSUsunder bothcentral
be in tune with present day equipment-intensive andstategovernments .Speedingupdisinvestment
patientcareand modern practicesand procedures
in some services- sector PSUs could not only
of medicaleducation.
providerevenueforthegovernmentbutalsospeed
up thegrowthof theseservices.
|
THE NEED FOR REFORMS
Credit related:The issues here include ‘collateral
Indianservicessector havethe potentialtogarner free’soft loans to support thesector’s cash needs
higher economic benefits to the country . But and possibility of considering even export or
there are many issues both general and sector business orders as collateral for credit-worthy
specificincludingdomesticregulationshinder the servicefirms.
growth prospects of the services sector . If these TaxandTradePolicyrelated:Theseinclude useof
issuesareaddresseddeftlythesector could lead to ‘net’insteadof‘gross’foreignexchangecriteriafor
exponential gains for the economy. The need of
export benefit schemes, the issue of retrospective
policyreforms6 in this regardsareoutlined in the
amendmentsof taxlawslike,
followingway:
(a) amendment to the definition of royalty
1.GeneralIssues to include payment of any rights via any
mediumfor useofcomputersoftware,
Therearesomegeneralissuesrelatedto thepolicy
(b) tax administrative measures to tackle
frameworkwhichhamper thehealthygrowthand
delayin refunds,
expansion of the services sector in the country .
Theyare broadlyrelated to thefollowingareas:
(c) introducing VAT (value added tax)
refundforforeign tourists,and
Nodalagency and marketing: Despite having
strong growth potential in various services sub ¬ (d) addressing the issue of bank guarantees
sectors, there is no single nodal department or based on past performance to avail of
agencyforservices.Aninter-ministerialcommittee export promotion benefitsinservices.
6. H.A.C. Prasad, R.Sathish, and Salam ShyamsunderSingh (2014), working paper1/2014 - DEA on 'Emerging Global
Economic Situation: Opportunities and Policy Issuesfor Services Sector' and updates from some ministries and
institutions.[Source:EconomicSurvey2013-14,p.190]
,

--- PAGE 333 ---
ServiceSector I 10.15
2.SectoralIssues
generate employment for Indian artists;
Area-specific policy hurdles to the servicessector and
are also there. Together with the general issues, (g) implementing urgently visa on arrival
these area-sepcific bottlenecks do not allow the and E visa facilities at 9 airports to 180
sector to realise its real potential.The major ones countries barring 8 ‘prior reference’
in thisareaarebeingoutlined below. countries (this decision has already been
taken).
Tourismandhospitalitysector:Asperthelatestdata
of world tourism, India’s tourism has not been Portservices:Indian portsarenotworld-classports
competitiveenoughtoattracttouristduetosevral and lack the necessary draft. As a result, ‘third-
—
reasons generationships’arenotabletoentertheharbour
(i) India’ssharein world tourist inflowswas andgoods haveto beoffloadedoutsideinsmaller
only 0.64 per cent in 2012 (rank 41), ships,addingtocosts .IfIndiacandevelopworld-
while that of the USA was 6.47 per cent class airport infrastructure and metros, there is
(rank 2) and China 5.57 per cent (rank every reason to attend the concerns of the port
3). services.Itsimmediatefocusshould beon —
(ii) India’sshareinworldtourismexpenditure (a) building world class ports providing
is relativelyhigher at 1.65 per cent (rank world class services that will also help
16) implying that foreign tourists spend the trade sector by reducing costs and
relativelymorein India. turnaround timein ports,and
(iii) Singapore, a small country, attracted (b) reducing port charges which are
11.10 million tourists in 2012, while a
considerablyhigher.
large country like India attracted only Shipping, shipbuilding and ship repairs: Indian
6.97millionforeigntouristsduring2013.
ships in the carriage of India’s overseas cargo has
Some suggested measures in this area, as per the fallen sharply and Indian ships are ageing, too .
EconomicSurvey2014 — 15,are: Government-ownedshipyardslikeVisakhapatnam
are facing problems like declining orders. India’s
(a) creatingworldclasstourisminfrastructure
shipbuilding industry has the capacity and
even byPPP;
expertise but isfunctioningbelowcapacity.Some
(b) addressingmultipletaxationissues;
of thesuggestedstepsto boost thesector are:
(c) skillandetiquettestrainingtocatertothe
(a) needtoreplaceourageingshipswithnew
needsof tourists;
ones,
(d) specialfocusoncleanlinessattouristsites
(b) increasing shipping fleet (with prices
andsafetyof tourists;
fallingon accountofglobalslowdown),
(e) using the MGNREGA for creating
(c) a special financing mechanism needs to
permanent assets like tourism bedeveloped.
infrastructureandfacilities;
(d) utilising India’sshipbuilding and repairs
(f) organising mini India cultural shows on
yards and enhancing their capacity (as
a daily basis at important tourist sites
India needs to replace many old ships
that will not onlyattract touristsbut also
and growingship repairs business in the
world).

--- PAGE 334 ---
10.16 4 IndianEconomy
Railways: The FDI policy of Railways sector (b) even in railway operations, FDI is
restricts FDI in rail transport, except in mass proposed in PPP projects, for suburban
rapidtransitsystems .FDIand privatisationinthe corridors, high speed train systems, and
railways could be the next big ticket reforms. A dedicatedfreightlines.
proposal has been initiated by Indian Railways, While privatization of railways has been
for making suitable changes in the existing FDI successful in some countries like Japan, it has
policyin order to allow FDI in railways, to foster failedinsomeothersliketheUK.Sothisproposal
creation of world class rail infrastructure. The needs to be examined carefully and quickly to
—
proposalenvisages allow privatization and inflows of FDI in areas
(a) allowingFDIinallareasoftherailsector where it is feasible, suggests the Economic Survey
except railwayoperations. 2014-15 .

--- PAGE 335 ---
C H A P T E R
Km
i
k
\V
l
l
1
INDIAN
*
FINANCIAL
.
/
MARKET
HP
Thereisnowampleempiricalresearch
=> Introduction tocorroborateSchumpeter'sconjecture
thatfinancial developmentfacilitates
<=> IndianMoney Market
real economic growth. The depth of
<=> MutualFunds
thefinancialmarketsandavailability
* DFHI
of diverse products should therefore
=> IndianCapitalMarket
not be treated as mere adornment
=> ProjectFinancing
but ascritical ingredients ofinclusive
=> MonetaryPolicy Tools .
growth *
=> FinancialRegulators
*AstheEconomicSurvey2011-12(MoF,Got,NDelhi,p.40)referstothe
AustralianeconomistJosephA.Schumpeter(1883-1950)toemphasisethe
importanceofthefinancialmarketinaneconomy.

--- PAGE 336 ---
11.2 < IndianEconomy
| INTRODUCTION in this market may or may not be supported by
collaterals. In the money market the financial
The market of an economy where funds are assets , which have quick conversion quality into
transacted between the fund-surplus and fund ¬ money and carry minimal transaction cost, are
scarce individuals and groups is known as the also traded.5 Money market may be defined as a
financial market (definition) . 1 The basis of market where short- term lending and borrowing
transaction is either interest or dividend. This take place between the cash-surplus and cash
¬
marketmighthaveitsorganised(institutionalised) scarcesides.
as well as non-organised (unregulated/non- The market operates in both ‘organised’ and
institutionalised)segmentsin an economy. ‘unorganised’ channels in India. Starting from
Financialmarketsineveryeconomyarehaving the‘person- to -person’ mode and converting into
two separatesegments today, one catering to the ‘telephonictransaction’, it hasnowgoneonlinein
requirements of short- termfundsand theother to the age of internet and information technology.
the requirements of long- term funds. 1 The short ¬ The transactions might take place through the
term financial market is known as the money intermediaries (known as brokers) or directly
market, while the long- term financial market is between thetradingsides.
known as thecapitalmarket.Themoneymarket
Need for Money Market: Income generation
f u u p lf t i o ls 3 t 6 h 4 e d r a e y q s ui { r i e . e m ., e s n h t o s rt of te f r u m n ) d w s h f i o l r e t t h h e e c p a e p ri i o ta d l a (i n .e y ., e g c r o o n w o t m h) ic is sy th st e em m . os In t e t s h s e en m tia o l d r e e r q n ui i r n e d m us n t t ri o a f l
market does the same for the period above 364
days {i . e ., long term)? A brief discussion on the economies creation of productive assets is not an
easy task, as it requires investible capital of long
Indian financial marketisgiven below.
termnature .Long- termcapitalcanberaisedeither
¬
| through bank loans, corporate bonds, debentures
INDIAN MONEYMARKET
orshares(i.e.,fromthecapitalmarket).Butoncea
Money market is theshort- term financial market productiveasset has been created and production
of an economy. In this market, money is traded starts there comes the need of another kind
between individuals or groups (i.e., financial of capital, to meet the day- to -day shortfalls of
institutions,banks,government,companies,etc .), working capital. It means that onlysetting-up of
who areeither cash-surplusor cash-scarce. Trading firmsdoesnotguaranteeproductionasthesefirms
is done on a rate known as discount rate which keep facing fund mismatches in the day- to -day
is determined by the market and guided by the production process.Such funds are requiredonly
availability of and demand for the cash in the
forashortperiod(days,fortnightsorfewmonths)
day- to -day trading.4 The ‘repo rate’ of the time and are needed to meet shortfalls in working
(announced by the RBI) works as the guiding capital requirements. This requires creation of a
rate for the current ‘discount rate’. Borrowings different segment of the financial market which
1. BasedonthediscussioninSamuelsonand Nordhaus,Economics,op.cit.,pp.543 - 45.
2. BasedonStiglitzandWalsh,Economics,op.cit.,pp.612 - 14.
3. ManyReportonCurrencyandFinance,RBI,Gol,N.Delhi.
4. Inthecapital market,moneyistradedoninterest rateaswellasondividends.Long -term loansare raised on well-
definedinterestrateswhilelong-termcapitalisraisedondividendsthroughthesaleofshares.
5. Suchfinancialassetsareknownas'closesubstitutesformoney'.

--- PAGE 337 ---
IndianFinancialMarket t 11.3
can cater to theshort- term requirements of such organised moneymarket, but theyarerecognised
funds for theeneterprises — known as themoney bythegovernment .In recentyears,someofthem
market or the working capital market. The havebeen included under theregulatedorganised
short- term period is defined as upto 364 days. market (for example, the NBFCs were put under
Thecrucialrolemoneymarketplaysinaneconomy the regulatory control of the RBI in 1997). The
is proved by the fact that if only a few lakhs or unorganised money market in India may be
crores of rupees of working capital is not met in divided into threedifferingcategories:
time, it can push a firm or business enterprise (i) Unregulated Non-Bank Financial
to go for lock- out, which has been set -up with Intermediaries: Unregulated Non-
thousandsofcroresofcapital.Iflock- outhappens, Banking Financial Intermediaries are
the firm might default in its payments, losing its functioning in the form of chit funds,
age-oldcredit-worthiness,consequentlycreatinga nidhis (operate in South India, which
chainofnegativesin theeconomicsystem .Thisis lend to only their members) and loan
whyitisessentialforeveryeconomytoorganisea companies.Theychargeveryhighinterest
strongandvibrantmoneymarketwhichhaswider rates (i.e., 36 to 48 per cent per annum),
geographic presence (the reason why it is today thus, are exploitative in nature and have
internet-based). selectivereachin theeconomy.
Money Market in India: The organised form (ii) Indigenous Bankers: Indigenous
of money market in India is just close to three bankers receivedeposits and lend money
decadesold.However,itspresencehasbeenthere, in the capacity of an individual or a
but restricted to thegovernmentonly.6 It wasthe private firms. There are, basically, four
ChakravarthyCommittee (1983) which,for the such bankers in the countryfunctioning
first time, underlined the need of an organised asnon-homogenousgroups:
money market in the country7 and the Vahul (a) Gujarati Shroffs: They operate in
Committee (1987) laid the blue print for its Mumbai, Kolkata as well as in
development.8 Today, money market in India is industrial, trading and port cities in
—
not an integrated unit and has two segments theregion.
UnorganisedMoney Marketand OrganisedMoney
(b) Multani or Shikarpuri Shroffs: They
Market.
operate in Mumbai, Kolkata, Assam
1. UNORGANISEDMONEYMARKET
teagardensand North Eastern India.
(c) Marwari Kayas:They operate mainly
Before the government started the organised inGujaratwithalittlebitofpresence
development of the money market in India, in Mumbaiand Kolkata.
its unorganised form had its presence since the
— (d) Chettiars:Theyareactivein Chennai
ancient times its remnant is still present in the andat theportsofsouthern India.
country .Their activitiesarenot regulated likethe
6. TheonlyinstrumentofthemoneymarketwastheTreasuryBillswhichweresold bytenderatweeklyauctionsupto
1965.ButlaterthesebillsweremadeavailablethroughouttheweekatdiscountratesbytheRBI(RBI,Gol,N.Delhi).
7. ReviewoftheWorkingoftheMonetarySystemheaded bySukhomoyChakravarthy,RBI,N.Delhi,1985.
8. WorkingGrouponMoneyMarket(VaghulCommittee),RBI,N.Delhi,1987(headedbyM.Vaghul,Chairman,ICICI.The
committeewassetupin1986).

--- PAGE 338 ---
11.4 < IndianEconomy
(iii) Money Lenders: They constitute the since Independence got organised only
most localised form of money market in in 1986. They are used by the Central
Indiaandoperateinthemostexploitative Government to fulfil its short- term
way.Theyhavetheir two forms: liquidity requirement upto the period of
(a) The professional money lenders who 364 days. There developed five types of
lend their own moneyasa profession theTBsin duecourseof time:
toearn incomethroughinterest. (a) 14-day(IntermediateTBs)
(b) The non-professional money lenders (b) 14-day(AuctionableTBs)
who might be businessmen and lend (c) 91-dayTBs
their money to earn interest income (d) 182-dayTBs
asasubsidiarybusiness.
(e) 364-dayTBs
Today, Indiahaseightorganisedinstruments
OutoftheabovefivevariantsoftheTBs,
of the money market which are used by
atpresentonlythe91-dayTBs, 182-day
the prescribed firms in the country, but the
TBsand the 364-dayTBsare issued by
unor — ganised money market also operates side by the government . The other two variants
side therearecertain reasons9 behind this:
werediscontinued in 2001.10
(i) Indian money market is still under
¬ The TBs other than providing short
developed. ¬
term cushion to the government, also
(ii) Lack of penetration and presence of the function asshort- term investmentavenues
instruments of the organised money
for the banks and financial institutions,
market.
besidesfunctioningas requirementsof the
(iii) Thereare manyneedful customersin the CRRandSLRofthebankinginstitutions.
money market who are curr_ent outside (ii) Certificate of Deposit (CD): Organised
the purview of the organised money in 1989, the CD is used by banks and
market.
issued to the depositors for a specified
(iv) Entryto theorganised moneymarketfor period ranging less than one year — they
—
itscustomersisstillrestrictiveinnature arenegotiableand tradablein themoney
notallowingsmall businessmen. market.Since 1993 the RBI allowed the
—
. financial institutions to operate in it
2 ORGANISEDMONEYMARKET
IFCI, IDBI, IRBI (IIBI since 1997) and
—
Since the government started developing the the Exim Bank theycan issue CDs for
organisedmoneymarketinIndia(mid-1980s),we the maturity periods above one year and
haveseenthearrivalofatotalofeightinstruments upto threeyears.
designed to be used by different categories of (iii) Commercial Paper (CP): Organised in
business and industrial firms. A brief description 1990itisusedbythecorporatehousesin
of theseinstrumentsfollows: India (whichshould bea listed company
(i) Treasury Bills (TBs): This instrument withaworkingcapitalofnotlessthanRs.
of the money market though present 3crore).TheCPissuingcompaniesneed
9. BasedonthesuggestionsofexpertsbelongingtotheIndianfinancialmarket.
10. EconomicSurvey2001 - 02&2009 - 2010 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 339 ---
IndianFinancialMarket t 11.5
to obtain a specified credit rating from intorduced/organised in 1992 to provide
an agencyapproved by the RBI (such as short- term investment opportunity to
CRISIL, ICRA,etc). individuals. The initial guidelines for
(iv) Commercial Bill (CB): Organised in the MF have been liberalised many
1990, a CB is issued by the All India times. Since March 2000, MFs have
Financial Institutions (AIFIs), Non- been brought underthepreviewofSEBI,
BankingFinanceCompanies(NBFCs), besides the RBI. At present, a whole lot
Scheduled Commercial Banks, of financial institutions and firms are
Merchant Banks, Co-operative Banks allowed to set up MFs, viz., commercial
and the Mutual Funds. It replaced the banks, public and private financial
old Bill Market available since 1952 in
institutionsandprivatesectorcompanies.
thecountry . At present 45 MFs are operating in the
(v) Call Money Market (CMM): This is country — managinga corpus of over Rs.
basically an inter-bank money market
4lakhcrore.
where funds are borrowed and lent, (vii) Repos and Reverse Repos: In the era of
generally, for one day — that is why this economic reforms there developed tw—o
is also known as over-night borrowing new instruments of money market
market(alsocalledmoneyatcall). Fund repo and reverse repo. Considered the
can be borrowed/raised for a maximum most dynamicinstruments of the Indian
periodupto14days(calledshortnotice). money market they have emerged the
Borrowingin this market maytake place most favoured route to raise short- term
against securities or without securities.11 funds in India. ‘Repo’ is basically an
Rateofinterestinthismarket‘glides’with acronym of the rateof repurchase. The
the ‘repo rate’ of the time the principle RBI in a span of four years, introduced
remains verysimple — longer the period, these instruments—repo in December
higher theinterest rate .Depending upon 1992 and reverse repo in November
the availability and demand of fund in
1996.
this market the real call rate revovles Repo allows the banks and other
nearbythecurrent repo rate . financial institutions to borrow money
Thescheduled commercial banks, co from the RBI for short- term (by selling
¬
operative banks operate in this market government securities to the RBI). In
as both the borrowers and lenders while reverse repo, the banks and financial
LIC, GIC, Mutual Funds, IDBI and institutions purchase government
NABARD areallowed to operateasonly securitiesfromtheRBI(basicallyherethe
lendersin this market. RBIis borrowingfrom thebanksand the
(vi) Money Market Mutual Fund (MF): financial institutions). All government
securities are dated and the interest for
Popular as Mutual Funds (MFs)
the repo or reverse repo transactions are
this money market instrument was
11. TheStateBankofIndia(operatesinthismarketaslenderasitisavailablewithcomfortablecashposition)lendsagainst
governmentsecurities,whileotherslendagainstthe'depositreceipts'oftheborrowingbanks.TheSBIfunctionsasthe
'lenderofintermediateresort'(whiletheRBIfunctionsasthe'lenderoflastresort').

--- PAGE 340 ---
11.6 I IndianEconomy
announcedbytheRBIfromtimetotime. discretionaryrouteforthegovernmentin
The provision of repo and the reverse meeting its short- term requirements of
repo have been abletoservetheliquidity funds at will (see ‘Fiscal Consolidation
evenness in the economy as the banks in India’,sub-topicinChapter18Public
are able to get the required amount of Financefor details).CBM doesnotcome
fundsoutofit,and theycan parksurplus under thesimilarWMAs provisions.
idle funds through it.These instruments
|
have emerged as important tools in the MUTUAL FUNDS
management of the monetaryand credit
policyin recentyears.12 Of all investment options, mutual funds are
touted to bethe best toolfor wealthcreationover
Accepting the recommendations of
the long term .They are of several types, and the
the Urjit Patel Committee, the RBI
riskvarieswiththekindofassetclassesthesefunds
in April 2014 (while announcing the
investin.Asthenamesuggests,a mutualfundisa
first Bi-monthly Credit & Monetary
Policy-2014 — 15)announced tointroduce
p
fu
u
n
t
d
in
th
t
a
he
t
i
i
r
sc
m
r
o
ea
n
t
e
e
y
d
,a
w
n
h
d
en
is
a
m
la
a
r
n
g
a
e
g
n
e
u
d
m
b
b
y
e
p
r
ro
o
f
f
e
i
s
n
s
v
io
e
n
st
a
o
l
r
ly
s
termrepoandtermreverserepo.Thisis
qualified persons with experience in investing in
believed to bring in higher stability and differentassetclasses — shares, bonds, money market
better signalling of interest rates across instruments like call money, and other assets such
different loan marketsin theeconomy,
as gold and property . Their names usually give a
(viii) Cash Management Bill (CMB): The
good idea about what type of asset class a fund,
Government of India, in consultation also called a scheme, will invest in. For example,
with the RBI, decided to issue a new a diversified equity fund will invest in a large
short- term instrument, known as number of stocks, while a gilt fund will invest
Cash Management Bills, since August in government securities, while a pharma fund
2009 to meet the temporary cash flow willmainlyinvestinstocksofcompaniesfromthe
mismatches of the government . The pharmaceuticaland related industries.
Cash Management Billsare non-standard
Mutual funds, first of all came in the money
and discounted instruments issued for
market (regulated bythe RBI), but theyhave the
maturitieslessthan 91days.
freedomtooperateinthecapitalmarket,too .This
The CMBs have the generic character —
iswhytheyhave provisionofdual regulator the
ofTreasuryBills(issuedatdiscount to the RBI and SEBI. Mutual funds are compulsorily
face value); are tradable and qualify for
registeredwiththeSecuritiesandExchangeBoard
ready forward facility; investment in it is ofIndia(SEBI),whichalsoactsasthefirstwallof
considered as an eligible investment in defencefor all investorsin thesefunds. For those
governmentsecuritiesbybanksforSLR.
whodonotunderstandhowmutualfundsoperate
Itshouldbenotedherethattheexisting butarewillingtoinvest,themovebySEBIisseen
Treasury Bills serve the same purpose, asa bigrelief.
but as they were put under the WMAs Eachmutualfundisrunbyagroupofqualified
(Ways&MeansAdvances) provisionsby
people who form a company, called an asset
the Gol in 1997, they did not remain a management company (AMC) and the operations
12 . ReportonCurrencyandFinance,1999and2000,RBI,Gol,N .Delhi.

--- PAGE 341 ---
IndianFinancialMarket t 11.7
of the AMC are under the guidance of another where they are traded on a daily basis.
group of people, called trustees . Both, the people As these units are listed, any investor
intheAMCaswellasthetrustees,haveafiduciary can buyand sell these units through the
responsibility,becausethesearethepeoplewhoare exchange. As the name suggests, close-
entrusted with the task of managing the hard- ended schemes are managed by fund
earned money of people who do not understand housesforalimitednumberofyears,and
muchabout managingmoney. at the end of the term either money is
A fund house or a distributor working for returned to the investors or the scheme
the fund house (which could be an individual, is madeopen ended. However, there isa
a company or even a bank) are qualified to sell wordofcautionherethatusually,unitsof
mutual funds. The fund house allots the ‘units’ closeendedfundswhicharelistedon the
of the MF to the investor at a price that is fixed stock exchanges, tradeat a high discount
through a process approved by SEBI, which is to their NAVs.Butasthedateforclosure
based on the net asset value (NAV). In simple of the fund nears, the discount between
terms, NAV is the total value of investments in the NAVand the trading price narrows,
a scheme divided by the total number of units and vanisheson thedayofclosureof the
issued to investors in the same scheme. In most scheme.
mutual fund schemes, NAVs are computed and (iii) Exchange-Traded Funds (ETFs): ETFs
publishedonadailybasis.However,whenafund area mixofopen-endedand close-ended
houseislaunchingaschemefor thefirst time,the schemes.ETFs,likeclose-endedschemes,
unitsaresoldatRs.10each.Therearethreetypes arelistedand traded on astockexchange
ofschemesoffered byMFs: on a daily basis, but the price is usually
(i) Open-ended Schemes: An open-ended veryclose to its NAV, or the underlying
fund is one which is usually available assets, likegold ETFs.
from an MF on an ongoing basis, that If investment have been done in
is,aninvestorcan buyorsellasandwhen a well-managed MF, the advantages
theyintend to at a NAV-based price. As outweigh disadvantages in the long
investorsbuyandsellunitsofaparticular term, which is 10 years or more. There
open- ended scheme, the number of is a very high probabilityfor investors of
units issued also changes every day and makingmoremoneythan byinvestingin
so changes the value of the scheme’s other risk-free investments such as FDs,
portfolio.So, the NAValso changes on publicprovidentfundetc .Advantagesof
a daily basis. In India, fund houses can investingin MFsinclude:
sell any number of units of a particular (i) diversification of portfolio,
scheme, but at timesfund houses restrict (ii) good investment management
selling additional units of a scheme for services,
sometime.
(iii) liquidity,
(ii) Closed-ended Schemes: A close-ended
(iv) stronggovernment-backedregulatory
fund usuallyissue units to investors only
help,
once, when they launch an offer, called
newfundoffer(NFO)inIndia.Thereafter, (v) professionalservice,and
theseunitsarelistedonthestockexchanges (vi) lowcostforall the benefits.

--- PAGE 342 ---
11.8 < IndianEconomy
An investor, by investing in a mutual fund (ii) to impart liquidity to the instruments
scheme that has blue chip stocks in its portfolio, of the money market prevalent in the
indirectly gets an exposure to these stocks. economy.
Compared to this, if the same investor wants to In 2004, the RBI transferred itstotal holding
haveeach of thesestocksin his portfolio, thecost in the DFHI to the Stae Bank of India arm SBI
of buying and managing the portfolio will be Gilts Limited. Its new name is SBI DFHI. It
much higher. functions as the biggest ‘primary dealer’ in the
Mutual funds invest the investors money in economy and functions on commercial basis. It
both the loan and share markets. Buyers of MF deals in all kinds of instruments in the money
units are given choice/option as in which of the market without any upper ceiling. Operating in
markets theywish their money to be invested by ‘two way’ (asa lender and borrower) itsobjective
thefund managers of the MF.This wayinvestors is to provide needful liquidityandstabilityin the
get thefollowingchoices: financial marketof thecountry .
(i) Loan (100 per cent of the funds will be
|
invested in theloan market), INDIAN CAPITALMARKET
(ii) Share (100 per cent of the funds will be Thelong- term financial market of an economyis
invested in thesharemarket),and knownasthe‘capital market’.This market makes
(iii) Balance (60 per cent of the funds will it possible to raise long- term money (capital), i.e.,
be invested in the loan market while the for a period of minimum 365 days and above.
—
rest 40 per cent in the share market Ceationofproductiveassetsisnotpossiblewithout
this provision keepschangingdepending a string capital market — the market gained more
—
upon the health of the share market importance once most of the economies in the
clearlyannounced bytheMFs). world started industrialising. Across the world,
banks emerged as the first and the foremost
|
DFHI segment of the capital market. In coming times
many other segments got added to it, viz.,
The Discount and Finance House of India
insurance industry, mutual funds, and finallythe
Limited13 (DFHI) was set up in April 1988 by
most attractive and vibrant, the security/stock
the RBI jointlywith the publicsector banks and
market.Organiseddevelopmentofcapitalmarket
financial investment institutions (i.e., LIC, GIC
togetherwith puttingin placetherightregulatory
and UTI). Its establishment was an outcome of
frameworkforit, hasalwaysbeena tough taskfor
thelong-drawn need of thefollowingtwo types:
theeconomies.Itis believedtodaythatforstrong
(i) to bring an equilibirium of liquidity in growth prospects in an economy presence of a
theIndian bankingsystem and strongand vibrantcapital marketisessential.
13. Itwasin1979thattheChoreCommitteeforthefirsttime recommendedfora discount housetoleveltheliquidity
imbalancesinthebankingsystem.ThegovernmentbecameactiveaftertherecommendationsoftheWorkingGroup
ontheMoneyMarket(i.e.,theVaghulCommittee,1987)andfinallyestablishedDFHIin1988.TheVaghulCommittee
suggested to set up a discount finance institution which could deal in short-term money market instruments so
thatliquiditycould be provided totheseinstruments.Thecommitteealsorecommendedthe housetooperateon
'commercialbasis'whichwasacceptedbythegovernmentwhilesettingupDFHI.

--- PAGE 343 ---
IndianFinancialMarket t 11.9
Though the capital market of India is far supported by these financial institutions was
stronger and better today in comparision to the known as ‘project financing’ in India. Over the
periods just after Independence, the process of time, Indian capital market started to have the
emergnece has not been easy and smooth. Once followingsegments:
India opted ‘industry’ as its prime moving force,
thefirstchallengewastoraiselong- termfundsfor A. FINANCIALINSTITUTIONS
industral establishments and their expansion. As The requirement of project financing made India
banksinIndiawereweak,smallandgeographically togoforanumberofFIsfromtimetotime,which
unevenly distributed they were not in a position aregenerallyclassifiedinto four categories:14
to play the pivotal role they played in case of
the industrialising Western economies. This is (i) AU , IndiaFinancialInstitutions(AIFIs)
why the government decided to set up ‘financial Theall India FIsare IFCI (1948); ICICI (1955);
institutions’ which could play the role of banks IDBI(1964);SIDBI(1990)&IIBI (1997).Allof
(till bakns gain strength and presence) and carry
them were publicsector FIs except ICICI, which
on theresponsibilitiesof‘projectfinancing’.
was a joint sector venture with initial capital
| coming from the RBI, some foreign banks and
PROJECT FINANCING
FIs. The public sector FIs were funded by the
Governmentof India.
After Independence, India went for intensive
industrialisation to achieve rapid growth and By 1980s, all Indian banks acquired wider
development.Tothisend,themainresponsibility capital base and by early 1990s when the stock
was given to the Public Sector Undertakings market became popular, it became easier for
(PSUs). For industrialisation we require capital, the corporate world to tap cheaper capital from
technology and labour, all being typically thesesegments of thecapital market.15Theera of
difficult to manage in the case of India. For economicreformshadgiventhesameoptiontothe
capital requirement, the government decided PSUstotapnewcapital.AstheAIFIshadmoreor
to depend upon internal and external sources lessfixed rateofinterestascomparedto thebanks
and the government decided to set up financial which could mobilise cheaper deposits to lend
institutions(FIs).ThoughIndiawashavingbanks, cheaper — theAIFIsseemed to becomeirrelevant.
but due to low saving rate and lower deposits The AIFIs witnessed a sharp decline in recent
with them, the upcoming industries could not years.16 At this juncture the government decided
be financed through them. The main borrowers to convert them into Development Banks17
for industrial development were the PSUs. To (suggested by the Narasimhan Committee-I) to
supportthecapitalrequirementofthe‘projects’of be known as the All India Development Banks
thepublicsectorindustries,thegovernmentcame (AIDBs). In 2000, the government allowed
up with different types of financial institutions ICICI to go for a reversemerger (when an elder
in the coming years. The industrial financing enterprise is merged with a younger one) with
14. IndustrialFinanceCorporationof IndiaAct , 1948,Gol,N.Delhi.
15. EconomicSurvey2000 - 01,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
16. EconomicSurvey2006 - 07 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
17. NarasimhanCommitteeontheFinancialSystem(CFS),1991suggestedfortheconversionoftheAIFIsIntoDevelopment
Banks.

--- PAGE 344 ---
11.10 4 IndianEconomy
—
the ICICI Bank the first AIDB emerged with (a) IFCI Venture Capital Funds Ltd (IFCI
—
no obligation of project financing such entities Venture),2000:ItwaspromotedasaRisk
in coming times will be known as the universal Capital Foundation (RCF) in 1973 by
banks18 (allowed to set up as many financial IFCI Ltd., a society to provide financial
institutions they wish to, such as insurance, assistancetofirstgeneration professionals
merchant banks, mutualfunds, etc .). In a similar and technocrat entrepreneurs for setting
move,theIDBIwasreversemergedwiththeIDBI up own ventures through soft loans,
Bankin2002andthesecondAIDBemerged.But under the RiskCapitalScheme.
it has still the obligation of carrying its project In 1988, RCF was converted into a
financingduties.
company
—
RiskCapitalandTechnology
In 2002, thegovernment, proposed to merge Finance Corporation Ltd. (RCTC) —
IFCIand IIBIwith thenationalised bankPNBto when it also introduced the Technology
ctraete a big Universal Bank. It is believed that Finance and Development Scheme
PNB was unwilling to go for this merger as these (TFDS) for financing development
FIs were running at heavy losses. This move was and commercialisation of indigenous
part correct as per the recommendations of the technology. Besides, under Risk Capital
NarasimhanCommitte-II (to theextent mergeris Scheme, RCTC started providing
concerned,followingits3-TierBankingStructure financial assistance to entrepreneurs
of India), but part against it (the committee by way of direct equity participation.
has advised not to merge weak banks/FIs with Based on IFCI Venture’s credentials and
either weak or strong banks/FIs).19 Presently, the strengths, Unit Trust of India (UTI),
government is trying to make IFCI and IIBI to entrustedRCTCwiththemanagementof
turnaroundtheirbusinessandemergeasprofitable anewventurecapitalfundnamedVenture
—
entities theyare busyrecovering their dues and CapitalUnitScheme (VECAUS-III) in
improvingtheir balancesheet. 1991 with its funds coming from the
Meanwhile, at present, there are only four UTI and IFCI.To reflect theshift in the
financial institutions operating in the country as company’sactivities, thenameof RCTC
AIFIs regulated bythe RBI, viz., the NABARD, was changed to IFCI Venture Capital
SIDBI, Exim Bankand theNHB. Funds Ltd. (IFCI Venture) in February
2000.
(it)SpecialisedFinancialInstitutions(SF/s)20
InordertofocusonAssetManagement
Two new FIs were set up by the Central Activities, IFCI Venture discontinued
Governmentin thelate1980stofinanceriskand Risk Capital and Technology Finance
innovation in the area of industrial expansion; Schemes in 2000-01 and continued
thiswasIndia’strialintheareaofventurecapital managing VECAUS-III. In 2007, as
funding. UTI had ceased to carryout its activities
18. ItwastheS . H . KhanCommitteeonDevelopmentFinancialInstitutions(DFIs),1998whichforwardedtheconcept/
ideaof UniversalBankinginIndia.
19. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.115 - 116.
20. Thewrite -upisbased ontheinformationavailablefromSEBI,RBIand different releasesoftheMinistryof Finance,
Gol,N.Delhi,since1996onwards.

--- PAGE 345 ---
IndianFinancialMarket t 11.11
and its assets vested with Specified In the present time they are no more
UndertakingoftheUnitTrustofIndia considered as FIs. LIC is now the public sector
(SUUTI), the portfolio of VECAUS-III insurance companyin the lifesegment, GICwas
under managementof IFCI Venturewas been converted into a public sector re-insurance
transferredtoSUUTI. company in 2000, while UTI was converted
(b) Tourism Finance Corporation of India into a mutual fund company in 2002. Now
Ltd (TFCI), 1989: The Government of these investment institutions (IIs) are no more
India had, on the recommendations of like the past . LIC is now called an ‘insurance
the National Committee on Tourism company’, part of the Indian Insurance Industry
(YunusCommittee)set up under theaegis and is the lone public sector playing in the life
of the Planning Commission, decided insurance segment competeing with the private
in 1988, to promote a separateAll India life insurance companies. Similarly, the UTI is
Financial Institution for providing nowpartoftheIndianMutualFundindustryand
financial assistance to tourism-related thelonesuchfirm in the publicsectorcompeting
activities/projects. In accordance with with other privatesector mutualfunds.Similarly,
the above decision, the IFCI Ltd. along theearstwhilefourpublicsectorgeneralinsurance
with other all-India financial/investment companies are part of India’s general insurance
institutions andsome nationalised banks industryand competeing with private companies
promoted a Public Limited Company in thearea (theywere HoldingComapniesof the
—
under the name of “Tourism Finance GIC now these are owned by the Gol directly
Corporation of India Ltd. (TFCI)” and GIC only looks after its ‘re-insurance’
to function as a Specialised All-India business).Thisiswhywedo notgetthe useofthe
Development Financial Institution to term‘IIs’in recenttimesinanyoftheGolofficial
caterto thefinancialneedsofthetourism
documents.
industry.
(iv)StateLevelFinanceInstitutions(SLFIs)
TFCI was incorporated as a Public
Limited Company in 1989 and became Inthewakeofstatesinvolvementin theindustrial
operational with effect from 1989. development,thecentralgovernmentallowedthe
TFCI was notified as a Public Financial states to set up their own financial institutions
InstitutioninJanuary1990.Itspromoter, (after thestatesdemandedso).In thisprocesstwo
the IFCI, holds major share (41.6 per kindsof FIscame up:
cent) in it, while the rest of the shares (a) State Finance Corporations (SFCs): First
arewiththe‘public’(26 percent), public came up in Punjab (1955) with other
sectorbanks, publicinsurancecompanies statesfollowingitsexample.Thereare18
andpublicmutualfund(i.e.,UTIMutual SFCsworkingpresently.
Fund Ltd.). (b) StateIndustrialDevelopmentCorporations
(SIDCs): A fully dedicated state public
(Hi)Investment Instituions(IIs)
sector FI to the cause of industrial
Threeinvestment institutionsalso came upin the development in the concerned states .
publicsector, which are yet another kind of FIs, First such FIs were set up (I960) in
i.e.,theLIC(1956),theUTI (1964)and theGIC Andhra Pradeshand Bihar.
(1971).

--- PAGE 346 ---
11.12 4 IndianEconomy
Almost all of the SFCs and SIDCs are at government (in 1956 and 1970, respectively),
present running in huge losses. They may be re ¬ and the public sector insurance companies did
structured on the lines of the AIFIs, but there is serve the better purpose in the areas of providing
lack of will from thestates and private financiers safety net and nation-building. In the wake of
who arenot interested togo infor their takeovers the process of economic refroms a restructuring
assuch. of the sector was started and the industry was
. opened for entry of private players in 1999 and
B BANKINGINDUSTRY —
an independent regulator wasset up the IRDA
—
With the passage of time, the industry saw its (domestic and foreign with an FDI cap of 49
nationalisation (1969 and 1980) and again per cent). Since then many private players have
opening up for privatesector entry (1993 — 94) to entered the industry. Presently, Indian insurance
emergeasthemostdependablesegementofIndian industryconsists of one publicsector life insurer
financialsystem — inawayitsmainstay.Presently, (LIC) and four public sector general insurers;
theindustryconsistsofcommercialbanksbothin twospecialised publicsector insurers (AICILand
publicand private sectors, Regional Rural Banks ECGC); one public sector re-insurer (GIC) and
(RRBs) and co-operative banks — a total of 171 37 private insurance companies (in collaboration
Scheduled Commercial Banks (SCBs) out of with established foreign insurers from across
whch113areinthepublicsector(19nationalised the world).22 The expansion and penetration
banks,7banksinSBIgroup,oneIDBI BankLtd. insuranceinthecountryhaveincreasedduringthe
and86RRBs);withtherestofthe38banksowned reform period, but not as per the expectations of
bytheprivatesector (domesticandforeign — FDI thegovernmentsand theexperts — several reasons
in banksisallowed upto26 per cent).21 have been responsible for this (for a detailed
discussionontheinsuranceindustryreferChapter
In the wake of the economic reforms the
.
13)
government has promised speedier expansion
of the banking sector . But the entry of new D . SECURITYMARKET
private players in the banking sector has been
slow, hapmering the growth and expansion of After the government’s attempts to formally
the sector . But in a recent release the RBI has organisethesecurityandstockmarketofIndia,the
committed to allow new banks to come up on segment
hasseenacceleratedexpansion.Today,it
regularbasis — inApril2014theRBIallowedtwo iscountedamong themost vibrantsharemarkets
new privatesector banks tostart their operations, of theworld and haschallenged the monopolyof
[for a detailed discussion on the banking sector banks in the capital market of thecountry .23The
refer the Chapter12\. securitymarketofIndiaisregulatedbySEBI.India
has developed a regulated ‘forward market’ also
C.INSURANCEINDUSTRY where hunderds of commodities and derivatives
—
AfterIndependence,forthepurposeofexpanding
aretraded onspotand non-spot basis regulated
byFMC[foradetaileddiscussiononthsesmarkets
the industry, one after another the life and non
life insurance businesses were nationalised bythe ¬ refer to Chapter l4\ .
21. India2014,PublicationsDivision,MolB,Gol,N.Delhi,p.326.
22. India2014,PublicationsDivision,MolB,Gol,N.Delhi,p.329.
23. EconomicSurvey2012 - 13,MoF,Gol,NDelhi,p.116.

--- PAGE 347 ---
IndianFinancialMarket t 11.13
| theRBI (introducedinJune2000).Ona
MONETARY POLICYTOOLS
daily basis, the RBI stands ready to lend
Monetarypolicydealswithallthoseinstruments/ to or borrow money from the banking
meansbywhichshort- termmoney/capitalisraised system, as per the latter’s requirement,
intheeconomy,i.e.,themoneywhichisraisedfor at fixed interest rates . The primaryaim
1to 364days.Thepolicyand theinstrumentsare of such an operation is to assist banks
regulated by the RBI.The monetary policy tools to adjust their day- to -day mismatches
used presently and their operating procedure are in liquidity, via repo and reverse repo
asgiven below:24
operations.
(i) Call Money Market: The call money Under the repo or repurchase option, banks
market is an important segment of the borrowmoneyfromtheRBIviathesaleofsecurities
money market where uncollateralised withanagreementto purchasethesecuritiesback
borrowing and lending of funds take atafixed rateatafuturedate.Theratecharged by
place on over night basis. Participants the RBI to aid this process of liquidity injection
in the call money market in India is termed as therepo rate . Under the reverse repo
currently include scheduled commercial operation, the RBI borrows money from the
banks (SCBs) — excluding regional rural banks,drainingliquidityoutfromthesystem .The
banks), cooperative banks (other than rateatwhichtheRBIborrowsmoneyisthereverse
land development banks), and primary repo rate .Theinterest rateon theLAFisfixed by
dealers, both as borrowers and lenders the RBI from time to time (with crucial changes
(RBI’s Master Circular dated July 1, introduced recentlyin theoperatingprocedureof
2011). Prudential limits, in respect of Monetary Policydetailed in the next paragraph).
both outstanding borrowingand lending LAF operations help the RBI effectively transmit
transactionsin thecall moneymarketfor interestratesignalsto themarket.
eachof theseentities,arespecified bythe
RBI.
RECENTCHANGESINMONETARYPOLICY
(ii) Open Market Operations (OMOs): Effective May 3, 2011, based on the
OMOs are conducted by the RBI recommendations of the Working Group on
via the sale/purchase of government Operating Procedure of Monetary Policy, the
securities (G-Sec) to/from the market operatingframeworkofmonetarypolicyhas been
with the primary aim of modulating refinedwith thefollowingchanges:
rupeeliquidityconditionsin themarket. (i) The repo rate has been made the only
OMOsareaneffectivequantitativepolicy independently varying policy rate . In
tool in the armoury of the RBI, but are Bi-monthly Credit &Monetary Policy for
constrained by the stock of government 2014-15, the RBI has announced to
securities available with it at a point in introduce ‘term repos’, too (which will
time. have provisions for more than ‘one-day’
(iii) Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF): borrowingin theshort- term market).
The LAF is the key element in the (ii) A new marginal standing facility (MSF)
monetary policyoperating framework of has been instituted, under which SCBs
24. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.96.

--- PAGE 348 ---
11.14 4 IndianEconomy
havebeenallowedtoborrowovernightat Meanwhile,JusticeB.N.Srikrishnaheaded
their discretion, up to 1 per cent of their FinancialSectorLegislativeReformsCommission
respective NDTL, at 100 basis points (FSLRC)handedoveritsreport (March2013)for
abovethereporate(thegapbetween‘repo’ examining the regulatory structure and the laws
and ‘MSF’ rates was though changed by governing the financial sector . The 10-member
the RBI many times till April 2014) . committee had a broad mandate covering all
The revised MSF reverse repo corridor financial services as well as everything currently
has been defined with a fixed width of overseen by any financial regulator. Broadly,
200 bps with the repo rate placed in the the commission has recommended what can be
middle of the corridor (fluctuates as per called a changeover from an ‘area-based’division
thegap between the‘repo’and the MSF of regulators to a ‘task-based’ division. Major
rates).
highlightsof therecommendationsareasfollows:
(iii) Thereversereporatehas been placed100 (i) Today, each agency like SEBI or IRDA
bpsbelowandtheMSFrate100bpsabove or FMClooks after one typeof financial
the repo rate (fluctuates as per the gap service or one area — this would be
between the ‘repo’ and the MSF rates). replacedbyahorizontalstructurewhereby
In Bi-monthly Credit &Monetary Policy the basic regulatory and monitoring
for 2014-15, the RBI has announced to functionsof all areaswould bedone bya
introduce‘termreverserepos’,too(which Unified FinacialAgency(UIA).
will have provisions for more than ‘one-
— (ii) All consumer complaints, regardless of
day’lending parkingoffundsbybanks
withtheRBI — intheshort- termmarket). t
R
h
e
e
dr
a
e
r
s
e
s
a
al
w
A
il
g
l
en
b
c
e
y
h
(
a
F
n
R
d
A
le
)
d
.
by a Financial
It is expected that the fixed interest rate (iii) There will be a single tribunal, the
corridor,setbytheMSFrateandreversereporate,
Financial Sector Appellate Tribunal
by reducing uncertainty and avoiding difficulties
(FSAT) which will hear appeals by the
in communication associated with a variable entiresector .
corridor,willhelpinkeepingtheovernightaverage
(iv) Therearealso threeother agenciesin the
call money rate close to the repo rate . Similarly,
recommendations,alongwiththeReserve
theintroduction of‘term repos’and‘term reverse
Bank of India which will continue to
repos’willprovidestabilityelementin themarket
oversee banking.
together with better signalling through the loan
market in theeconomy. Thehorizontalstructurewillservetheinterests
oftheconsumersoffinancialservices(ofindividuals
| FINANCIAL REGULATORS and businesses, both) much better. For one, it
—
should eliminate regulatory arbitrage the recent
At present Indian financial market has a number IRDAvs.SEBIspaton ULIPshappened because
of regulators, precisely eleven, viz ., RBI, SEBI, the two agencies’ views on the characteristics of
FMC, NABARD, IRDA, SIDBI, NHB, SFCs, investment products wereverydifferent.Another
IDBI,CLBandRegistrarofCooperativeSocieties. advantage of the horizontal structure would be
TheNarasimhanCommitteeon FinancialSystem that consumer complaints about a sector would
(1991) hasmadeastrongcaseforasinglerequlator getseparatedfromtheregulator.Thisisimportant
for banks, financial institutions and the non ¬ because a certain class of consumer complaints
bankingfinancialinstitutionsin India. have mistakes or oversights by the regulator at

--- PAGE 349 ---
IndianFinancialMarket t 11.15
their root . Recognising this root cause means financial system has been facing some pressure
admittingto its own flaw,something that is hard since 2010 — 11 onwards. Higher non-performing
foranyorganisation. assetsof banks;lackoflevel-playingfieldto private
Due to severe recessionarysituations among sectorbanksandtheinsurancecompanies, under ¬
themajor trading partnersof India (i.e., theUSA developed corporate bond market together with
and Western European nations) and a situation regulatory concerns are the emerging areas of
of delayed policy-decisions in the country (due challenges/concerns for India, which have been
to the nature of coalition government at the hampering the proper growth and expansion of
—
Centre as the Prime Minister puts it), Indian thefinancial market in thecountry .