--- PAGE 351 ---
C H A P T E R
I
m , k
\V
l
K
1
BANKING IN
1
C"
INDIA -
/
M*
=> Introduction
=> Bank& Non-BankInstitutions Banksareperhapsthemost important
^ Non-BankingFinancialCompanies financial intermediary . In the
(NBFCs) nineteenthcentury ,banksmainly lent
=> ReserveBankof India money tofirms to helpfinance their
Base Rate inventories - which were held as
^ RevisedLMF collateral - in the cases ofdefaulters
=> NationalisationandDevelopmentof Bank banks seized them. Gradually, banks
¬
inginindia expanded their lending activities -
=> FinancialSector Reforms to finance houses and commercial
=> Banking Sector Reforms real estates - holding the buildings
Non-Performing Assets as collateral. Emergence of the
information technology haspresented
o WillfulDefaulter
special problems to these traditional
=> CapitalAdequacyRatio
formsoffinance- ifthe idea does not
=> BaselIIICompliance of thePSBs& RRBs
panout,thefirmmaygobankrupt,but
<=> Non-ResidentIndianDeposits
thereis nocollateral-thereislittleof
=> Labelsof ATM valuethat thecreditor can seize . *
*SeeJosephEStiglitzandCarlEWalsh,Economics,WWNorton,NewYok,
USA,4thEdition,2006,p.205.

--- PAGE 352 ---
* NIDHI
=> ChitFund
o UrjitPatelCommittee
<=> NachiketMor Committee
o Small& PaymentBanks
^ FinancialInclusion
O ALM of Banks
o NewInitiativesintheBanking Sector

--- PAGE 353 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.3
| INTRODUCTION non-banking financial company (residuary non ¬
bankingcompany, i.e., RNBC).
Thesenseinwhichwetodayusetheterm banking NBFCs are doing functions akin to that of
hasitsoriginin thewestern world to which India banks, however thereareafewdifferences:
wasintroduced bythe British rulers, way back in (i) AnNBFCcannotacceptdemanddeposits
the 17th century . Since then, enough water has (which are payable on demand), like the
flown and today Indian banks are considered savingsand currentaccounts .
amongthebestbanksinthedevelopingworldand
(ii) It is not a part of the payment and
itsattemptstoemergeamongthebestintheworld
settlementsystemandassuchcannotissue
isgoingon.
chequestoitscustomers;and
-
| BANK8t NON BANK INSTITUTIONS (iii) Deposit insurancefacilityis not available
forNBFCdepositorsunlikeinthecaseof
A financial institution which accepts different banks.(It meansthe publicdepositswith
formsofdepositsandlendsthemtotheprospective them are ‘unsecured’. In case an NBFC
borrowers as well as allows the depositors to defaults in repayment of deposit, the
withdraw their money from the accounts by depositor can approach Company Law
chequeisa bank. Board or Consumer Forum or filea civil
If the financial institution has all the same suit to recover thedeposits).
functions but does not allow depositors to issue Under the RBI Act, 1934, the NBFCs
cheque and withdraw their moneyfrom deposits have to get registered with the RBI. However,
thenit isa non-bankinstitution. to obviate dual regulation, certain category of
NBFCs which are regulated by other regulators
-
NON BANKING FINANCIAL COMPANIES areexemptedfromtherequirementofregistration
(NBFCs) with RBIsuchas:
(i) venture capital fund, merchant banking
A non-banking financial company (NBFC) is a companies, stock broking companies
company1 registered under the Companies Act,
registerwithSEBI;
1956 and is engaged in the business of loans
(ii) insurance company holding a valid
and advances, acquisition of shares/stock/bonds/
certificateofregistrationissuedbyIRDA;
debentures/securities issued by government or
(iii) nidhi companies under the Companies
localauthorityorothersecuritiesoflikemarketable
nature, leasing, hire-purchase,insurance business,
Act, 1956;
chitbusiness,butdoesnotincludeanyinstitution (iv) chit companies under the Chit Funds
whose principal business is that of agriculture Act, 1982;
activity, industrial activity, sale/purchase/ (v) housing finance companies regulated by
constructionofimmovable property . National HousingBank (of the RBI).
Anon-bankinginstitutionwhichisacompany AcompanyincorporatedundertheCompanies
and which has its principal business of receiving Act, 1956 and desirous of commencing business
deposits under anyschemeor arrangement or any of the NBFCshould havea minimum net owned
other manner, or lendingin anymanner isalso a fund (NOF) of Rs.25 lakh (raised to Rs. 2 crore
1. Thediscussionhereisbasedontheupdatedinformationsreleased bytheRBI , May11,2012.

--- PAGE 354 ---
12.4 i IndianEconomy
from April 21, 1999). NBFCs registered with other advantage, by whatever name called by
RBI have been reclassified (since 2006) as Asset them in respect of deposits received shall not be
Finance Company (AFC), Investment Company lessthantheamountcalculatedattherateof5per
(IC), and the Loan Company (LC). Provisions cent(tobecompoundedannually)ontheamount
foracceptingdepositsare: deposited in lump sum or at monthly or longer
(i) There is ceiling on acceptance of public intervals; and at the rate of 3.5 per cent (to be
deposits,an NBFCmaintainingrequired compounded annually) on theamount deposited
NOF and CRAR, and complying with under daily deposit scheme. Further, an RNBC
the prudential norms can accept public can accept deposits for a minimum period of
depositsmaximum upto4timesofNOF; 12 months and maximum period of 84 months
from thedateof receiptofsuch deposit.Like the
(ii) Can offer themaximum 11 per cent rate
ofinterest; NBFCs theycannot accept deposits repayableon
demand (it means they, too cannot open saving
(iii) Minimuminvestmentgradecredit rating
andcurrentaccounts).
(MIGR) is essential (mayget itself rated
byanyofthefourratingagenciesnamely, Debenture Redemption: The norms for the
CRISIL, CARE, ICRA and FITCH NBFCs which raise capital through debentures
Ratings India Pvt.Ltd.); have becomestricter after the new CompanyAct,
2013cameintoeffect(w.e.f.April1,2014)which
(iv) Allowed to accept/renew public deposits
areasgiven below:
fora minimum periodof12 monthsand
maximum period of60months;and (i) They need to create a debenture
(v) Effectivefrom April 2004, cannotaccept redemptionreserve (DRR) account out
deposits from NRIs except deposits by
oftheir profits,tobe usedonlytoredeem
debentures. The corpus of DRR should
debit to NROaccountof NRIsprovided
such amount do not represent inward be at least 50 per cent of the amount
raised throughdebentures.
remittanceor transfer from NRE/FCNR
(B) account, however, the existing NRI (ii) Theyneed to investor deposit asum not
deposits can be renewed (Note: different lessthan15percentoftheamountinthe
foreign currency accounts opened by the form ofdepositsin banksor government
Indian banks have been given as the last or corporate bonds.This amount cannot
sub-topicofthisChapter) . be used for any purpose other than
redeemingdebentures.
There is no ceiling on raising of deposits by
RNBCs, but every RNBC has to ensure that The norms are aimed at minimising the
the amounts deposited and investments made risk of debenture buyers in a NBFC and check
by the company are not less than the aggregate the mishaps like the‘Sahara OFCD’[for Sahara
amount of liabilities to the depositors.To secure OFCDsee Chapterl4\ .
the interest of depositors, such companies are
|
requiredtoinvestina portfoliocomprisinghighly RESERVE BANK OF INDIA
liquid andsecured instruments, viz., central/state
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) was set up in
government securities, fixed deposit ofscheduled 1935 (by the RBI Act, 1934) as a private bank
commercialbanks(SCB),certificateofdepositsof —
SCB/FIs, unitsofMutualFunds,etc .Theamount with two extrafunctions regulation and control
of the banks in India and being the banker of
payable by way of interest, premium, bonus or

--- PAGE 355 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.5
thegovernment .After nationalisation in 1949, it RBI keeps modifying this as per the requirement
emergedasthecentralbankingbodyof Indiaand of the economy, though the practice of the two
it did not remain a ‘bank’ in the technicalsense. policyannouncementsa yearstillcontinues.
Since then, the governments have been handing In India, a debate regarding autonomy to
over different functions2 to the RBI, whichstand the RBI regarding announcement of the policy
todayasgiven below: started when the Narasimham Committee-I
(i) It is the issuing agency of the currency recommended on these lines. As the Governor
and coins other than rupeeonecurrency RBI itwas BimalJalanwho vocallysupported the
and coin (which are issued by Ministry idea. No such move came from thegovernments
of Financeitselfwith thesignatureofthe officially, but it is believed that the RBI has been
FinanceSecretaryon thenote). given almost working autonomy in this area. In
(ii) Distributingagentforcurrencyandcoins most of the developed economies, the central
issued bytheGovernmentof India. bank functions with autonomous powers in this
(iii) Bankerofthegovernment . area (bifurcation of politics from theeconomics).
Though we lack such kind of officially open
(iv) Bankof thebanks/Bankoflast resort .
autonomyfor the RBI, we havelearnt enough by
(v) Announces the credit and monetary nowandare better offtoday.
policyfor theeconomy.
There are many tools by which the RBI
(vi) Stabilisingtherateofinflation.
regulates the desired/required kind of the credit
(vii) Stabilisingtheexchangerateof rupee, and monetary policy — CRR, SLR, Bank Rate,
(viii) Keeperoftheforeigncurrencyreserves. Repo rate, Reverse Repo rate, PLR, Exim interest
(ix) Agent of theGovernmentof_India in the rate, SmallSavingSchemes’ interest rates (SSSs),
IMF. interestchangesfor theinstrumentsofthemoney
(x) Performing a variety of developmental
market,etc .
and promotional functions under which
^DD
it did set up institutions like IDBI,
SIDBI, NABARD, NHB,etc . Thecash reserveratio (CRR) is theratio (fixed by
the RBI) of the total deposits of a bank in India
CREDITANDMONETARYPOLICY which is kept with the RBI in the form of cash.
The policy by which the desired level of money This was fixed to be in the range of 3 to 13 per
flow and its demand is regulated is known as the cent .3A recent Amendment (2007) has removed
credit and monetary policy.All over the world it the 3 per cent floor and provided a free hand to
theRBI in fixingtheCRR.
is announced by thecentral banking bodyof the
country — as the RBI announces it in India. In At present it is 4 per cent and a 1 per cent
India there has been a tradition of announcing it change in it today affects the economy with Rs.
twice in a financial year — before the starting of 96,000 crore4 — an increase sucks this amount
the busyand the slack seasons. But in the reform from the economy, while a decrease injects this
period, this tradition has been broken. Now the amount into theeconomy.
2. BasedontheRBINationalisationAct,1949andfurtherannouncementsoftheGovernmentofIndia(MoF).
3. RBIAct,1934,sub- section(1)ofSection42.
4. AnnualPolicyStatement2013-14,RBI,May3,2013,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 356 ---
12.6 I IndianEconomy
Following the recommendations of the paid by the government, it was being advised.
NarasimhamCommitteeon theFinancialSystem However, there has been no follow up in this
(1991) thegovernmentstartedtwomajorchanges regard by the governments . The Government of
concerningtheCRR: India has removed the 25 per cent floor for the
(i) reducingtheCRRwassetasthemedium- SLRbyanAmendment(2007) providingtheRBI
term objective and it was reduced afreehand in fixingit.
graduallyfrom its peak of 15 per cent in
BANK RATE
1992 to 4.5 per cent byjune2003.5
After the RBI (Amendment) Act has TheinterestratewhichtheRBIchargesonitslong ¬
been enacted inJune 2006, the RBI can term lendings is known as the Bank Rate. The
now prescribe CRR for scheduled banks clientswhoborrowthroughthisroutearetheGol,
without anyfloor or ceiling rate thereby state governments, banks, financial institutions,
removing the statutory minimum CRR co-operative banks, NBFCs, etc . The rate has
limitof3per cent .6 direct impact on long- term lending activities of
(ii) Payment of interest by the RBI on the the concerned lending bodies operating in the
CRR money to the scheduled banks Indian financial system . The rate was realigned10
— withtheMSF (MarginalStandingFacility) bythe
started in financial year 1999 2000 (in
the wake of the banking slow down). RBI in February2012.
Though the RBI discontinued interest
REPORATE
paymentsfrom mid-2007.7
TherateofinteresttheRBIchargesfromitsclients
C1 D on their short - termborrowing is the repo ratein
The statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) is the ratio India.11 Basically, this is an abbreviated form of
(fixed bythe RBI) of the total deposits of a bank the‘rateof repurchase’and in western economies
which is to be maintained bythe bank with itself
itisknown asthe‘rateofdiscount’.12
innon-cashformprescribedbythegovernmentto In practiceit is not calledan interest rate but
bein therangeof25 to 40percent .8 considered a discount on the dated government
The ratio was cut to 25 per cent (done in securities, which are deposited by institution to
October 1997 after CFS suggestions).9 It used borrow for the short term . When they get their
to be as high as 38.5 per cent . The CFS has securities released from the RBI, the value of the
recommended the government not to use this securities is lost by the amount of the current
money by handing G-Secs to the banks. In its repo rate . This rate functions as the benchmark
place a market - based interest on it should be rate for the inter-bank short- term market (i.e.,
5. EconomicSurvey,2006-07,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
6. RBI(Amendment)Act,2006,Gol,N.Delhi.
7. CreditandMonetaryPolicy,April1,2007,op.cit.
8. RBIAct,1934andBankingRegulationAct,1949Section24.
9. CommitteeonFinancialSystem(CFS)headed bythethenRBIDeputyGovernorM.Narasimhan,1991.
10. ThroughanRBIannouncementon15thFeb.2012.
11. RBIAct,1934andBankingRegulationAct,1949.
12. StiglitzandWalsh,Economics,op.cit.,p.629 - 630.

--- PAGE 357 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.7
call Money Market) in India. Banks usually use falling exchange rate, the RBI increased the gap
this route for one-day borrowing to fulfil their between ‘repo’ and MSF to 3 per cent (lateJuly
short- term liquiditycrunch. Higher the repo rate 2013).
costlier theloans banksforward and viceversa. It The MSF would be the last resort for banks
has direct impact on the nominalinterest rates of oncetheyexhaustall borrowing options including
the bank’slending.Thereporatewasintroduced the liquidity adjustment facility by pledging
in December1992. through government securities, which has lower
rate (i.e., repo rate) of interest in comparison
REVERSEREPORATE
with the MSF. The MSF would be a penal rate
It is therateof interest the RBI pays to its clients for banks and the banks can borrow funds by
who offer short- term loan to it. At present (July pledging government securities within the limits
2013) therateisat6.23percent . of the statutory liquidity ratio. The scheme has
Itisreverseofthereporateandthiswasstarted been introduced by RBI with the main aim of
inNovember1996aspartofliquidityAdjustment reducing volatility in the overnight lending rates
Facility (LAF) by the RBI. In practice, financial in the inter-bank market and to enable smooth
instituions operating in India park their surplus monetarytransmission in thefinancialsystem .
fundswiththeRBIforshort- termperiodandearn Banks can borrow through MSF on all
money.Ithasadirect bearingon theinterestrates working days except Saturdays, between 3:30
chargedbythebanksandthefinancialinstitutions and 4:30 p.m. in Mumbai where RBI has its
on their differentformsofloans. headquarters. The minimum amount which can
This tool was utilised bythe RBI in thewake be accessed through MSF is Rs. l crore and in
of over money supply with the Indian banks multiplesof Rs.1crore.
and lower loan disbursal to serve twin purposes MSFrepresentstheupperbandoftheinterest
of cutting down banks losses and the prevailing corridor and reverse repo (7.25 per cent) as the
interest rate .13It has emergedasa veryimportant lower band and the repo rate in the middle. To
tool in direction of following cheap interest balance the liquidity, RBI would use the sole
—
regime the general policy of the RBI since independentpolicyratewhichisthereporateand
reform processstarted. the MSF rate automaticallyadjusts to 1 per cent
abovetherepo rate .
MARGINALSTANDINGFACILITY(MSF)14
Similar to India’s MSF the ECB (European
MSF is a new scheme announced by the RBI in Central Bank) also offers standing facilities
its Monetary Policy, 2011 — 12 which came into called marginal lending facilities (MLF) and
effectfrom May, 2011.Under thisscheme, banks the Federal Reserve (the US Central Bank) has
can borrow overnight upto 1 per cent of their discount window systems (DWS). Like the MSF,
net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) from thesecondarycreditfacilitymadeavailablebythe
the RBI, at theinterest rate 1 per cent (100 basis Federal Reserve to the depository institutions in
points) higher than the current repo rate . In an USA is typically overnight credit on a veryshort
attempt to strengthen rupee and checking its term basisat ratesabovethe primarycredit rate .
13. EconomicSurvey2001-02,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
14. Thewrite -up is based on theRBI'sCredit& Monetary Policy,2011-12 (in which theScheme was introduced);and
theEuropeanCentralBank,Frankfurt,GermanyandFederalReserveSystem(alsoknownastheFederalReserve,and
informallyastheFed)Washington,DC,USA

--- PAGE 358 ---
12.8 i IndianEconomy
Inanattempttostrengthenrupeeandchecking from the RBI and reverse repo rate is the rate at
itsfallingexchangerate,theRBIincreasedthegap whichbanksparktheirfundswiththeRBI.Under
between ‘repo’ and MSF to 3 per cent (lateJuly theMSF, banksare permitted to avail themselves
2013). The effectiveness of standing facilities in offundsfrom the RBIonovernight basis.
reducing volatility have been examined by many The bank rate acts as the penal rate charged
scholars and certain studies have pointed out on banks for shortfalls in meeting their reserve
that in the Federal ReserveSystem in the United requirements (CRR and SLR). The bank rate
States, thedesignof thefacilitydecreasesa bank’s is also used by several financial institutions as a
incentive to participate actively in interbank referenceratefor indexation purposes.
market(i.e.,India’scallmoneymarket)duetothe
perceivedstigma from usingsuch facility.Thisin | BASE RATE
turn reduces the effectiveness of standing facility
in reducinginterest ratevolatility. Base Rate is the interest rate below which
ScheduledCommercialBanks(SCBs)willlendno
BANK RATEREALIGNEDWITHMSF, loans to its customers — its means it is like prime
The RBI on February 13, 2012 increased the lending rate (PLR) and the benchmark prime
lendingRate (BPLR) ofthe pastand is basicallya
Bank Rate by 350 basis points from 6 per cent
floor rateofinterest.It replaced16theexistingidea
to 9.50 per cent and realigned the Bank Rate
of BPLRonJuly1, 2010.
with Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) rate,
which, in turn, islinked to the policyrepo rate .15 The BPLRsystem (while the existingsystem
Henceforth, whenever there is an adjustment of was of PLR), introduced in 2003, fell short of
theMSF rate, the RBI willconsiderand align the its original objective of bringing transparency to
bank ratewith therevised MSF rate . lending rates . This was mainly because under
this system, banks could lend below BPLR.
Beingthediscount rate, the bank rateshould
technicallybehigherthanthepolicyreporate .The This made a bargaining by the borrower with
bank- ultimately one borrower getting cheaper
bankratehas, however, been kept unchangedat6
percentsinceApril2003.Thiswasmainlyfor the loan than the other, and blurred the attempts of
bringing in transparencyin the lending business.
reason that monetary policysignalling was done
For thesame reason, it was also difficult to assess
through modulations in the reverse repo rateand
the repo rate till May 3, 2011, and the policy
the transmission of policy rates (i.e., repo rate,
reverse repo rate, bank rate) of the Reserve Bank
repo rate under the revised operating procedure
of monetarypolicyfrom May3, 2011onwards. to lending rates of banks. The Base Rate system
is aimed at enhancing transparency in lending
Moreover, under the revised operating
rates of banks and enabling better assessment of
procedure, MSF, instituted at 100 basis points transmissionofmonetarypolicy.Tolookintothis
abovethe policyrepo rate, has been in operation,
matter, theRBIconstitutedaWorkingGroupon
whichmoreorlessserved thepurposeofthebank
BenchmarkPrimeLendingRate (chaired Deepak
rate . At present, the repo rate is 8.50 per cent,
Mohanty) toreviewthepresentbenchmarkprime
reserverepo7.50percentandMSF9.50percent .
lending rate (BPLR) system and suggest changes
Repo rateistherateatwhich banksborrowfunds —
to make credit pricing more transparent report
15. RBIAnnouncement,RBI,MoF,Gol,NewDelhi,Feb.15,2012.
16. RBIAnnouncement,RBI,MoF,Gol,NewDelhi,Apr.5,2010.

--- PAGE 359 ---
BankinginIndia I 12.9
submitted in October 2009 and accordingly the (cid:127) Recognition of the glide path for
ideaofbase ratewasimplemented. disinflation — the recommendation of
Now, all categories of loans are priced
UrjitR.PatelCommitteereporthavebeen
with reference to the base rate only, except (a) implemented, including adoption of
differential rate of interest ( DRI) loans (b) loans thenewCPI-Casthekeymeasureof
to banks’own employees, and (c) loans to banks’
inflation.
depositors against their own deposits. Since the (cid:127) A Monetary Policy Framework has been
—
base rate will be the minimum rate for all loans, put in place an agreement in this
banks are not permitted to resort to any lending regard was signed between the Gol and
below this rate — accordingly, the provision the RBI late February 2015. Under the
of lending below the BPLR to a customer by framework, the RBI is to‘targetinflation'
banks if the loan amount is not less than Rs. 2 at 4 per cent with a variations of 2 per
lakh has been withdrawn. It is expected that the cent . It means, the‘range of inflation’ to
above deregulation of lending rate will increase be between 2 to6 per cent .
the credit flow to small borrowers at reasonable (cid:127) Progressivereductioninaccesstoovernight
rateand direct bankfinancewill provideeffective liquidityatthefixedreporate,andincrease
competition to other forms of high cost credit. in accesstoliquiditythroughtermrepos
For export credit, RBI announces the floor rate, (the liquidity provided under 7-day and
separately. Banks are required to review the base 14-day term repos have been increased
rateatleastonceinaquarterandpublishthesame from0.5percentofthebankingsystemto
for thegeneral public. . 0.75 per cent, and theliquidity provided
- under overnight repos has been decreased
C&MPOLICY NEWINITIATIVES
from 0.5 per cent to 0.25 per cent
Thelast Bi-monthlyCredit&MonetaryPolicyof (done in pursuance of the Urjit R. Patel
theRBI wasannouncedon February3,2013 — as Committee’s recommendations). This
per which theratesand ratiosstansasfollows: aimsto improve the transmission of
Policy Rates: Bank Rate 8.5 per cent; Repo Rate policy impulses across the interest rate
.
7.5 per cent; Reverse Repo Rate6.5 per cent and spectrum
MSF Rate8.5 per cent . (cid:127) Introductionoflonger- tenortermreposas
wellastermreverserepos.
Reserve Ratios:CRR4 per cent andSLR21.5 per
.
cent | REVISED LMF
Lenidng /Deposit Rates: Base Rate from 10.00-
10.25 per cent; Saving Deposit Rate4.0 per cent In August 2014, the RBI announced a revised
(relatesto 5 major banks)andTerm Deposit Rate Liquidity Management Framework (LMF) as
from8.00-8.75 per cent . a way to check volatility in the inter-bank call
The RBI hasstarted some newthingsin the money markets, where banks lend to each other,
C&MPolicy,in recenttimes
—
majoronesareas
andalsoallowthelenderstomanagetheirliquidity
needsbetter.MajorfeaturesoftheLMFisasgiven
given below:
below:
(cid:127) Transition to a bi-monthly monetary
policycycle. (cid:127) RBI started conducting 14-day term
repurchaseauctionsfourtimesafortnight,

--- PAGE 360 ---
12.10 4 IndianEconomy
up to anaggregate amount equal to 0.75 the masses had no access to the banking
per cent of the system’s deposit base or service;
net demandand timeliabilities(NDTL). (ii) The government needed to direct the
(cid:127) Unlike earlier, RBI has announced a resourcesinsuchawaythatgreaterpublic
fixed schedule for these 14-dayterm repo benefitcould takeplace;
operations, which are used by banks for (iii) Theplanneddevelopmentoftheeconomy
their day- to -day liquidity requirements. required a certain degre _ e of government
One-fourth of the total amount of 0.75 control on the capital generated by the
per cent of NDTLs would be put up for economy. Nationalisation of banks in
auction in each of thefour auctions, RBI India took place in the following two
said inastatement . stages:
(cid:127) No change in the amount that banks .
can access from the liquidity adjustment 1 EMERGENCEOFTHESBI
facility (LAF) window at fixed repo rate The Government of India, with the enactment
of the time. Banks are currently allowed of the SBI Act, 1955 partially nationalised the
to borrow upto 0.25 per cent of their three Imperial Banks (mainly operating in the
deposit base or NDTL from the LAF three past Presidencies with their 466 branches)
window.
and named them the State Bank of India
—
the
(cid:127) Additionally, RBI conducts overnight firstpublicsectorbankemergedin India.TheRBI
variable rate repo auctions based on an had purchased 92 per cent of the shares in this
assessment of liquidityin thesystem and partial nationalisation.
government cash balances available for Satisfiedwiththeexperiment,thegovernment
auction for theday. in a related move partially nationalised eight
(cid:127) The LMF is aimed at reducing volatility more private banks (withgood regional presence)
in the call rate . Better interest signalling via SBI(Associates)Act,1959and named them as
and medium- term stability in the loan theAssociates of theSBI — the RBI had acquired
marketareother objectivesofit. 92 per cent stake in them as well. After merging
theState Bank of Bikaner and the State Bank of
NATIONALISATION AND DEVELOPMENT Jaipur as well, the RBI came up with the state
OFBANKING IN INDIA Bankof BikanerandJaipur. NowtheSBIGroup
—
has a total number of six banks SBI being one
The development of banking industry in India andfiveofitsassociates.
has been intertwined with the story of its
.
nationalisation. Once the Reserve Bank of India 2 EMERGENCEOFNATIONALISEDBANKS
(RBI) was nationalised in 1949 and a central
After successful experimentation in the partial
bankingwasin place, thegovernment considered
nationalisations the government decided to go
the nationalising of selected private banks in the
for complete nationalisation. With the help
countrydueto thefollowingmajorreasons:
of the Banking Nationalisation Act, 1969, the
(i) As the banks were owned and managed
government nationalised a total number of 20
by the private sector the services of the
—
privatebanks:
banking were having a narrow reach

--- PAGE 361 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.11
(i) 14 banks with deposits were more than bankcango for capitalisation.
Rs.50croreofnationalised inJuly1969, (ii) In 1994 the government allowed the
and nationalised banks to have access to the
(ii) 6 banks with deposits were more than capital market with a ceiling of 33 per
Rs. 200 crore of nationalised in April cent sale of shares through the Banking
1980. Companies(Amendment)Act,1994.
After the merger of the loss-making New Sincethen manynationalised bankshave
Bank of India with the Punjab National Bank tappedthecapitalmarketfor theircapital
—
(PNB) in September 1993, the total number of enhancement Indian Overseas Bank
nationalisedbankscamedownto19.Today,there being the first in the row. Though such
are 27 publicsector banks in India out of which banks could be better called the public
19 are nationalised (though noneof theso-called sector banks (astheGol holdsmorethan
nationalisedbankshave100percentownershipof 50 per cent stake in them) they are still
theGovernmentof India). knownasthenationalised banks.
After the nationalisation of banks the (iii) In1994itselfthegovernmentallowedthe
government stopped opening of banks in the opening of private banks in the country .
privatesector though some foreign private banks The first private bank of the reform era
wereallowed to operatein thecountryto provide was the UTI Bank. Since then a few
theexternalcurrencyloans.AfterIndia usheredin dozens Indian and foreign private banks
theera of theeconomicreforms, thegovernment have beenopened in thecountry .
started a comprehensive banking system reform Thus, since 1993 — 94 onwards, we see a
inthefiscal1992 — 93.Threerelateddevelopments reversal of the policies governing banks in the
allowedthefurtherexpansionofbankingindustry country .As a general principle, the publicsector
in thecountry: and the nationalised banks are to be converted
(i) In1993theSBIwasallowedaccesstothe into private sector entities. What would be the
capital market with permission given to minimum government holding in them is still
sell its share to the tune of 33 per cent a matter of debate and yet to be decided.17 The
-
throughSBI(Amendment)Act,1993 policyofbankconsolidationisstillbeingfollowed
At present the Government of India by the government, so that these banks could
has 59.73 per cent shares in the SBI (It broadentheircapitalbaseandemergeassignificant
was onJuly9,2007thattheentireequity playersintheglobalbankingcompetit — ion.18Every
stake of the RBI was taken over by the delay in it will hamper their interests, as per the
Governmentof India. Thus,the RBI is no experts .
more the holding bank of the SBI and its .
.. 3 EMERGENCEOFTHERRBs
Associates ) ^
OnOctober10,2007thegovernment TheRegionalRuralBanks(RRBs)werefirstsetup
announced its proposal of selling the onOctober2,1975 (only5in numbers)with the
shares of the SBI and cutting down its aim to take banking services to the doorsteps of
stakein it to 53 per cent levelso that the theruralmassesspeciallyin theremoteareaswith
17. AspertheStrategicDisinvestmentStatementof1999 , theGovernmenthaddecidedtocutitsholdinginthemto26
percent.Thepolicywasputon holdoncetheUPAGovernmentcametopower.
18. Y.V.Reddy,LecturesonEconomicandFinancialSectorReformsinIndia , Oxford U.Press,N.Delhi,2002,pp.137 - 57.

--- PAGE 362 ---
12.12 4 IndianEconomy
no access to bankingservices with twin duties to After the above-given policy changes, the
fulfill: RRBs started coming out of the red/losses. The
(i) to providecredittotheweakersectionsof CFS has recommended to get them merged with
thesocietyatconcessionalrateofinterest theirmanagingnationalisedorpublicsectorbanks
who previously depended on private andfinallymakethem partofthewould-bethree-
moneylendingand tier banking structure of India. At present there
are 56 RRBs (after amalgamation) functioningin
(ii) to mobilise rural savings and channelise
India even though the amalgamation process is
them forsupportingproductiveactivities
in theruralareas. goingon (RBI,April2015) .
TheGol,theconcernedstategovernmentand |
FINANCIALSECTOR REFORMS
the sponsoring nationalised bank contribute the
sharecapitalof the RRBsin the proportion of 50 The process of economic reforms initiated in
percent,15percentand35percent,respectively.
1991 had redefined the role of government in
The area of operation of the RRB is limited to the economy — in coming times the economy
notifiedfewdistrictsinastate . will be dependent on the greater private
Following the suggestions of the Kelkar participation for its development.19 Such a
Committee, the government stopped opening changed view to development required an
—
new RRBs in 1987 by that time their total overhauling in the investment structure of the
number stood at 196. Due to excessive leanings economy. Now the private sector was going
towards social banking and catering to the to demand high investible capital out of the
highlyeconomicallyweaker sections, these banks financial system . Thus, an emergent need was
started incurring huge losses by early 1980s. For felt to restructure the whole financial system of
restructuring and strengthening of the banks, India.
—
the governments set up two committees the The three decades after nationalisation had
—
Bhandari Committee (1994 95) and the Basu seen a phenomenalexpansion in thegeographical
Committee (1995 — 96). Out of the total, 171 coverage and financial spread of the banking
—
were running in losses in 1998 99 when the system in the country . As certain weaknesses
government tooksomeseriousdecisions: were found to have developed in the system
(i) The obligation of concessional loans during the lateeighties, it was felt that these had
abolished and the RRBsstarted charging to be addressed to enable the financial system to
commercialinterest rateson itslendings. play its role ushering in a more efficient
(ii) Thetarget clientele (rural masses, weaker and competitive economy.20 Accordingly, a high
sections) wasset free now to lend to any level committee on Financial System (CFS) was
body. set up onAugust 14, 1991 to examineall aspects
19. RepeatedbytheGolmanytimesi.e.theNewIndustrialPolicy1991;theUnionBudget1992 - 93;EighthFiveYearPlan
(1992 - 97)DraftApproach;etc.
20. Announced bytheGovernmentwhilesettingupthe M. NarasimhamCommitteeonFinacialSystemon August14,
1991.SeealsoIndia2001 , Pub.Div.,Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 363 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.13
relating to structure , organisation , functionand RECOMMENDATIONOFCFS
—
procedures of the financial system based on TheCFSrecommondation23couldbesummedup
its recommedations, a comprehensive reform of under fivesub-titles:
the banking system was introduced in the fiscal
.
1992-93.21 1 OnDirectedInvestment
TheCFSbaseditsrecommendationsoncertain
The RBI was advised not to use the CRR as a
assumptions22 which are basic to the banking principal instrument of monetary and credit
industry. And the suggestions of the committee control, in place it should rely on open market
became logical in light of this assumption, there operations (OMOs) increasingly. Two proposals
is no second opinion about it. The assumption advised regardingtheCRR:
says that “theresourcesofthe bankscomefrom
(i) CRR should be progressively reduced
thegeneralpublicandareheldbythebanksin
fromthepresent highlevelof13percent
trustthattheyaretohedeployedformaximum
. to3to 5 percent;and
benefit of the depositors” This assumption
(ii) RBI should pay interest on the CRR of
automaticallyimplied:
banksabovethe basicminimumat a rate
(i) That even the government had no
ofinterestequaltothelevelofbanks,one
business to endanger the solvency, yeardeposit.
health and efficiency of the nationalised
banks under the pretext of using banks, Concerning the SLR it was advised to cut it
resources for economic planning social to the minimum level (i.e., 25 per cent) from the
hanking povertyalleviation , etc . present high level of 38.5 per cent in the next 5
years (it was cut down to 25 per cent in October
(ii) Besides, the government had no right 1997). The government was also suggested
to get hold of the funds of the banks to progressively move towards market-based
at low interest rates and use them for
borrowingprogrammesothatbanksgeteconomic
financing its consumption expenditure benefitson theirSLRinvestments.
(i.e., revenueand fiscal deficits) and thus
defraud thedepositors. These suggestions were directed to the goal
of making more funds available to the banks,
The recommendations of the CFS
convertingidlecashfor use,andcuttingdownthe
(NarasimhamCommitteeI) wereaimedat:
interest ratesbankschargeon their loans.
(i) ensuring a degree of operational
.
flexibility; 2 OnDirectedCreditProgramme
(ii) internal autonomy for public sector Under this sub-title the suggestions revolved
banks (PSBs) in their decision making around thecompulsion of prioritysector lending
process;and
(PSL) bythebanks:
(iii) greater degree of professionalism in (i) Directed credit programme should
bankingoperation.
be phased out gradually. As per the
21. TheNarasimhamCommitteehandedoveritsreportinrecordtimewithin3monthsafteritwassetup.
22. CFS , op.cit.
23. Ibid.

--- PAGE 364 ---
12.14 4 IndianEconomy
committee, agriculture and small scale (i) Substantial reduction in the number
industries (SSIs) had already grown to of the PSBs through mergers and
—
a maturestage and they did not require acquisitions to bring about greater
any special support; two decades of efficiencyin bankingoperations;
interest subsidywere enough.Therefore, (ii) DualcontrolofRBIandBankingDivision
concessional rates of interest could be (of the Ministry of Finance) should go
dispensed with. immediately and RBI to be made the
(ii) Directed credit should not be a regular primary agency for the regulation of the
—
programme it should be a case of bankingsystem;
extraordinary support to certain weak (iii) ThePSBstobemadefreeandautonomous;
—
sections besides,itshouldbetemporary,
(iv) TheRBItoexaminealltheguidelinesand
not a permanentone. directions issued to the banking system
(iii) Concept of PSL should be redefined in the context of the independence and
to include only the weakest sections of autonomyofthe banks;
the rural community such as marginal
(v) Every PSB to go for a radical change in
farmers, ruralartisans,villageandcottage
work technology and culture, so as to
industries, tinysector,etc .
become competitive internallyand to be
(iv) The “redefined PSL” should have 10 per at par withthewide rangeofinnovations
centfixed of theaggregatebankcredit. takingplaceabroad;and
(v) The composition of the PSL should be (vi) Finally, the appointment of the Chief
reviewedafter every3years. Executiveof Bank(CMD) wassuggested
. not to be on political considerations
3 OntheStructureofInterest Rates
but on professionalism and integrity.
The major recommendations on thestructure of An independent panel of experts was
interest ratesare: suggested whichshould recommend and
(i) Interestratestobebroadlydeterminedby finalise the suitable candidates for this
.
marketforces; post
(ii) All controls of interest rates on deposits 5 . AssetReconstructionCompanies/Fund
andlendingto bewithdrawn;
To tackle the menace of the higher non
(iii) Concessional rates of interest for PSL of ¬
smallsizesto bephasedoutandsubsidies performing assets (NPAs) of banks and financial
institutions, the committee suggested setting up
on the IRDPloansto bewithdrawn;
of asset reconstruction companies/funds (taking
(iv) Bank rate to be the anchor rate and all cluefrom theUSexperience).
other interest rates to becloselylinked to
The committee directly blamed the
it;and
Government of India (Gol) and the Ministry of
(v) T si h m e pli R fy BI the to str b u e ctu th re e o s f o i l n e te a re u s t t ho ra r t i e ty s . to Finance for the sad state of affairs of the PSBs.
These banks were used and abused by the Gol,
4.OnStructuralReorganisationoftheBank the officials, the bank employees and the trade
unions, the report adds. The recommendations
For the structural reorganisation of banks some
were revolutionary in many respects and were
majorsuggestionsweregiven:

--- PAGE 365 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.15
opposedbythebankunionsandtheleftistpolitical (i) Need for a stronger banking system
parties. for which mergers of the PSBs and
There were some other major suggestions of the financial institutions (AIFIs) were
—
the committee which made it possible to get the suggested stronger banks and the DFIs
following24 thingsdone bythegovernment: (development financial institutions, i.e.,
(i) opening of new private sector banks AIFIs) to be merged while weaker and
permitted in 1993;
unviableonesto beclosed.
(ii) prudential norms relating to income
(ii) A3-tier bankingstructurewassuggested
recognition, asset classification and
after mergers:
provisioning by banks on the basis of (a) Tier-1 to have 2 to 3 banks of
objectivecriterialaiddown bythe RBI; internationalorientation;
(iii) introduction of capital adequacy norms (b) Tier-2 to have 8 to 10 banks of
(i.e., CAR provisions) with international nationalorientation;and
standardstarted; (c) Tier-3to have large number of local
(iv) simplification in the banking regulation
banks.
(i.e.,viaboardforfinancialsupervisionin The first and second tiers were to take
1994);etc . careofthebankingneedsofthecorporate
sectorin theeconomy.
| BANKING SECTOR REFORMS (iii) Higher norms of Capital- to -Risk —
Weighted Adequacy Ratio (CRAR)
The government commenced a comprehens — ive suggested — increasedto 10percent .
reform processin thefinancialsystemin 1992 93
after the recommendations of the CFS in 1991. (iv) Budgetary recapitalisation of the PSBs is
In December 1997 the government did set up not viableandshould beabandoned.
anothercommittteeon the bankingsector reform (v) Legalframework of loan recoveryshould
under the chairmanship of M. Narasimham.25 be strengthened (the government passed
Theobjectiveofthecommitteeisobjectivelyclear
theSARFAESI(Act,2002) .
bythetermsofreferenceitwasgivenwhilesetting (vi) Net NPAs for all banks suggested to be
up: cut down to below 3 per cent by 2000
“Toreviewtheprogressofbankingsectorreforms and3 per cent by2002.
to date and chart a programme of financial sector (vii) Rationalisation of branches and staffs of
reforms necessary to strengthen India’s financial thePSBssuggested.
systemandmakeitinternationallycompetitive” (viii) Licencingtonewprivatebanks(domestic
The Narasimham Committee-II (popularly as well as foreign) was suggested to
called by the Government of India) handed over continuewith.
its reports in April 1998 which included the (ix) Banks’ boards should be depoliticised
followingmajorsuggestions:26 under RBIsupervision.
24. BasedonY.V.Reddy,2002,op.cit.
25. EconomicSurvey1998 - 99 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
26. BasedontheReportoftheCommitteeonBankingSectorReforms , April,1998(Chairman:M.Narasimham).

--- PAGE 366 ---
12.16 4 IndianEconomy
(x) Board for financial Regulation and both) of their total lending. There is a
—
Supervisions (BFRS) should be set up sub-target also 18 per cent of the total
for the whole banking, financial and the lendingmustgotoagricultureand10per
NBFCsin India.27 centofthetotallendingor25 percentof
the prioritysector lending (whichever be
,
DRI
higher) must be lent out to the weaker
Thedifferential rateofinterest (DRI) isa lending
sections.Otherareasoftheprioritysector
programmelaunched bythegovernment inApril to becovered in theleft amount, i.e., 12
1972 which makes it obligatory upon all the per centof thetotallending.
public sector banks in India to lend 1 per cent (ii) Foreign Banks (having less than 20
of the total lending of the preceding year to ‘the branches) have to fulfil only32 per cent
poorest amongthe poor’ at an interest rate of 4 PSL target which has sub-targets for
percentperannum.Thetotallendingin2005 — 06 the exports (12 per cent) and small and
was Rs.351crores. medium enterprises (10 per cent). It
meanstheyneedtodisburseotherareasof
PRIORITYSECTORLENDING the PSL from the remaining 10 per cent
All Indian banks have to follow the compulsory
of their totallending(lesserburden).
target of priority sector lending (PSL). The The committee on financial System (CFS,
—
prioritysectorin Indiaareatpresentthesectors 1991) had suggested to immediatelycut it down
agriculture, small and medium enterprises to10percentforallbanksandcompletelyphasing
(SMEs), road and water transport, retail trade, outofthispolicyforthebettermentofthebanking
small business, small housing loans (not more industryin particularandtheeconomyingeneral.
than Rs. 10 lakhs), software industries, self help Thecommitteealsosuggestedtoshufflethesectors
groups (SHGs), agro-processing, small and covered under PSL every three years. No follow
marginal farmers, artisans, distressed urban poor up has been done from the government except
andindebtednon-institutionaldebtorsbesidesthe cutting down PSL target for the foreign banks
SCs, STs and other weaker sections of society.28 from40percent to32 percent .Meanwhilesome
In 2007, the RBI included five minorities — newareas havebeen added to the PSL.
Buddhists, Christians, Muslims, Parsis and Sikhs
under the PSL. In its new guidelines of March REVISIONINPSL
2015,theRBIadded‘mediumenterprise,sanitation The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) panel on
and renewable energy’ under it.29 The PSL target priority sector lending on February 21, 2012
must be met by the banks operating in India in proposed that the target (priority sector) for
thefollowingway: foreign banks to be increased to 40 per cent of
(i) Indian Banks need to lend 40 per cent net bank credit from the current level of 32 per
to the priority sector every year (public cent with sub-targets of 15 per cent for exports
sector as well as private sector banks, and 15 per cent for the medium and small
27. Anintegratedsystemofr—egulationandsupervisionwassuggestedbytheCommitteesothatsoundnessofthefinancial
systemcouldbeensured theconceptofafinancialsuper-regulatorgetsvindicated,asopinesY.V.Reddy,2002,op.
cited,p.38.
28. India2007,Pub.Div.,Gol,N.DelhiandthefurtherannouncementsbytheRBI.
29. RBI,NewGuidelinesonthePSL,March2,2015.

--- PAGE 367 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.17
enterprises(MSE)sector, withinwhich7percent (v) To encourage construction of dwelling
may be earmarked for micro enterprises. The units for economically weaker sections
target of domestic scheduled commercial banks and low income groups, housing loans
for lending to the priority sector to be retained granted to these individuals may be
at 40 per cent of net bank credit. The Nair included in theweakersectionscategory .
Committee, (under the Chairmanship of M. V. (vi) All loans to women under the priority
Nair, Chairman, Union Bank of India), has re ¬ sector may also be counted under loans
examined theexistingclassification andsuggested
to
weakersections.
revised guidelines with regard to priority sector (vii) The loans to education sector may
lending and related issues. Major suggestions by continue to be under the prioritysector .
thecommitteeareasgiven below:
The limit under the priority sector for
(i) The committeesuggested that the sector loansforstudiesinIndiamaybeincreased
'agriculture and allied activities’ may to Rs. 15 lakh and Rs.25 lakh in caseof
bea compositesector within the priority studiesabroad,from theexistinglimitof
sector,bydoingawaywiththedistinction Rs.10lakhand Rs.20lakh, respectively.
between direct and indirect agriculture.
(viii) The committee has also recommended
However, the targets for agriculture and allowing non-tradable priority sector
alliedactivitieswould beat18 percent .
lending certificates on a pilot basis with
(ii) A sub-target for stnall and marginal domestic scheduled commercial banks,
farmers within agriculture and allied foreign banksand regional rural banksas
activities is recommended, equivalent to market players.
9 per cent, which would be achieved in
-
stagesby2015 — 16. | NON PERFORMINGASSETS
(iii) TheMSEsectormaycontinuetobeunder
the priority sector . Within the MSE
Non-PerformingAssets(NPAs)arethebadloansoi
sector, a sub-target for micro enterprises
thebanks.Thecriteriatoidentifysuchassetshave
isrecommended,equivalentto7percent, been changing over the time. In order to follow
whichwouldalso beachievedinstagesby international best practices and to ensure greater
2013-14.
transparency,theRBIshiftedtothecurrentpolicy
in 2004. Under it, a loan is considered NPA if
(iv) T to he be lo u a n n d s e to r t h h o e u p si r n io g r s i e ty ct s o e t ct m or a . y L c o o a n n t s in f u o e r d it ay h s a ) s .T n h o i t si b s e k e n n ow se n rv a i s ce ‘9 d 0 f d o a r y’ o o n v e er t d e u r e m no ( r i. m e. . , F 9 o 0 r
constructionor purchaseofonedwelling
agricultureloanstheperiodistiedwiththeperiod
unit per individual up to Rs. 25 lakh; —
l u o r a b n a s n u a p re t a o sa R n s d .2 up lak to h R in s. r 5 ur l a a l kh an i d n s o e t m he i r - s o e f a t s h o e ns c t o o nc o e n r e ne y d ear cr o o v p e s rdu r e an n g o i r n m g .3 f 0 rom two crop
centres for repair of damaged dwelling
NPAswereclassified into threetypes:
units may be granted under the priority (a) Sub-standard: remaining NPAs for less
sector
. than or equalto 18 months;
30. ReserveBankof India,'MasterCircular - Income Recognition,AssetClassification,Provisioning andOther Related
Matters',July,2013.

--- PAGE 368 ---
12.18 4 IndianEconomy
—
(b) Doubtful: remaining NPAs for more AspertheEconomicSurvey2014 15,thestress
than 18 months;and tests suggest that the asset quality of banks may
(c) Loss assets: where the loss has been improveinthenearfutureunderexpectedpositive
identifiedbythebankorinternal/external developmentsinthemacroeconomicenvironment
auditors or the RBI inspection but the and banks may be able to meet expected losses
amount hasnot been written off. with theirexistinglevelof provisions.
The main reasons for increase in NPAs, in
CURRENTSCENARIO recent times, areasgiven below (EconomicSurvey
-
Asset qualityof the ublicsector banks (PSBs) has
2013-14&2014-15) .
comeunderstressinrecenttimes.AspertheRBI’s (i) Switchovertosystem-basedidentification
Financial Stability Report-December 2014, the of NPAs;
—
situationofwas (ii) Current macroeconomicsituation in the
(cid:127) The gross non-performing assets country;
(GNPAs)ofscheduledcommercialbanks (iii) Increasedinterest ratesin therecent past;
asa percentageofthetotalgrossadvances (iv) Lower economicgrowth;and
increased to 4.5 per cent in September
(v) Aggressive lending by banks in the past,
2014from4.1per centin March 2014. especiallyduringgood times.
(cid:127) Stressed advances increased to 10.7 per
The RBI came out with a new guidelines31
cent of the total advances from 10.0 to resolvethe NPAissue byealry2014.Thesteps
per cent between March and September
taken under itare:
2014.
— (a) Banks have to start acting as soon as a
(cid:127) Five sub- sectors infrastructure, iron &
sign of stress is noticed in a borrower’s
steel, textiles, mining (including coal),
— actions and not wait for it to become
and aviation hold 54 per cent of total an NPA. Banks to carve out as special
stressed advances of PSBs as on June
categoryofassetstermedspecialmention
2014.
accounts (SMAs) in which early signs of
(cid:127) Among bank groups, exposure of PSBs stressarevisible.
to infrastructure stood at 17.5 per cent
(b) Flexibility brought in project loans to
of their gross advances as of September
infrastructureand coreindustry projects,
2014. This was significantly higher than bothexistingand new.
thatofprivate- sector banks (9.6percent)
andforeign banks (12.1per cent). (c) Non-cooperative borrowers in NPAs
resolutionwillhaveto payhigherinterest
(cid:127) The PSBs continue to be under stress foranyfuture borrowing.Bankswillalso
on account of their past lending.Taking
berequired tomakehigherprovisionsfor
GNPAs and restructured advances
further loansextended to borrowers who
together, the stress on PSBs is 12.57 per areconsidered to be‘non-cooperative’.
cent of total advances as on September
2014.
31. RBI,EarlyRecognitionof FinancialDistress,PromptstepsforResolutionandFairRecoveryforLenders:Frameworkfor
RevitalizingDistressedAssetsintheEconomy,January2014.

--- PAGE 369 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.19
(d) Towards strengthening recovery from (i) Takepossession ofsecurityand/or
non-cooperative borrowers, the norms for (ii) take over the management of the
asset reconstruction companies (ARC) borrowingconcernand/or
have been tightened, whereby the
(iii) appoint a person to manage the
minimum investmentinsecurityreceipts concern.
should be 15 per cent, as against the
(C) If thecaseisalreadybeforetheBIFR,
earlier norm of 5 percent .
the proceedings can be stalled if
(e) Independent evaluation of large-value
banks/FIs having 75 per cent share
restructuring(aboveRs.500crore) made
in the dues have taken any steps to
mandatory.
recover thedues under theprovisions
(f) If a borrower’s interest or principal of theordinance.
payments are overdue by more than 60 2 . Thebanks/FIscanalsosellthesecurityto
days,aJointLenders’Forumto beformed
a securitisation or Asset Reconstruction
by the bankers for early resolution of
Company (ARC), established under the
.
stress provisions of the Ordinance. [The ARC
(g) The RBI has set up a central repository issought to beset upon thelinessimilar
ofinformation on largecreditsto collect,
to
theUSA,fewyearsago.]
store and disseminate credit data to
lenders. For this, banks need to furnish DEBTRECOVERYTRIBUNALS(DRTS)
creditinformationon all their borrowers
Earlier,thegovernmenthadset upDebtRecovery
withanexposureofRs.5croreandabove.
Tribunals (DRTs) in 1993 which failed to bring
(h) Incentives to banks to quickly and about thedesiredchangein thescenario dueto:32
collectivelyagreeto a resolution plan.
(i) DRTs are also clogged up with many
SARFAESIACT ,2002 casesandthejudgementtakestime(many
months, ifnotyears):
Golfinallycrackeddownonthewilfuldefaulters
(ii) The sale of property can be made only
by passing theSecuritisationand Reconstructionof
throughcourtappointed officials,adding
FinancialAssetsandEnforcementofSecurityInterest
delays;
(SARFAESI)Act,2002 .
(iii) The tribunals cannot take up the
The Act gives far reaching powers to the medium- or large-sized firms if they are
banks/FIsconcering NPAs:
under consideration of the BIFR due to
.
1 Banks/FIs having75 per cent of thedues sickness.
owed by the borrower can collectively
The praiseworthy step regarding recovery
proceed on the following in theevent of
of the NPAs and allowing the setting up of the
theaccount becoming NPA:
Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) had
(A) Issue notice of default to borrowers an impact. Improved industrial climate and new
askingto clear dueswithin 60days. options available to banks for dealing with bad
(B) On the borrower’sfailureto repay: loanshelpedin recoveringasubstantialamountof
32 . EconomicSurvey2001 - 02&India2002 , Pub. Div .,Gol,N .Delhi.

--- PAGE 370 ---
12.20 4 IndianEconomy
NPAs.The NPAsofscheduledcommercial banks needs to be at least Rs.25 lakh to be included in
(SCBs) were at 2.3 per cent of total assets as on thecategoryofwilfuldefaults.
end December2011.33 Ifanentity’sorindividual’snamefiguresinthe
list of wilful defaulters, the following restrictions
| WILLFUL DEFAULTER —
getinaction on them
(a) Barred from participating in the capital
There are many people and entities who borrow
market.
money from lending institutions but fail to
repay. However, not all of them are called wilful (b) Barredfromavailinganyfurther banking
defaulters. As is embedded in the name, a wilful facilitiesand toaccessfinancial
defaulter is one who does not repay a loan or institutionsfor five years for the purpose
liability, butapartfrom thisthereareother things ofstartinga newventure .
that define a wilful defaulter. According to the (c) The lenders can initiate the process of
—
RBI,a wilfuldefaulter isonewho recoverywithfullvigour andcan even
(i) is financially capable to repay and yet initiatecriminal proceedings, ifrequired.
doesnot doso; (d) The lending institutions may not allow
(ii) oronewhodivertsthefundsforpurposes anyperson related to thedefaulting
other thanwhat thefundwasavailedfor; company to become a board member of
(iii) or with whom funds are not available in
anyother companyaswell.
theform ofassetsasfundshave been
|
CAPITALADEQUACY RATIO
siphoned off;
(iv) or who hassold or disposed the property At first sight bank is a business or industry a
that was used asasecurityto obtain the segment of the service sector in any economy.
loan.
But the failure of a bank may have far greater
Diversion of fund includes activities such as damagingimpact on an economythan anyother
using short- term working capital for long- term kindofbusinessorcommercialactivity.Basically,
purposes, acquiring assets for which theloan was moderneconomiesareheavilydependentonbanks
—
not meant for and transferring funds to other todaythaninthepast banksaretodaycalledthe
entities. Siphoning of funds means that funds backbone of economies. Healthy functioning of
were used for purposes that were not related to banksistodayessentialfortheproperfunctioning
the borrower and which could affect thefinancial of an economy. As credit creation (i.eloan
healthof theentity. disbursals) of banksarehighlyriskybusiness, the
However, a lending institution cannot term depositors’ moneydepends on the banks’quality
an entity or an individual a wilful defaulter for
oflending.Moreimportantly,thewholepayment
a one-off case of default and needs to take into
system,publicaswellasprivate,dependsonbanks.
account the repayment track record. The default Abank’sfailurehasthepotentialofcreatingchaos
should be established to be intentional and the in an economy. This is why governments of the
defaultershould beinformedabout thesame.The world pay special attention to the regulatory
defaulter should also be given a chance to clarify aspects of the banks. Every regulatory provision
his stand on the issue. Also, the default amount for banks tries to achieve a simple equation, i.e.,
33. EconomicSurvey2011 - 12 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 371 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.21
“how the hanks should maximise their credit lending. It was in 1988 that the central banking
creation by minimising the risk and continue bodies of the developed economies agreed upon
—
functioning permanently”. In the banking such a provision, the CAR also known as the
.
businessrisksarealwaysthereandcannotbemade Basel Accord35 The accord was agreed upon
—
‘zero’ as any loan forwarded to any individual at Basel, Switzerland at a meeting of the Bank
orfirm(irrespectiveoftheircredit-worthiness)has for International Settlements (BIS).36 It was at
theriskofturningout to bea baddebt(i.e.,NPA this time that the Basel-I norms of the capital
— —
in India) the probability of this being 50 per adequacyratio wereagreed upon a requirement
cent . But banks must function so that economies wasimposed uponthebankstomaintainacertain
can function. Finally, the central banks of the amountoffreecapital(i.e.,ratio) to theirassets37
worldstarted devising tools to minimise the risks (i.e., loans and investments by the banks) as a
of banking at one hand and providing cushions cushionagainstprobablelossesininvestmentsand
(shock-absorbers) to the banks at the other hand loans.In1988,thisratiocapitalwasdecidedtobe
so that banks do not go bust (i.e., shut down 8 per cent . It means that if the total investments
after becoming bankrupt). Providing cushion/ and loans forwarded by a bank amounts
shock-absorbers to banks has seen three major to Rs. 100, the bank needs to maintain a free
developments:34 capital38 of Rs. 8 at that particular time. The
(i) The provision of keeping a cash ratio capitaladequacyratioisthepercentageoftotal
of total deposits mobilised by the banks capital to the total risk—weighted assets (see
(known as theCRRin India);
reference39).
(ii) the provision of maintainingsome assets CAR, a measure of a bank’s capital, is
of the deposits mobilised by the banks expressedasa percentageofa bank’sriskweighted
with the banks themselves in non-cash creditexposures:
form(known astheSLRin India);and CAR=TotaloftheTier1&Tier 2capitals-s-
(iii) The provision of the capital adequacy RiskWeightedAssets
ratio (CAR) norm. Also known as ‘Capital to Risk Weighted
The capital adequacy ratio (CAR) norm has Assets Ratio (CRAR)’this ratio is used to protect
been the last provision to emerge in the area of
depositorsandpromotethestabilityandefficiency
regulating the banks in such a way that theycan of financialsystemsaround theworld.Two types
ofcapitalweremeasuredaspertheBaselIInorms
sustain the probable risks and uncertainties of
34. Through various legislationssince the RBINationalisationAct,1949and the BankingRegulationAct,1949 were
enacted-andfurtherAmendmentstotheActs,MoF,Gol,NewDelhi.
35. SimonCox(ed.),Economics,TheEconomist,2007,op.cit.,p.145.
36. TheBIS istodaya central bankfor central bankersset up in1930 in a round tower near Basel railwaystation in
Switzerlandasa privatecompanyowned bya numberof central banks,onecommercial bank(Citibank)and some
private individuals.Today itfunctionsasa meeting placeforthe bank regulatorsof manycountries,a multilateral
regulatoryauthorityandaclearinghouseformanynations'reserves(i.e.foreignexchange).SeeTimHindle,Pocket
Finance,TheEconomist,2007,pp.35 - 36.
37. Investmentsmadeandloansforwardedbybanksareknownasriskyassets.
38. ThecapitalofabankwasclassifiedintoTier - 1andTier - ll.WhileTier - 1comprisessharecapitalanddisclosed reserves,
Tier - llincludesrevaluationreserves,hybridcapitalandsubordinateddebtofabank.As—pertheprovisionTier - llcapital
shouldnotexceedtheTierIcapital.Therisk-weightingdependsuponthetypeofassets forexampleitis100percent
onprivatesectorloanswhileonly20percentforshort-termloans.

--- PAGE 372 ---
12.22 4 IndianEconomy
— Tier 1 capital, which can absorb losses without WHYTOMAINTAINCAR?
a bank being required to cease trading, and Tier The basic question which comes to mind is as
2capital, which can absorb losses in the event of to why do the banks need to hold capital in the
a winding-up and so provides a lesser degree of form of CAR norms? Two reasons42have been
protection to depositors. The new norms (Basel generallyforwardedfor thesame:
III)hasdevisedathirdcategoryofcapital,i.e.,Tier
(i) Bank capital helps to prevent bank
3capital.
failure, which arises in case the bank
- -
The RBI introduced the capitalto risk
cannot satisfy its obligations to pay the
weighted assets ratio (CRAR) system for the depositors and other creditors. The low
banks operating in India in 199
—
2 in accordance capitalbankhasanegativenetworthafter
with the standards of the BIS as part of the the loss in its business. In other words,
financial sector reforms.39 In the coming years it turns into insolvent capital, therefore,
the Basel norms were extended to term -lending acts as a cushion to lessen the chance of
institutions, primary dealers and non-banking thebankturninginsolvent.
financial companies (NBFCs), too . Meanwhile
(ii) The amount of capital affects returns for
theBIScame upwithanothersetofCARnorms,
theowners (equityholders) of the bank.
popularlyknown as Basel-II.The RBI guidelines
regarding the CAR norms in India have been as BASELACCORDS
given below:
(i) Basel-I norm of the CAR was to be The Basel Accords (i.e., Basel I, II and now III)
areasetofagreementssetbytheBaselCommittee
achieved by the Indian banks by March
on Bank Supervision (BCBS), which provides
1997.
recommendations on banking regulations in
(ii) The CAR norm was raised to 9 per regardstocapitalrisk,marketriskandoperational
cent with effect from March 31, risk.The purpose of theaccords is to ensure that
2000 (Narasimham Committee-II had
financialinstitutionshaveenoughcapitalonaccount
recommended to raise it to 10 per cent in to meetobligationsandabsorb unexpectedlosses.
1998)3°
Theyareofparamountimportancetothebanking
(iii) Foreign banks as well as Indian banks worldandarepresentlyimplemented byover100
-
with foreign presence to follow Basel countriesacross theworld.The BISAccordswere
II norms , w.e.f. March 31, 2008 while theoutcomeofalong-drawn- outinitiativetostrive
other scheduled commercial banks to for greater international uniformityin prudential
follow it not later than March 31, 2009. capital standards for banks’ credit risk. The
The Basel-II norm for theCARis12 per objectives of the accords could be summed up43
cent
.41
as:
39. TheRBIisa memberoftheBoardoftheBIS.Thefinancialsectorreformscommenced in India inthefiscal1992 - 93
afterthereportsubmittedbytheNarasimhamCommitteeonFinancialsystem(CFS).
40. CommitteeonBankingSectorReforms(M NarasimhanCommittee -II),MoF,Gol,NewDelhi,April1998.
41. EconomicSurvey2006 - 07 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
42. D.M.Nachane,Partha RayandSaibalGhosh,IndiaDevelopmentReport 2004 - 05 , Oxford UniversityPress,N.Delhi,
2005,p.171.
43. IDR2004 - 05 , op.cit.,p.172.

--- PAGE 373 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.23
(i) to strengthen the international banking (i) improve the banking sector’s ability to
system; absorb shocks arising from financial and
(ii) to promote convergence of national economicstress, whatever thesource be;
capitalstandards;and (ii) improve risk management and
(iii) to iron out competitive inequalities governance;and
among banks across countries of the (iii) strengthen banks’ transparency and
world. disclosures.
The Basel Capital Adequacy Risk-related The capital of the banks has been classified
Ratio Agreement of 1988 (i.e., Basel I) was not into threetiersasgiven below:
a legal document. It was designed to apply to Tier1Capital:Aterm usedtodescribethecapital
internationallyactive banks of member countries —
adequacyofa bank it can absorb losseswithout
of the Basel Committee on BankingSupervision a bank being required to cease trading. This is
(BCBS) of the BIS at Basel, Switzerland. But the the core measure of a bank’s financial strength
detailsofitsimplementation wereleft to national from a regulator’s point of view (this is the most
discretion. This is why Basel I looked G10- reliable form of capital). It consists of the types
centric.44
of financial capital considered the most reliable
The first Basel Accord, known as Basel and liquid, primarily stockholders’ equity and
I focuses on the capital adequacy of financial disclosed reserves of the bank — equity capital
institutions.The capital adequacy risk (the risk a can’t beredeemedat theoptionoftheholderand
financial institution faces due to an unexpected disclosed reserves are the liquid assets available
loss), categorises theassetsof financial institution with thebankitself.
into five risk categories (0 per cent, 10 per cent,
20percent,50percent,100percent).Banksthat Tier 2 Capital: A term
—
used to describe the
capital adequacy of a bank it can absorb losses
operateinternationallyarerequired to havea risk
weight of8 percentorless. i
le
n
ss
t
e
h
r
e
d
e
e
v
g
e
re
n
e
t o
o
f
f
a
pr
w
ot
i
e
n
c
d
ti
i
o
n
n
g-u
to
p
d
a
e
n
p
d
os
s
i
o
tor
p
s
r
.
ov
T
i
i
d
e
e
r
s
I
a
I
The second Basel Accord, known as Basel
capital issecondary bank capital (the second most
II, is to befullyimplemented by2015. Itfocuses reliable forms of capital). This is related to Tier
on three main areas, including minimum capital 1 Capital. This capital is a measure of a bank’s
requirements, supervisory review and market
financial strength from a regulator’s point of
discipline,whichareknownasthethreepillars.
The view. It consists of accumulated after- taxsurplus
focus of thisaccord is tostrengthen international
of retained earnings, revaluation reserves of fixed
banking requirements as well as to supervise and assetsand long- term holdingsofequitysecurities,
enforcetheserequirements.
general loan-loss reserves, hybrid (debt/equity)
The third Basel Accord, known as Basel III capital instruments, and subordinated debt and
is a comprehensiveset of reform measures aimed undisclosed reserves.
to strengthen the regulation, supervision and
risk management of the banking sector . These Tier 3 Capital: A term used — to describe the
capital adequacy of a bank considered the
measuresaim45to:
44. G - 10comprisesBelgium,Canada, France,Germany,Italy,Japan,The Netherlands,Sweden, UK,and USA;laterthe
groupincorporatedLuxembourg,SwitzerlandandrecentlySpaininitsfold.
45. BankofInternationalSettlemets,Basel,Switzerland,May15,2012.

--- PAGE 374 ---
12.24 4 IndianEconomy
tertiary capital of the banks which are used to from 2 to 4.5 per cent starting in phases from
meet/support market risk, commodities risk and January 2013 to be completed byJanuary 2015.
foreign currency risk. It includes a variety of In addition, banks will have to set aside another
debt other than Tier 1 and Tier 2 capitals. Tier 2.5 per cent as a contingency for future stress .
3 capital debts may include a greater number of Banksthatfailtomeetthebufferwouldbeunable
subordinated issues, undisclosed reserves and to pay dividends, though theywill not be forced
general loss reserves compared to Tier 2 capital. to raisecash.
ToqualifyasTier3capital,assetsmustbelimited The new norms are based on renewed focus
to 230 per cent of a bank’s Tier 1 capital, be ofcentral bankerson‘macro-prudentialstability’.
unsecured, subordinated46 and have a minimum Theglobalfinancialcrisisfollowingthecrisisinthe
maturityof two years. USsub-primemarkethaspromptedthischangein
Disclosed Reserves are the total liquid cash approach.Theprevioussetofguidelines,popularly
and theSLRassetsof the banks that maybe used known as Basel II focused on ‘macro-prudential
anytime.Thiswaytheyare part of itscorecapital regulation’. In other words, global regulators are
(Tier 1). UndisclosedReservesare the unpublished now focusing on financial stability of the system
or hidden reserves of a financial institution that as a whole rather than micro regulation of any
may not appear on publicly available documents individual bank.
such as a balance sheet, but are nonetheless real Banks in theWest, which are market leaders
assets,whichareacceptedassuchbymostbanking for the most part, face low growth, an erosion
institutions but cannot be used at will by the in capital due to sovereign debt exposures and
bank. That is why they are part of its secondary stiffer regulation. They will have to reckon with
capital(Tier 2). a permanent decline in their returns on equity
thanks to enhanced capital requirements under
BASELIII PROVISIONS47 the new norms. In contrast, Indian banks — and
Thenewprovisionshavedefinedthecapitalofthe thoseinotheremergingmarketssuchasChinaand
—
banks in different way. They consider common Brazil are well-placed to maintain their returns
equity and retained earnings as the predominant on capital consequent to Basel III. Financial
component of capital (as the past) but they experts haveopined that Basel III looks changing
restrict inclusion of items such as deferred tax theeconomiclandscape in which banking power
assets, mortgage-servicing rights and investments shiftstowards theemergingmarkets.
in financial institutions to no more than 15 pen
cent of the common equity component . These BASEL III COMPLIANCEOF
rules aim to improve the quantity and quality of THE PSBs8C RRBs
thecapital.
The capital to risk weighted assets ratio (CRAR)
Whilethekeycapital ratio has been raised to
of the scheduled commercial banks of India
7 per cent of risky assets, according to the new
was 13.02 per cent by March 2014 (Basel-Ill)
norms, Tier-I capital that includes common
fallingto 12.75 per cent bySeptember2014.The
equityand perpetualpreferredstockwillberaised
46. Subordinateddebtranksbelowotherdebtswithregardtoclaimsonassetsorearnings(alsoknownasa'juniordebt').Inthe
caseofdefault,suchcreditorsgetpaidoutuntilaftertheseniordebtholderswerepaidinfull.Thus,suchcapitalsofbanksare
moreriskythanunsubordinateddebt.
47. ReserveBankof India , MoF,Gol,NewDelhi,May5,2012.

--- PAGE 375 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.25
regulatoryrequirementforCRARis9percentfor InMarch2015,theGolspecifieditsintention
2015.Thedeclineincapitalpositionsataggregate to bring down its stake in state run banks to 52
level, however,wasonaccountofdeteriorationin percent togivethem moreavenuestoraisefunds,
capital positionsof PSBs.WhiletheCRARofthe most banks are expected to approach the market
scheduled commercial banks (SCB) at 12.75 per to raise capital only next fiscal once the share
centasofSeptember 2014wassatisfactory,going marketgetsomesynergy.
forward the banking sector, particularly PSBs
will requiresubstantial capital to meet regulatory
STOCKOFMONEY
requirements with respect to additional capital In every economy it is necessary for the central
buffers.
bank to know thestock (amount/level) of money
InordertomakethePSBsandRRBscompliant available in the economy only then it can go
to the BaselIIInorms,48thegovernment has been for suitable kind of credit and monetary policy.
following a recapitalisation programme for them Saying simply, credit and monetary policy of an
since 2011 — 12. A High Level Committee on the economy is all about changing the level of the
issue was also set up by the government which money flowing in the economic system . But it
hassuggested the idea of ‘non-operating holding can be done onlywhen we know the real flow of
company’ (HoldCo) under a special Act of money.That’swhyitisnecessarytofirstassessthe
Parliament (actionisyet to comeregardingthis). levelof moneyflowingin theeconomy.
Meanwhile,thegovernmenthasinfusedthree FollowingtherecommendationsoftheSecond
tranches of capital into the banks (infused funds WorkingGrouponMoneySupply(SWG)in 1977,
go to the RRBs, too through the PSBs under RBI has been publishingfour monetaryaggregates
—
whom theyfall) upto March 2015: (component of money) M , M , M and M
2 2 3 4
(i) Rs.12,000croreinfusedduring2011-12 (are basicallyshort termsfor Money-1, Money-2,
inseven PSBs. Money-3 and Money-4) besides the Reserve
(ii) Rs.12,517croreinfusedin2012-13in8
Money.Thesecomponentsusedtocontainmoney
PSBs. ofdifferingliquidities:
(iii) Rs.6,990 crore infused in nine PSBs by Mj = Currency&coinswithpeople+ Demand
February 2015. But this capital infusion deposits of Banks (Current & Saving
is based on a new criteria — efficiency Accounts) + Otherdepositsofthe RBI.
parameters such as return on assets and M = Mj+ Demand depositsof the post offices
2
return on equity. Efficient banks are (i.e.,savingschemes’money).
rewarded with extra capital for their M = M Time/Term deposits of the Banks
3
equityso thattheycanfurtherstrengthen (i.e., the money lying in the Recurring
their position. Deposits&thefixed Deposits).
48. BaselIIInormsprescribea minimumregulatorycapitalof10.5percentforbanksbyJanuary1,2019.Thisincludesa
minimumof6percentTierIcapital,plusaminimumof2percentTierIIcapital,anda2.5percentcapitalconservation
buffer.Forthisbuffer,banksareexpectedtosetasideprofitsmadeduringgoodtimessothatitcan bedrawn upon
duringperiodsofstress.

--- PAGE 376 ---
12.26 4 IndianEconomy
M = M + total deposits of the post offices M = M + All deposits with Post Office
4 3 4 3
(both, Demand and Term/Time Savings Banks (excluding National
Deposits). SavingsCertificates).
Now the RBI has started49 publishing a set WhiletheWorkingGroupdidnotrecommend
of new monetary aggregates following the any change in the definition of reserve money
recommendationsoftheWorkingGrouponMoney and M , it proposed a new intermediatemonetary
Supply:Analytics and Methodology of Compilation aggregate to be referred to as NM comprising
2
(Chairman, Dr. Y. V. Reddy) which submitted currencyand residents’short- term bank deposits
its report in June 1998. The Working Group with contractual maturity up to and including
recommended compilation of four monetary one year, which would stand in between narrow
aggregateson the basisof the balancesheet of the money (which includes only the non-interest-
banking sector in conformity with the norms of bearingmonetaryliabilitiesofthebankingsector)
progressive liquidity: M (monetary base), M and broad money (an all-encompassing measure
(narrow money), M an 0 d M (broad money) | . that includes long- term time deposits). The new
2 3
In addition to the monetary aggregates, the broadmoneyaggregate(referredtoasNM forthe
3
Working Group had recommended compilation purposeofclarity) in theMonetarySurveywould
ofthreeliquidityaggregatesnamely,Lj,L andL , comprise,inaddition to NM ,long- termdeposits
2 3 2
which include select items of financial liabilities of residents as well as call/term borrowings from
of non-depository financial corporations such non-bank sources, which have emerged as an
as development financial institutions and non important source of resource mobilisation for
¬
banking financial companies accepting deposits banks.ThecriticaldifferencebetweenM andNM
3 3
from the public, apart from post office savings is the treatment of non-resident repatriable fixed
banks. The New Monetary Aggregates are as foreign currency liabilities of the bankingsystem
given below: in themoneysupplycompilation.
Reserve Money (MJ = Currency in There are two basic changes in the new
circulation + Bankers’ Deposits with the monetaryaggregates . sincethepostofficebank
RBI + ‘Other’50depositswith theRBI. isnota partofthebankingsector,postaldeposits
Narrow Money (MJ = Currency with are no longer treated as part of moneysupply, as
the Public + Demand Deposits with the was the case in the extant M 2 and M 4 . Second,
Banking System + ‘Other’ deposits with the residency criterion was adopted to a limited
theRBI. extent for compilation of monetary aggregates .
The Working Group made a recommendation
M =MI + Savings Depositsof Post-office
Sav 2 ings Banks. in favour of compilation of monetary aggregates
on residency basis. Residency essentially relates
BroadMoney(MJ = +TimeDeposits
to the country in which the holder has a centre
with theBankingSystem. of economic interest. Holdings of currency
49. Theworkinggroupwassetupin December1997underthechairmanshipofY.V.Reddy(thethen DeputyGovernor,
RBI)whichsubmitteditsreportinJune1998.
50. 'Other' depositswith RBI comprise mainly:(i) depositsof quasi -government; other financial institutions including
primary dealers, (ii) balances in the accounts of foreign Central Banks and Governments, and (iii) accounts of
internationalagenciessuchastheInternationalMonetaryFund.

--- PAGE 377 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.27
and deposits by the non-residents in the rest of NMj= Currency with the Public + Demand
the world sector, would be determined by their Deposits with the Banking System +
portfoliochoice.However,thesetransactionsform ‘Other’Depositswith theRBI.
partof balanceof payments (BoP).Suchholdings NM = NM + Short Term Time Deposits of
of currency and deposits are not strictly related 2 Resi ] dents (including the contractual
to thedomesticdemand for monetaryassets . It is maturityofoneyear).
thereforeargued that thesetransactionsshould be
NM =NM + Long- term Time Deposits of
regarded as external liabilities to be netted from 3 Re 2 sidents + Call/Term Funding from
foreign currency assets of the banking system . FinancialInstitutions.
However, in the context of developing countries
Lj = NM + All Depositswith the Post Office
such as India, which have a large number of 3
Savings Banks (excluding National
expatriate workers who remit their savings in the
SavingsCertificates)
formofdeposits,itcouldbearguedthatthesenon
¬
residentshaveacentreofeconomicinterestintheir L
2
= L
[
+ Term deposits with Term Lending
countryoforigin.Althoughina macro-economic Institutionsand RefinancingInstitutions
accounting framework all non-resident deposits (FIs) + Term Borrowing by FIs +
Certificatesof Deposit issued byFIs
need to beseparated from domesticdeposits and
treated as capital flows, the underlyingeconomic L = L + Public Deposits of Non-Banking
3 2
realitymaypointotherwise.IntheIndiancontext, FinancialCompanies.
it maynot beappropriateto excludeallcategories Data on M are published by the RBI on weekly
of non-residentdepositsfrom domesticmonetary basis, while 0 thosefor and M areavailableon
aggregates as non-resident rupee deposits are fortnightlybasis.Amongliquidity 3 aggregates, data
essentially integrated into the domestic financial on Lj and L are published monthly, while those
system . The new monetary aggregates, therefore, for L are d 2 isseminated quarterly. The working
exclude only non-resident repatriable foreign group 3 advised for the quarterly publication of
currency fixed deposits from deposit liabilities FinancialSectorSurveyto capture the dynamic
and treat thoseasexternalliabilities.Accordingly, linkages between banks and rest of the organised
fromamongthevariouscategoriesofnon-resident financialsector .
deposits at present, only Foreign Currency Non-
Resident Accounts (Banks) [FCNR(B)] deposits LIQUIDITYOFMONEY
are classified as external liabilities and excluded
Aswe movefrom M to M theliquidity(inertia,
from the domestic money stock. Since the bulk [ 4
stability, spendability) of the money goes on
of the FCNR(B) deposits are held abroad by
decreasing and in the opposite direction, the
commercialbanks,themonetaryimpactofchanges
liquidityincreases.
insuchdepositsiscapturedthroughchangesinnet
foreign exchange assets of the commercial banks. NARROWMONEY
Thus,nowthenewmonetaryaggregatesNM and
2 In banking terminology, is called narrow
NM aswellasliquidityaggregates L ,and L3
have
3
been introduced, the components
2
of which
moneyasitishighlyliquidand bankscannot run
theirlendingprogrammeswith thismoney.
areelaboratedasfollows:

--- PAGE 378 ---
12.28 4 IndianEconomy
BROADMONEY (i) RBI’snet credit to theGovernment;
ThemoneycomponentM iscalled broad money (ii) RBI’snet credit to the Banks;
3
in the banking terminology , with this money (iii) RBI’snetcredittothecommercialbanks;
(whichlieswith banksfora known period) banks (iv) netforexreservewith theRBI;
run theirlendingprogrammes.
(v) government’s currency liabilities to the
public;
MONEYSUPPLY
(vi) net non-monetaryliabilitiesofthe RBI.
Ingeneraldiscussionweusuallyusemoneysupply
RM = l + 2 + 3+ 4 + 5 +6
to mean money circulation, money flow in the —
economy. But in banking and typical monetary Asper theEconomicSurvey2014 15,therate
of growth of reserve money comprising currency
management terminologythelevelandsupplyof
M isknownasmoneysupply.Thegrowthrateof in circulation and depositswith the RBI (bankers
bro 3 admoney(M ),i.e.,moneysupply, wasnotonly and others) decelerated from an average of 17.8
lowerthantheind 3 icativegrowthsetbytheReserve per cent in 2014-15 to 4.3 per cent in 2013-14.
Almost the entire increase in the reserve money
BankofIndiabutitalsowitnessedcontinuousand
of Rs.3.258 billion between the period consisted
sequential deceleration in the last 7 quarters and
moderated to 11.2 per cent by December 2012.
ofincreasein currencyincirculation. Assourcesof
Aggregatedepositswith thebankswerethemajor reserve money, net RBI credit to thegovernment
componentof broad moneycountingfor over85 and increase in net financial assets of the RBI
per cent remaining almost stable.The sources of contributed to thegrowth of basemoney .
broadmoneyarenetbankcredittothegovernment
MONEYMULTIPLIER
and to thecommercialsector .Thesetwo together
accounted for nearly 100 per cent of the broad AtendMarch2012,themoneymultiplier(ratioof
money in 2012 — 13, compared to 89 percent in M to M ) was5.2, higher thanend-March2015,
3 0
2009-10. due to cumulative 125 basis point reduction in
CRR. During 2012 — 13, the money multiplier
MINIMUM RESERVE generally stayed high reflecting again, the CRR
The RBI is required to maintain a reserve cuts . As on December 31, 2014, the money
equivalent of Rs. 200 crores in gold and foreign multiplier was 5.5 compared with 5.2 on the
currency with itself, of which Rs. 115 crores
correspondingdateofthepreviousyear(Economic
should beingold.Against this reserve, the RBI is
Survey2014-15) .
empowered to issue currency to any extent . This CREDITCOUNSELLING
is beingfollowed since1957and is known as the
Minimum ReserveSystem (MRS). Advisingborrowerstoovercometheirdebtburden
and improve money management skills is credit
RESERVEMONEY counselling.Thefirstsuchwell-knownagencywas
Thegrossamountofthefollowingsixsegmentsof created in the USA when credit granters created
National Foundation for Credit Counselling
moneyat any point of time is known as Reserve
(NFCC) in 1951.51
Money(RM)fortheeconomyorthegovernment:
India’s sovereign debt is usually rated bysix
51. Y.V.Reddy,theRBIGonvernor,TheEconomicTimes , N.Delhi, September 11,2006.

--- PAGE 379 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.29
—
majorsovereigncredit ratingagencies (SCRAs)of rating agency S & P a McGraw Hill
theworld whichare: GroupofCompanies.
(i) Fitch Ratings, (ii) ICRA (Investment Information and
(ii) Moody’s InvestorsService, Credit RatingAgencyof India Ltd.) was
(iii) Standardand Poor’s (S&P), set up in 1991 by IFCI, LIC, SBI and
selectbanksaswellasfinancialinstitutions
(iv) Dominion Bond RatingService(DBRS),
to
ratedebtinstruments.
(v) Japanese Credit Rating Agency (JCRA),
(iii) CARE (Credit Analyses and Research
and
Ltd.) wasset up in 1993 by IDBI, other
(vi) Ratingand Investment Information Inc.,
financial institutions, nationalised banks
Tokyo (R&I).
and private sector finance companies to
As onJanuary 15,2013 most of these rating rateall typesofdebt instruments.
agencies have put India under ‘stable’ category (iv) ONICRA (Onida Individual Credit
in foreign and local currencies barring Fitch Rating Agency of India Ltd.) was set
and S&P which have put its foreign currency up by ONIDA finance (a private sector
in ‘negative’ category . The government is taking financecompany) in 1995 to ratecredit-
a number of steps to improve its interaction worthiness of non-corporate consumers
withthemajorSCRAssothattheymakeinformed and their debt instruments, i.e., credit
decisionsas the EconomicSurvey2012 — 13says.
cards, hire-purchase, housing finance,
rentalagreementsand bankfinance.
CREDITRATING
(v) SMERA (Small and Medium Enterprises
To assess the credit worthiness (credit record, RatingAgency) wasset up in September
integrity, capability) of a prospective (would be) 2005,to ratetheoverallstrengthofsmall
borrower to meetdebtobligationsiscredit rating. and medium enterprises (SMEs) — the
Today it is done in the cases of individuals, erstwhile SSIs. It is not a credit rating
companies and even countries. There are some agency precisely, but its ratings are used
world-renowned agenciessuch as the Moody’s, S for this purpose, too . A joint venture of
& P. The concept was first introduced by John SIDBI (the largest share-holder with 22
Moodyin the USA (1909). Usuallyequityshare
per cent stake), SBI, ICICI Bank, Dun
isnot rated here.Primarily, ratingsareaninvestor
& Bradstreet (an international credit
service.
information company), five publicsector
Credit ratingwasintroducedin India is1988 banks (PNB, BOB, BOI, Canara Bank,
by the ICICI and UTI, jointly.The major credit UBIwith 28 percentstaketogether)and
ratingagenciesofIndiaare: CIBIL (Credit Information Bureau of
(i) CRISIL (Credit Rating Information of India Ltd.).
India Ltd.) was jointly promoted by A general credit rating service not
ICICIandUTIwithsharecapitalcoming linked to anydebt issueisalso availed by
from SBI, LIC, United India Insurance companies — already offered in India by
CompanyLtd. to ratedebtinstrument — ratingagencies — CRISILcallssuchratings
.
debenture. InApril 2005 its 51 per cent as Credit Assessment 52 International
equity was acquired by the US credit rating agencies such as Moody’s, S &
52. S.Sundararajan,BookofFinancialTerms,TataMcGraw -Hill,N.Delhi,2004,p.44.

--- PAGE 380 ---
12.30 4 IndianEconomy
P also undertake sovereign ratings, i.e., Rateofinterestapplicableto theseaccountsarein
—
of countries highly instrumental in accordancewiththedirectivesissuedbyRBIfrom
external borrowingsofthecountries. timeto time.
Individualsarealsocoveredbycreditappraisal NRO accounts can be opened by any person
which is on useful information for the consumer residentoutsideIndiawithanauthoriseddealeror
creditfirms.To maintainadatabaseon thecredit anauthorisedbankforcollectingtheirfundsfrom
records of individuals the credit Information local bonafide transactions in Indian Rupees.
Bureau of India Limited (CIBIL) was set up in When a resident becomes an NRI, his existing
May 2004 which makes credit informations Rupee accounts are designated as NRO. These
availableto banksandfinancialinstitutionsabout accounts can be in the form of current, savings,
prospectiveindividual borrowers.53 recurringorfixed depositaccounts .
| - " There were two more NRI deposit accounts
NON RESIDENT INDIAN DEPOSITS
inoperation,viz., Non-Resident(Non-Repatriable)
Rupee DepositAccountand Non-Resident (Special)
Foreign Exchange Management (Deposit)
—
Regulations, 2000 permits Non-Resident Indians Rupee Account an amendment to Foreign
ExchangeManagement (Deposit) Regulations, in
(NRIs) to have deposit accounts with authorised
dealersand with banks authorised bythe Reserve 2002, discontinued the acceptance of deposits in
Bankof India (RBI) whichinclude:54
thesetwoaccountsfromApril2002 onwards.
(i) Foreign Currency Non-Resident (Bank) Repatriation of funds in FCNR(B) and
Account [FCNR(B)Account] NRE accounts is permitted. Hence, deposits in
(ii) Non-Resident External Account (NRE these accounts are included in India’s external
debt outstanding. While the principal of NRO
Account)
deposits is non-repatriable, current income and
(iii) Non-Resident Ordinary Rupee Account
interestearningis repatriable.Account-holdersof
(NROAccount)
NROaccountsarepermittedtoannuallyremitan
FCNR(B) accounts can be opened by NRIs and amount up to US$ 1 million out of the balances
Overseas Corporate Bodies (OCBs) with an heldintheiraccounts .Therefore,depositsinNRO
authorised dealer.Theaccountscan beopened in accountstooareincluded in India’sexternaldebt.
the form of term deposits. Deposits of funds are
allowed in Pound Sterling, US Dollar, Japanese GUIDELINESFORLICENSINGOF
Yen and Euro.Rateofinterestapplicableto these
NEWBANKS
accounts are in accordance with the directives
issued byRBIfrom timeto time. The RBI on February 22, 2013 released the
Guidelines for ‘Licensing of New Banks in the
NREaccountscan beopened byNRIsandOCBs PrivateSector’.Keyfeaturesoftheguidelinesare:
withauthoriseddealersandwithbanksauthorised
by RBI. These can be in the form of savings,
(i) EligiblePromoters:Aprivatesector/public
current, recurring or fixed deposit accounts .
sector/NBFCs/entity/groupeligibletoset
Deposits are allowed in any permitted currency.
upabankthroughawholly-owned“Non-
53. Ibid.
54. AsperthelatestupdatebytheRBI , May11,2012.

--- PAGE 381 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.31
Operative Financial Holding Company not impede effective supervision of the
(NOFHC)”. bankand the NOFHCbyRBI.
(it) Fitand Proper’criteria:A past record of (viii) Prudential norms for the NOFHC: The
sound credentials, integrity and sound prudential norms will be applied to
financial background with a successful NOFHC on similar lines as that of the
track record of10yearswillbe required. bank.
(Hi) Corporate structure of the NOFHC: The (ix) Exposure norms: The Bank/NOFHC
NOFHC to be wholly owned by the allowed no exposure to the Promoter
—
promoter/promoter group which shall Group the bankshall not invest in the
hold the bank as well as all the other equity/debt capital instruments of any
financialservicesentitiesof thegroup. financialentitiesheld bythe NOFHC.
(iv) Minimum voting equity capital (x) Business Plan for the bank:The business
requirements for banks and shareholding plan should be realistic and viable and
by NOFHC:The initial minimum paid- shouldaddresshowthebankproposesto
up votingequitycapitaN for a bankshall achieve financialinclusion.
be Rs. 5 billion. The NOFHC shall (xi) Additional conditions for NBFCs
initially hold a minimum of 40 per cent promoting/convertingintoabank:Existing
of the paid-up voting equity capital of NBFCs, if considered eligible, may be
the bank which shall be locked in for a permitted to promote a new bank or
period of five years and which shall be convert themselvesinto banks.
brought down to 15 per cent within 12 (xii) Otherconditionsforthebank:
years. Bank’s shares to be listed on the
(a) To open at least 25 per cent of its
stock exchanges within threeyears of the
businesscommencement .
branchesin un-banked ruralcentres(
with population of upto 9,999 as per
(v) Regulatory framework: The bank to be thelatestcensus).
regulated by the relevant Acts/Statutes/
(b) To comply with the priority sector
Directives, issued by the RBI and
other regulators. The NOFHC shall lending targets applicable to the
existingdomesticbanks.
be registered as an NBFC with the RBI
(c) Bankspromoted bygroupshaving40
and will be governed bya separateset of
directionsissued bythe RBI. per cent or more assets/income from
non-financial business will require
(vi) Foreignshareholdinginthebank:Foreign
RBI’s prior approvalfor raisingpaid-
shareholdingupto49percentforthefirst
up voting equity capital beyond Rs.
5 years after which it will be as per the
10billion.
extant
policy.
(d) Any non-compliance of terms and
(vii) Corporate governance of NOFHC: At
conditionswillattractpenalmeasures
least 50 per cent of the Directors of
including cancellation of licence of
the NOFHC should be independent
the bank.
directors.Thecorporatestructureshould
55. Thepartof'Authorised Capital'(thelimituptowhichacompanycan issueshares)which hasbeenactually'paid'by
theshareholdersisknownasthe'Paid-upCapital'ofacompany,[fordetailedanalysisofdifferentkindof'Capitals'of
acompanyrefertheChapter14:SecurityMarketinIndia].

--- PAGE 382 ---
12.32 4 IndianEconomy
Two new banks get licence: The RBI by early firm).The concerned banks only handle
April, 2014granted‘in-principle’approval to two part of the process that is‘cash handling’
applicants,IDFCLimitedandBandhan Financial and ‘back-end server’ connectivity.They
—
Services Private Limited, to set up banks ‘in ¬ carry‘logo’ofthebankwhichoutsources
principle’ approval granted will be valid for 18 theirservice.
months during which the applicants have to (iii) White Label ATMs (WLAs): These are
comply with the requirements and fulfil other ‘owned’ and ‘operated’ by a third party
conditions.Bothareleadingnon-bankingfinance (a non-banking firm). They do not bear
companies, while IDFC deals in infrastructure ‘logo’ of the banks they serve (that is
finance, Bandhan is in microfinance business. why such a name). In place, they carry
A High Level Advisory Committee headed by logo of the firm which own them. They
former RBI Governor BimalJalan recommended serve customers of all banks and are
thesetwoapplicantsoutofalistof25applications.
interconnected with the entire ATM
Thecaseof India post will bedecided bythe RBI network in the country . The role of the
in consultation with the Government of India. concernedbankisonlylimitedtoprovide
The RBI also announced to work on giving accountinformationandback-endmoney
licences more regularly, that is virtually‘on-tap’. transfers to the third parties managing
As per the RBI, those applicants who have been these ATM machines. These entities
denied licences can apply for the ‘differentiated have a mandate to deploy 67 per cent
licences’ (once RBI invites applications for of ATMs in rural locations (Tier III-VI)
—
it) some of them may be better off applying and33percentin urbanlocations(TierI
for a differentiated licence rather than for a full and II cities).TheTataCommunications
licence. The so-called differentiated banks will PaymentSolutions became the first such
be specialised institutions such as the ‘payment firm to get permission of the RBI (by
banks’ suggested by an RBI panel (headed by mid-2013) to set up such ATMs — its
Nachiket Mor) on financial inclusion, to widen brand nameis‘Indicash’.
thespread ofpaymentservicesand depositproducts
The main objectives of the Brown/White
tosmallbusinessesand low-incomehouseholds.
LabelATMsarecuttingoperationcostofrunning
themandfinancialinclusion.
|
LABELSOFATM
-
NONOPERATIVEFINANCIALHOLDING
The automated teller machine (ATM) enetered
India bylate1980sand haveevolvedinto threeof COMPANY(NOFHC)56 ^^^^
—
itstypesbynow The difference between an operating company
(i) Bank’s own ATMs:These are owned and and a holding company lies in the fundamental
operatedbytheconcernedbankandcarry structures of the two, in their management and
the bank’s ‘logo’. They are the costliest their interactions with one another. Business
way to provide such service to bank’s goals are often different, and both business types
customers . are after profits, but holding companies can still
(ii) Brown Label ATMs (BLAs): These are benefit from operating company losses under
owned by third party (a non-banking certain conditions.
56. Thoughthissub- topicoriginallybelongstotheChapter14:SecurityMarketinIndia,ithasbeendiscussedheretomake
thenewguidelinesofsetting -upbanksan'easy-to-understand'thingforthereaders.

--- PAGE 383 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.33
The primaryfunction of a holdingcompany can benefit the parent company in the form of
istoinvestinothercompanies,commonlyknown a business loss when tax time rolls around. This
assubsidiaries.Holdingcompaniesareusuallynot does not benefit the operating company, as it
involvedinday- to -dayoperationsoftheoperating is responsible for operating income to run the
company, but lend initial or ongoing financial business.Ifthelosses becometoogreat,operating
support via cash reserves or stock sales, and may companiescangooutofbusiness,buttheholding
assist in restructuring the operational model to company can still benefit because the operating
ensure profits. Holding companies are normally company can help to balance overall profits and
structured as corporations (limited liability firms stock prices.
i.e.,knownasaLtd.companyin India)to protect Therearethreebasictypesofholdingcompanies:
assetsandabsorbfinanciallosses.
(i) A pure holding company that is non
¬
Operating companies are owned by the operatingandexistssolelytoinvestinand
holding company, but are responsible for all hold the votingshares of itssubsidiaries.
day- to -day operations of the company. When a This type of holding company derives
holdingcompanycreatesorpurchasesanoperating its income from the dividends earned
company, theyaresometimesallowed to conduct from its ownership of the shares of its
businessasusual — especially,iftheyareprofitable. subsidiaries and from any gains realised
Net profitsafterexpensesarethen handedover to fromother investments.
theholdingcompany.
(ii) A general or operating holding company
Ownership of operating companies, even that earns its income from selling goods
when purchased, revert to the holding company. and services in addition to the income
Former owners who are kept on-board are often derivedfromitsownershipofsubsidiaries.
givencontroloftheoperatingcompanyintheform
(iii) A pyramid holding company that owns
of executive management responsibility, but have controlling interest in its subsidiaries
noownershiprights.Allmajordecisionsthatmay
with less invested capital than the two
affect profitability or involve large expenditures other categories.
mustfirst beapproved bytheholdingcompany.
INIDHI
Although operating company’s profitability
should makesensefor the holdingcompany, this
isnotalwaysthecase.Especiallyforlargerholding Nidhi in the Indian context means ‘treasure’.
companies with heavy tax burdens, owning one However, in the Indian financial sector it refers
or more operating companies that lose money to any mutual benefit society’7 notified by the
57. Mutual Benefit Society (also known globally as 'benefit society' or 'mutual aid society') is an organization, or
voluntaryassociationformed to provide mutualaid, benefit,orinsurancefor relieffrom common difficulties.Such
organizationsmaybeformallyorganizedwithchartersandestablishedcustoms,ormayarisead hoctomeetunique
needsofaparticulartimeandplace.Theymaybeorganizedaroundasharedethnicbackground,religion,occupation,
geographical region or other basis. Benefits may include moneyor assistanceforsickness, retirement, education,
birthofa baby,funeraland medicalexpenses,unemployment.Often benefitsocietiesprovideasocialoreducational
frameworkformembersandtheirfamiliestosupporteachotherandcontributetothewidercommunity.
A benefitsocietymay havesomecommonfeatures-membershavingequivalentopportunity in theorganization;
members having equivalent benefits; aid goes to needy (stronger helping the weaker); payment of benefits by
collectionoffundsfromthemembers;educatingothersaboutagroup'sinterest;preservingculturaltraditions;and
mutualdefence.
Examplesof benefitsocietiesinclude trade unions,self-helpgroups,etc. It is believed thatsuch societies predate
humanculturearefoundaroundtheworld.

--- PAGE 384 ---
12.34 4 IndianEconomy
Central/UnionGovernmentasaNidhiCompany. (iii) Mutual benefit company (MBC), i.e.,
They are created mainly for cultivating the habit potentialnidhicompany;i.e.,acompany
of thrift and savings amongst its members. The which is working on the lines of a
companies doing Nidhi business, viz., borrowing Nidhi company, but has not yet been so
from members and lending to members only, declared by the Central Government;
are known under different names such as Nidhi, has minimum net owned fund (NOF)
Permanent Fund, Benefit Funds, Mutual Benefit of Rs.10lakh, hasapplied to the RBI for
Fundsand MutualBenefitCompany . certificate of registration and also to the
Nidhis are more popular in South India Department of CompanyAffairs (DCA)
and are highly localised single office institutions. for being notified as a Nidhi company
They are mutual benefit societies, because their and has not contravened directions /
dealings are restricted only to the members; regulationsof RBI/DCA.
and membership is limited to individuals. The (iv) Miscellaneous non-banking company
principalsourceoffundsisthecontributionfrom (MNBC), i.e., chitfundcompany.
themembers.Theloansaregiven to themembers SinceNidhiscomeunderoneclassofNBFCs,
at relatively reasonable rates for purposessuch as RBI is empowered to issue directions to them
house construction or repairs and are generally in matters relating to their deposit acceptance
secured.Thedepositsmobilised byNidhisarenot activities.However,in recognitionofthefactthat
much when compared to the organised banking theseNidhisdealwiththeirshareholder-members
.
sector only, RBI hasexempted the notified Nidhisfrom
Nidhis are companies registered under the the core provisions of the RBI Act and other
Companies Act, 1956 and are regulated by the directions applicable to NBFCs. As on date
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA). Even (February2013) RBI does not have anyspecified
though Nidhis are regulated by the provisions regulatoryframeworkfor Nidhis.
of the Companies Act, 1956, they are exempted The Central Government in March 2000
fromcertainprovisionsoftheAct,asapplicableto constituted a committee to examine the various
other companies,due to limitingtheir operations aspects of the functioning of Nidhi Companies.
within members. There was no government notification defining
Nidhis are also included in the definition of the word ‘Nidhi’. Taking into consideration
NBFCs,which operate mainlyin the unorganised the manner of functioning of Nidhis and
moneymarket.However,since1997,NBFCshave the recommendations of the P. Sabanayagam
been brought increasingly under the regulatory Committee in its report and also to prevent
ambit of the RBI. Non-bankingfinancialentities unscrupulous persons using the word ‘Nidhi’ in
partiallyorwhollyregulated bythe RBI include: their name without being incorporated by the
(i) NBFCs comprising equipment leasing Department of CompanyAffairs (DCA) and yet
(EL), hire purchase finance (HP), loan doing Nidhi business, the committee suggested
(LC),investment(IC)[includingprimary thefollowingdefinitionfor Nidhis (a part of this
dealers (PDs] and residuarynon-banking definition is appearing in the new Companies Bill
companies RNBC; 2012(Section406):
(ii) Mutual benefit financial company “Nidhiisacompanyformedwiththeexclusive
(MBFC), i.e., nidhicompany, objectofcultivatingthehabitofthrift,savingsand
functioningforthemutualbenefitofmembersby

--- PAGE 385 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.35
receiving deposits onlyfrom individuals enrolled them.Functionally,chitfundsareincludedinthe
as members and by lending only to individuals, definition of NBFCs by the RBI under thesub ¬
also enrolled as members, and which functions headmiscellaneousnon-bankingcompany(fANB > C) .
as per Notification and Guidelines prescribed by But RBI has not laid out anyseparate regulatory
the DCA. The word Nidhi shall not form part frameworkfor them.
of the name of any company, firm or individual Official Definition:As per the Chit Funds Act,
engagedinborrowingandlendingmoneywithout
1982, chit means “a transaction whether called
incorporation by DCA and such contravention chit,chitfund,chitty,kurior byanyothernameby
willattract penalaction.”
or under whicha personentersinto anagreement
withaspecified numberofpersonsthateveryone
|
CHIT FUND
of them shall subscribe a certain sum of money
Recently, Chit Fund was in centre of news after (or a certain quantityofgrain instead) bywayof
the Kolkata-based Saradha ChitFundscam came periodical installments over a definite period and
tolight.Mostofthemediapeoplewerethemselves that each such subscriber shall, in his turn, as
not very clear about the ‘finer’ points related determined by lot or by auction or by tender or
to the idea of ‘chits’ in India, but they kept on in such other manner as may be specified in the
highlightingchitsastheyneeded to reporton the chit agreement, beentitled to the prizeamount”.
scam. Let us try understand what ‘chits’ are and Atransactionisnotachit, ifinsuch transaction:
someothersimilarconceptsin India: (i) Somealone,butnotall,ofthesubscribers
Chitfunds (also known bytheir other names
gettheprizeamountwithoutanyliability
suchas — Chitty,Kuri,MiscellaneousNon-Banking to payfuturesubscriptions;or
Company) areessentiallysavinginstitutions.They (ii) All the subscribers get the chit amount
are of various forms and lack any standardised by turns with a liability to pay future
form.Chitfundshaveregularmemberswhomake subscriptions.
periodicalsubscriptions to thefund.The periodic
|
collection is given to some member of the chit URJIT PATEL COMMITTEE
funds selected on the basis of previously agreed
criterion.Thebeneficiaryisselected usuallyonthe An expert committee headed by Urjit R. Patel,
Deputy Governor of the RBI was appointed in
basisofbidsor bydrawoflotsorinsomecasesby
auction or by tender. In any case, each member S M e o p n te e m tar b y er Po 2 li 0 c 1 y 3 Fr t a o me R w e o v r is k e . T a h n e d m S a tr i e n ng o t b h j e e n cti t v h e e
of the chit fund is assured of his turn before the
of the committee was to recommend what needs
second round starts and any member becomes
entitled to get periodic collection again. Chit to be done to revise and strengthen the current
monetary policy framework with a view to
fundsaretheIndianversionsof‘RotatingSavings
andCreditAssociations’foundacrosstheglobe. making it transparent and predictable.The panel
submitted its report (January, 2014) made the
Chit fund business is regulated under the
followingrecommendations:
CentralChitFundsAct,1982andtherulesframed
1. CPI (combined) should be used as the
under this Act by the various state governments
nominal anchor for a flexible inflation
for this purpose. The Central Government has
targeting (FIT) framework. The choice
notframedanyrulesofoperationfor them.Thus,
ofCPIas nominalanchor wasmainlyon
registrationandregulationofchitfundsarecarried
account of the fact that the CPI closely
outbystategovernmentsunder therulesframedby

--- PAGE 386 ---
12.36 4 IndianEconomy
reflects cost of living and has larger rangeofinstrumentsat itscommand.
influences on inflationary expectations With regard to inflows that are
than otheranchors. excessivein relation to externalfinancing
2. Target rate of inflation should be 4 requirements and the need for sterilised
per cent with a tolerance band of 2 per intervention, the RBI should build a
cent to be achieved in a two -year time sterilisation reserveout of its existing and
frame. evolvingportfolioofGolsecuritiesacross
3. The transition path to the target zone the range of maturities, but accentuated
should be graduated to bring down towards a ‘strike capability’ to rapidly
inflationfromthecurrentlevelofaround intervene at the short-end. The central
10percentto8percentoveraperiodnot bank should introduce a remunerated
exceeding 12 months and to 6 per cent standing deposit facility, which would
over a period not exceeding the next 24 effectively empower it with unlimited
months. sterilisationcapability.Asabufferagainst
4. Administered prices and interest outflows, the RBI’s strategy should be
rates should be eliminated as they act to build an adequate level of foreign
exchangereserves.
as impediments to monetary policy
transmission and achievement of price 8. The committee asked the Central
stability. Government to ensure that the fiscal
3. The monetary policy decision-making deficitasa ratio to GDP (grossdomestic
should be vested with a monetary policy
product) is broughtdown to3.0percent
— by2016-17.
committee (MPC) the RBI Governor
asits ChairmanandDeputyGovernor In view of the elevated level of current CPI
as the Vice-Chairman, the Executive inflation and hardened inflation expectations,
Director in charge of monetary policy supplyconstraintsandweakoutput performance,
could be its member and two external the committee said the transition path to the
members. target zone should be graduated to bringing
6. All fixed income financial products down inflation from the current level of 10 per
should be treated on a par with bank cent to 8 per centover a period notexceedingthe
depositsfor the purposesof taxation and next 12 months and to 6 per cent over a period
TDS. With a sharp rise in the ratio of not exceeding the next 24 month period before
agricultural credit to agricultural GDP, formally adopting the recommended target
the need for subventions on interest rate of 4 per cent inflation with a band of +/- 2 per
.
for lending to certainsectors would have cent
to
re-visited. Sincefoodandfuelaccountfor morethan57
7. In view of the cross-country and Indian percentoftheCPIonwhichthedirectinfluenceof
experience with global spillovers driving
monetarypolicyislimited,thecommitmenttothe
episodes of large and volatile capital nominal anchor would need to be demonstrated
inflowsaswellasoutflows,thecommittee bytimelymonetary policy response to risks from
second-roundeffectsandinflationexpectationsin
felt that a flexible setting of monetary
policy by the RBI in the short-run was
responsetoshockstofoodandfuel,thecommittee
warranted.This presages readiness to use pointedout .

--- PAGE 387 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.37
|
enhancements.
NACHIKETMOR COMMITTEE
3. Consolidating NBFCdefinitions into two
The RBI set up the Committee on Comprehensive categories: Core investment companies
Financial Services for Small Businesses and Low- and other NBFCs. Restore permission
Income Households (CCFS) in September 2013 of NBFCs-ND to act as business
under the Chairmanship of Dr Nachiket Mor. correspondents.
The Committee’s Report was released on 7 6. On priority sector lending, while the
January2014.
Committeeacknowledgedthatthecurrent
Atitscore,theCommittee’srecommendations focus of the policy, on small farmers,
are that in order to achieve the task of financial small businesses, and weaker sections,
inclusionina mannerthatenhancesbothfinancial was well placed, it recommended an
inclusionandstability,thereisneedtomoveaway approach that incentivizes each provider
from an exclusive focus on any one model to an to specialise in one or more sectors of
approachwheremultiplemodelsandpartnerships theeconomyand regions of thecountry .
are allowed to thrive, particularly between Government subsidies to be channelled
national full-service banks, regional banks of as direct benefit transfers (DBTs) rather
various types, NBFCs, and financial markets. than assubventionsor waivers.
The common theme of all the recommendations 7. All financial firms regulated by the RBI
madebytheCommitteeisthatinsteadoffocusing be required to have an internal process
onlyonlargegeneralistinstitutions,specialization to assess suitability of products prior to
and partnerships between specialists must be advisingclientswith regard to them.
encouraged.Suchanapproach, in itsview,would
be far more effective at delivering high quality | SMALL8C PAYMENT BANKS
financial inclusion, without compromising
financial stability or responsibility towards By mid-July 2014, the RBI issued the draft
customers . Some of the key recommendations of guidelinesforsetting upsmall banksand payment
theCCFSinclude: banks.Theguidelinessaid that bothare‘niche’or
‘differentiated’bankswith thecommon objective
1. UniversalElectronicBankAccountforevery
offurtheringfinancialinclusion.Itisin
pursuance
resident to be madeavailableat the time
ofissuingtheAadhaar number. of the announcement made in the Union
Budget 2014 — 15 (Full) . The details regarding
2. Licensing,withloweredentrybarriersbut
the provisions to set up such banks and their
otherwise equivalent treatment, more
operationalcriteriaareasgiven below:
functionally focused banks, including
payment banks, wholesale consumer T — he guidelines to set up both the banks are
banks,and wholesaleinvestment banks. same
3. Developingrisk-basedsupervisionprocesses (cid:127) Theminimumcapitalrequirementwould
beRs100crore.
for regional banks and strengthening
existingonesbeforecreatingnewregional (cid:127) Promoter contribution would be at least
banks. 40percentfor thefirstfiveyears.Excess
4. Reorienting the focus of NABARD, shareholdingshould be brought down to
SIDBI, and NHB to be market-makers 40per cent bytheendoffifthyear, to30
and providers of risk-based credit per cent by the end of 10th year and to

--- PAGE 388 ---
12.38 4 IndianEconomy
26 per cent in 12 years from the date of (cid:127) The area of operations would normally
commencementof business.
be restricted to contiguous districts in a
(cid:127) Foreign shareholding in these banks will homogenous cluster of states or union
beas percurrent FDI policy. territories so that the Small Bank has
(cid:127) Voting rights to be linewith theexisting a ‘local feel’ and culture. However, if
guidelinefor privatebanks. necessary, it would be allowed to expand
(cid:127) Entitiesother than promoterswill not be its area of operations beyon contiguous
permitted to haveshareholding in excess districts in one or more states with
of10percent .
reasonablegeographicalproximity.
(cid:127) Thebankshouldcomplywiththecorporate (cid:127) The bankshall primarily undertake basic
governanceguidelines, including‘fit and banking activities of accepting deposits
proper’ criteriafor Directorsasissued by
and lendingto small farmers, small
RBI. businesses, micro and small industries,
(cid:127) Operations of the bank should be fully
and unorganisedsectorentities.Itcannot
networked and technology driven from set up subsidiaries to undertake non ¬
the beginning.
bankingfinancialservices activities.After
theinitialstabilisationperiodoffiveyears,
SMALLBANKS and after a review, the RBI mayliberalise
thescopeofactivitiesforSmallBanks.
The purposeof thesmall bankswill beto provide
(cid:127) The promoters’ other financial and non-
a whole suite of basic banking products such as
financialservicesactivities, if any,should
depositsandsupplyof credit,but in a limitedarea
ofoperation . Theobjectiveof theSmall Banks to m be ing d l i e s d tin w c i t t l h y b r a i n n k g- in fe g n b ce u d sin a e n ss d . not co ¬
increasefinancialinclusionbyprovisionofsavings
vehicles to under-served and unservedsectionsof (cid:127) A robust risk management framework
is required and the banks would be
the population,supplyof credit tosmallfarmers,
microandsmallindustries,andother unorganised subject toall prudential norms and
sector entities through high technology low- cost RBI regulations that apply to existing
operations. Other features of the small banks are commercialbanks, including
maintenanceofCRRandSLR.
asfollows:
(cid:127) Resident individuals with 10 years of (cid:127) In view of concentration of area of
experience in banking and finance, operations, theSmall Bankwould need a
diversified portfolio of loans, spread over
companiesandSocietieswillbeeligibleas
promoterstoset upsmallbanks. NFBCs,
itareaofoperations.
microfinance institutions (MFIs), and (cid:127) The maximum loan size and investment
Local Area Banks (LABs) can convert limitexposuretosingle/group borrowers/
their operations into those of a small issuerswould be restricted to 15 per cent
bank. Local focus and ability to serve ofcapitalfunds.
smaller customers will be a key criterion (cid:127) Loansand advancesof up to Rs 25lakhs,
inlicensingsuch banks. primarily to micro enterprises, should
(cid:127) For the initial three years, prior approval constituteat least 50 per centof theloan
will berequiredfor branchexpansion. portfolio.

--- PAGE 389 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.39
(cid:127) For the first three years, 25 per cent of (cid:127) NocreditlendingisallowedforPayments
branches should be in unbanked rural Banks.
areas.
(cid:127) Thefloatfundscan beparkedonlyin less
than oneyear G-Secs.
PAYMENTSBANKS
Meanwhile, the RBI has received 72
The objective of payments banks is to increase applications for small banks and 41 applications
financial inclusion by providing small savings for payments banks. The applications are, at
accounts, payment/remittanceservicesto migrant present, under consideration of the RBI. It is
labour, lowincome households, small businesses, expected thatsoonsomeof them willget thenod
other unorganised sector entities and other users forsetting uptheseniche banks.
by enabling high volume-low value transactions
|
in depositsand payments/remittanceservicesin a FINANCIAL INCLUSION
secured technology-driven environment.
Financial inclusion is an important priority of
(cid:127) Those who can promote a payments
banks can be a non-bank PPIs, NBFCs, the government . The objective is to ensure the
excluded sections, i.e. weaker sections and low
corporate’s,mobiletelephonecompanies,
super market chains, real sector
incomegroups,accesstovariousfinancialservices
such as a basicsavings bank account, need-based
cooperativescompaniesand publicsector
entities. Even banks can take equity in
credit, remittancefacility, insuranceand pension.
Payments Banks. The government has recently launched an
effectiveschemeto promotethecauseoffinancial
(cid:127) Payments Banks can accept demand —
inclusion the PMJDY:
deposits (only current account and
savingsaccounts).Theywouldinitiallybe
PRADHANMANTRIJAN
-
DHANYOJANA
restricted to holdinga maximum balance
of Rs 100,000 per customer . Based on To achieve theobjectiveof financial inclusion by
performance, the RBI couldenhancethis extending financial services to the large hitherto
limit. unserved population of the country and to
unlock its growth potential, the Pradhan Mantri
(cid:127) The banks can offer payments and
Jan-DhanYojana (PMJDY) was launched on 28
remittance services, issuance of prepaid August2014.TheYojanaenvisages —
payment instruments, internet banking,
functioningasbusinesscorrespondentfor
(i) Universalaccesstobankingfacilitieswith
other banks. at least one basic banking account for
everyhousehold,
(cid:127) PaymentsBankscannotsetupsubsidiaries
to
undertakeNBFCbusiness. (ii) Financial literacy, access to credit and
insurance.
(cid:127) As in the case of Small Banks, other
financial and non-financial services (iii) The beneficiaries will receive a RuPay
Debit Card having inbuilt accident
activitiesofthe promoters should be
ring-fenced. insurancecover of Rsl lakh.
(cid:127) The Payments Banks would be required
(iv) Inaddition,thereisalifeinsurancecover
to use the word ‘Payments’ in its name of Rs.30,000 to thosewho opened their
to differentiateitfrom other banks. bank accounts for the first time between

--- PAGE 390 ---
12.40 4 IndianEconomy
15 August 2014 and 26 January 2015 (i) Banks allowed to raise fund through
and meet other eligibility conditions of long- term bonds (with maturity period
theYojana. of not lessthan 7years),
The Yojana has entered the Guinness World (ii) Such bonds exempted the mandatory
Records for opening most bank accounts during regulatory normssuch as the CRR, SLR
the week starting August 23, 2014 as part of and PSL.
the financial campaign. As on 28 January 2015, (iii) Such funds to be used to finance long ¬
12.31 crore bank accounts have been opened, of term projects in infrastructure, core
which7.36crorearein ruralareasand4.95 crore sectorandaffordablehousing.Affordable
inurban areas. Under the PMJDY, 67.5 per cent housing means loans eligible under the
of the accounts as on January 28, 2015 are with priority sector lending (PSL), and loans
zero balance. upto Rs.50lakhtoindividualsforhouses
costingupto Rs.65lakhlocatedinthesix
|
ALMOFBANKS metropolitan centres . For other areas, it
coversloansofRs.40lakhforhouseswith
Banks have been faced with Asset-Liability
values up to Rs.50lakh.
Management (ALM) problems in recent times
dueto theirexistinglong- termloansforwarded to (iv) Banks can extend long term loans with
certainsectors,viz.,infrastructure,coresectorand flexible structuring to absorb potential
realestatesector .Again,raisingnewfundsfornew adverse contingencies,knownasthe5/25
projectsinthesesectorshadbecomequitedifficult structure . Under the 5/25structure, bank
for the banks.These sectors constitute the major mayfixlonger amortisation period (25
portionofbanks’non-performingassests . years) with periodic refinancing (every 5
years.
Banks have been seeking permission for
longertenoramortisationoftheloanwithperiodic India is looking at investing US $1 trillion
refinancingofbalancedebt.Bankshavebeenraising in infrastructure development by 2017, half
resources in a significant way, issuance of long of which is expected to come from the private
¬
term bonds for funding loans to infrastructure sector . The instructions announced by the R — BI
sector has not picked upat all. Infrastructureand are in pursuance of the Union Budget 2015 16
.
core industries projects are characterised by long announcement
gestation periods and large capital investments.
|
NEW INITIATIVES INTHE BANKINGSECTOR
Thelongmaturitiesofsuchprojectloansconsistof
the initial construction period and the economic
In order to strengthen the banking industry ,
l
(
i
u
fe
sua
o
l
f
ly
t
2
h
5
e
— 3
a
0
ss
y
e
e
t/
a
u
rs
n
)
d
.
erlying concession period impartinggreatertransparencyandaccountability
together with providing speedier and effective
In pursuance of the Union Budget 2015-16, legal framework, the Gol took several important
the RBI announced ‘eased’ norms in July 2015 steps, in the recent times. Majorsteps, as per the
for the banks to take care of the Asset-Liability EconomicSurvey2014 — 15,areasfollows:
Management iisues of the banks, which are as
(a) The RBI issued guidelines for licensing
follows:
of new banks in the private sector on

--- PAGE 391 ---
BankinginIndia t 12.41
22 February 2013, and in April 2014 repositories and legal entity identifier
two applicants have been granted ‘in issuer,amendmentshavebeenconsidered
principle’ approval to set up new banks necessary to make the PSS Act more
in the private sector within a period of effective.
eighteen months. The proposed amendments will provide
—
(b) Pursuant to the Union Budget 2014 finality to the determination of the
2015 announcement for setting up payment obligations and settlement
of differentiated banks serving niche instructions between a central counter
interests such as local area banks and party (the system provider) and system
payment banks, the RBI has formulated participants in the event of insolvency,
and released guidelines in November dissolution, or winding up of a central
2014 for licensing of payments banks counter party .
and small finance banks in the private (d) Capital requirement of PSBs: The Gol,
sector .Subsequently,theRBI hasinvited in December 2014, approved aproposal
applicationsforsetting upofsmall banks allowingPSBstoraisecapitalfrom public
and paymentsbanks. markets through FPO (follow on public
(c) Payment and Settlement Systems offer) or QIP (qualified institutional
(Amendment) Bill 2014: The Payment placement) by diluting Government
and Settlement Systems Act 2007 (PSS of India holding upto 32 per cent in a
Act)wasenactedwithaviewtoproviding phased manner based on their capital
sound legal basis for the regulation requirement, stock performance,
and supervision of payment systems liquidity, market appetite and subject to
in India by the RBI. For establishing a certain conditions.
legal framework for regulation of trade

--- PAGE 393 ---
C H A P T E R
-
Km
i
-
Sa &
tr
C 'm r :' v k
i
1
1
INSURANCE IN
*
INDIA
-
'
r
a
=> Definition
Insurance Industry Insurance is a kind of gambling
<=> Insurance Reforms in reverse-a major form of ‘risk
Reinsurance spreading'-one person’s risk which
=> Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee would be large, is spread around to
Corporation(DICGC) make it smallfor a large number of
=> ExportCreditGuarantee Corporation people-in this process it serves two
(ECGC) purposes-providessocialsecurity netto
=> NationalExportInsurance Account(NEIA) peopleandhelpsinnation-buildingby
.
<=> The Challenge Ahead makingavailable investiblecapital *
=> Insurance Penetration
<=> NewReformInitiatives
*See Paul A. Samuelson and William D. Nordhaus, 'Economics', The
McGraw-Hill Company, N. York, USA, 2005, pp. 210-212. Also see the
LIBNA,1956andGIBNA,1971oftheGol.

--- PAGE 394 ---
13.2 < IndianEconomy
| DEFINITION
insuranceforgreatersocialsecurityandsecondly,
to
mobilise people’ssavings (collected as premiums)
Ineconomicterms,anythingusedtocutdownthe fornation building.TheLIChad beenthebiggest
riskisknownasinsurance.Butin familiarterms, investor in the government’s procces of planned
insurance is provided by an insurance company development purchasing government securities
which covers a person’s life (called life segment)
(G-Secs.)andequitiesofthebigassetpublicsector
or covers loss of assets, property (called non-life undertaking(PSUs).
or general segment). The insurance policies are
purchasedatfixed premiums. rjir>
In 1971, thegovernment nationalised the private
|
INSURANCE INDUSTRY sector companies (107 Indian and foreign
companies) playing in the general insurance
Insurance has a deep-rooted history in India.
segmentand a governmentcompanytheGeneral
It finds mention in the writings of Manu
InsuranceCorporationofIndia(GIC)wasformed
(Manusmrithi), Yagnavalkya (Dharmasastra)
in1972.TheGICstartedoperationonJanuary1,
and Kautilya (Arthasastra) . The writings talk in
1973withitsfour holdingcompanies:
terms of poolingof resources that could be re ¬ (i) National InsuranceCompanyLtd.
distributed in times of calamities such as fire,
floods, epidemics and famine.This was probably (ii) NewIndiaAssuranceCompanyLtd.
a pre-cursor to modern day insurance. Ancient (iii) Oriental Fire and Insurance Comany
Indian history has preserved the earliest traces of Ltd.
insurance in the form of marine trade loans and (iv) United India InsuranceCompanyLtd.
carriers’contracts . Insurancein India hasevolved
Intheeraofeconomicreforms,twomajorchanges
over time heavily drawing from other countries, —
tookplacein thisarea
England in particular.
(i) In november 2000 theGICwas notified
1 asthe Indian Reinsurer1
(ii) In March 2002 the GIC was withdrawn
Thelifeinsurancebusiness/industryinthecountry
from holding company status of the
was nationalised by the Government of India in
four public sector general insurance
1956 and a fully government-owned company,
companies. Now these four companies
the life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC)
aredirectlyownedbytheGovernmentof
was set up (at that time 245 Indian and foreign India.2
companies were playing in the life segment of
insurance). Opening of private life insurance |
INSURANCE REFORMS
companies was prohibited at thesame that time.
The LIC was called an investment institution by Under the process of economic reforms an
thegovernment . Insurance Reforms Committee (IRC) was set up
The nationalisation was motivated by twin in April 1993 under the chairmanship of the ex-
objectives — first, to spread the message of life RBI Governor R. N. Malhotra. The committee
1. India2002,Pub.Div.,Gol,N.Delhi
2. EconomicSurvey2002-03,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 395 ---
InsuranceinIndia t 13.3
handed over its report (January 1994) with the which have been able to cover 40 million lives
followingmajorsuggestions:3 in the country . Out of the local life and non ¬
(i) Decontrolling insurance sector, i.e., life segment, insurance coverage in the rural
allowingIndian as well as foreign private areas have ashareof 17 per cent and 14 per cent
sector insurance companies to enter the respectively, still too much needs to be done for
sector (the government did it in 1999 thedevelopmentofinsuranceinthecountry .(See
passingtheIRDAAct) . theSelectModelAnswerson thetopic.)
(ii) Restructuring the LIC and the GIC and
AICIL
cutting down the government’s holding
in them to 50 per cent (no follow up The Agricultural Insurance Company of India
still, but the privateinsurancecompanies Ltd. (AICIL) was set up in 2002 in the public
demanding it anxiously. The NDA sector to look after the National Agricultural
government had taken steps in this area, Insurance Schemes (NAIS) of 1999.4 Till its
but the UPA government has no such arrival, the responsibility was on the GIC whose
plans.)Late2012,thegovernmentstarted losses were supposed to be reimbursed by the
saleoftheLICsharesbutto publicsector
CentralGovernment.NowtheGICdoesnotplay
undertakings — seenasa welcomemove. this role.
(iii) Delinking GIC and its four subsidiaries
PUBLICSECTORINSURANCECOMPANIES
(whichwasdonein 2000).
(iv) Discarding the system of licensing of There are six public sector insurance companies
—
surveyors bythecontroller of Insurance. operating in the country one in life segment
(v) Restructuring the Tariff Advisory
(LIC),fourinthenon-lifesegmentandoneinthe
Committee.
agriculturesector (AICIL).
(vi) Setting up a regulatoryanthorityfor the |
REINSURANCE
insurance industry (the IRDA set up in
2000). When an insurance company gets insurance
coverageon itsinsurance policies, it isconsidered
IRDA a case of reinsurance. For the development
The Insurance Regulatory and Development of insurance in an economy the presence of
Authority (IRDA) was set up in 2000 (the Act reinsurance companies is a precondition. It
was passed in 1999) with one chairman and five becomesanessential preconditioniftheeconomy
members (two as full time and three as part- istryingtodevelopandexpandinsurancewiththe
time members) appointed and nominated by the activeparticipationoftheprivatesectorinsurance
government . The authority is responsible for the companies. This made the government convert
—
regulation, development and supervision of the theGICinto a re-insurance companyin 2000
Indian insuranceindustry. this is thesole re-insurer in India, that too in the
Thereare29insurancecompaniesinIndia(15 publicsector . (Nobodycan bea better insurer or
in life segment and 14 in the non-life segment) reinsurer than thegovernmentitself.)
3. R.N.MalhotraheadedInsuranceReformsCommittee , Gol,N.Delhi,January1994.
4. EconomicSurvey2002 - 03 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 396 ---
13.4 < IndianEconomy
Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd. (ECGC)
DEPOSIT INSURANCEAND CREDIT
under the Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
GUARANTEECORPORATION (DICGC)
formedium-andlong- termexports .Butowingto
DICGC was set up by merging the Deposit
itsownlimitations,attimesitisdifficultforECGC
Insurance Corporation (1962) and the Credit to cover pure commercial risksin issues likelong
Guarantee Corporation (1971) in 1978. While repayment period, the large value of contracts,
DepositInsurancehadbeenintroducedinIndiaout difficult economicand political conditionsof the
ofconcernsto protectdepositors,ensurefinancial importing country, together with the fact that
stability, instill confidence in the bankingsystem reinsurance cover is generally not available for
and help mobilise deposits, the establishment of such projects.5 Many times such projects look
theCreditGuaranteeCorporation wasessentially necessary considering the economic and political
in the realm of affirmative action to ensure that
relationshipofIndiawiththeproposedimporting
the credit needs of the hitherto neglected sectors country . It means that in the absence of credit
and weaker sections were met . The essential insurancecover, theabilityof Indian exporters to
concern was to persuade banks to make available go forsuchexport projectsishampered.Itshould
credit to not so creditworthy clients. After the be noted that in many developed economies
merger,thefocusoftheDICGChadshiftedonto such projects are covered and underwritten on
credit guarantees . This owed in part to the fact
governmentaccount6.
that mostlargebankswerenationalised.Withthe
NATIONAL EXPORT INSURANCE
financialsector reforms undertaken in the1990s,
credit guarantees have been gradually phased out
ACCOUNT(NEIA)
and the focus of the Corporation is veering back
ForfacilitatingtheserviceoftheECGC(discussed
to itscorefunctionof Deposit Insurancewith the
above) the Government of India did set up the
objective of averting panics, reducing systemic
National Export Insurance Account (NEIA) in
riskandensuringfinancialstability.
March2006 to promotemedium-andlong- term
exportbyprovidingcreditinsurancesupportinthe
EXPORTCREDITGUARANTEE
caseswhereECGCwasnot ableto providecredit
CORPORATION (ECGC)
cover on its own because of purely commercial
The overseas projects undertaken by the Indian reasons:7
companies face many political and commercial (i) The corpus given to the account was Rs.
risks in the importing countries. To provide 66crore,raisedtoRs.246croreby2007 —
adequate credit insurance cover to such firms, 08andwasenhancedtoRs.2000crorein
the government has set up the Export Credit theEleventh Plan (2007 — 12).
5. Duetoitsunderwritingconstraint,theECGCisunabletocoversuchprojectsonitsown.
6. Asforexamplethe USA,France,the UKand manyotherEuro- Americaneconomiesunderwwritesuch medium and
longterm projectsinthegovernments'account.TheSEIAalsocoversonlymedium-and long-term export projects
only.
7. AnnouncedwhilesettinguptheNEIA,MinistryofCommerceandIndustry,Gol,N.Delhi,March9,2006.

--- PAGE 397 ---
InsuranceinIndia t 13.5
(ii) ResourcesoftheNEIAwillbethecorpus, thenationalre-insurer)in2000to52insurersason
the premium income, interest income 30September2012operatinginthelife, non-life,
and recoveryofall theclaimspaid. and re-insurance segments (including specialised
(iii) As per the provision, an exposure equal insurers, namely the Export Credit Guarantee
to ten times corpus can be taken by the CorporationandAgriculturalInsuranceCompany
NEIA. [AIC]). Four of thegeneral insurancecompanies,
viz.,StarHealthandAllianceInsuranceCompany,
The NEIAcan cover projectswhich fulfil the
Apollo Munich Health Insurance Company,
followingcriteria:8
Max BUPA Health Insurance Company, and
(i) The project by itself should be
Religare Health Insurance Company function as
commerciallyviable;
standalonehealthinsurancecompanies.Ofthe23
(ii) The project should be strategically
insurance companies that have set up operations
important for India, with regard to in thelifesegment post opening upof thesector,
economic and political relationship of 21 are in joint ventures with foreign partners .
India with theimportingcountry;and
Of the 21private insurers who have commenced
(iii) The exporter should be capable of operations in the non-life segment, 18 are in
executing the contract, as evident from collaborationwith foreign partners .
his previoustrack record.
After the state monopoly in the insurance
The useand benefits of the NEIAneed to be sector was dismantled and private players’ entry
publicised among its beneficiaries. Meanwhile, allowed, the IRDA has played a crucial role in
many export projects pertaining to Indonesia, the development and expansion of the sector,
Vietnam, Iran, Sudan, etc ., are under way. The there is no doubt in it. But still the sector faces
NEIAwillfacilitate potential project exporters to many challenges which, if only tackled well may
entertheinternationaltradearea,asitisexpected9 one say that insurance is serving the interests of
to be so. In the era of globalisation it has been theinsuring companies and the covered alike.As
praised as a welcomedevelopment by the experts per the concerned experts, the major challenges
and thetradepeoplealike. Indian insurance is facing today may be seen as
given below:
|
THE CHALLENGEAHEAD
(i) Aspervariousestimates,only20percent
Since the opening up of theinsurancesector, the
of theinsurable Indian populationislife-
number of participants in the insurance industry insured; the share of India in global life
has gone up from seven insurers (including the insurance is just 0.66 per cent; and life
Life Insurance Corporation of India [LIC], four insurance penetration is at present 2.53
public- sector general insurers, one specialised per cent (2004) in thecountry .10
insurer,andtheGeneralInsuranceCorporationas
8. Ibid.
9. S.Prabhakaran,ExecutiveDirector,ECGC,MumbaiinSurveyof IndianIndustry2007 , TheHindu,p.84.
10. S.Krishnamurthy,CEO&MD,SBILifeInsuranceCo.Ltd.Surveyof IndianIndustry2007 , op.cit., p.91

--- PAGE 398 ---
13.6 I IndianEconomy
The message of life insurance needs to Rs. 9,00,000 crore over the next four to
be publicised among the population, five years, a better scope for the general
specially in the rural areas. Moreover, insurance expansion is probable.14 The
social security schemes should be growth in both commercialand personal
expanded to cover the poor masses who linesofgeneralinsurancebusinessreflects
lack the premium-payingcapacity. positivetrends.Over70percentofIndia’s
(ii) Experts suggest that health insurance population lives in rural areas and along
couldemergeamongthemost important with organised financial services, general
factorsofimprovinghumandevelopment insurance companies are also expanding
in the countryif expanded in a focussed into thesesectors .
way and via an action plan. It is (iv) People in their lives experience financial
estimated that around 15 per cent of the difficulties that can affect the entire
Indian populationiscovered undersome familynegatively, thisismoretrueabout
formofpre-paymentonhealthcarewhich thepoor massesin India.
includes employees and beneficiaries This is why experts suggested for
covered under ESIS, CGHS, Armed the provision of micro insurance. A
forces, Central Police organisations, relatively new concept, micro insurance
Railways, employer self-funded schemes, is today provided to the beneficiaries
the PSUs and pensions covered under of micro finance covering the finance
health insurance.11 The health insurance amount, reducing the risk of the clients
penetration is at present at 1.536 per as well as the micro finance institutions
cent only (2005 — 06). Besides the LIC, (MFIs). - 15
the private players should be promoted
The concept of micro insurance has
to enter the foray, specially in the rural been developed by the private insurance
areas.
company Aviva Life Insurance (in
(iii) After the general insurance industry was partnershipwith MFIs) whichhasforged
opened up (2000) for the private sector alliances with banks like Canara Bank,
participation, the experience has been P&SB, RRBs, 23 cooperatives, etc ., to
positive.12Itsgrowthcomparesfavourably promotemicro finance.
withthatofmanyotheremergingmarkets
Micro insurance has evolved in the
and is in line with global benchmark of
past two decades of research in micro
two to threetimes thegrowthin GDP.13 financeand hasseen growth in countries
As the economy is on a strong growth like Sri Lanka, Philippines in the last
pathand thecapitalexpenditureplanned decade.16 Here NGOs and people’s
across industries is estimated to be over
11. AlokeGupta,HealthInsuranceConsultant,SurveyofIndianIndustry , op.cit.,p.94.
12. SandeepBakhshi,CEO&MD,ICICILombardGeneralInsuranceCompany,Mumbai,SurveyofIndianIndustry2007,op.
cit.,p.99.
13. Ibid.
14. Ibid.
15. VivekKhanna,Director,AvivaIndia,SurveyofIndianIndustry2007 , op.cit.,p.102.
16. Ibid.

--- PAGE 399 ---
InsuranceinIndia t 13.7
organisations are allowed to register | INSURANCE PENETRATION
themselvesasmicro insurancecompanies
which sell such insurance. As they cover Thegrowthintheinsurancesectorisinternationally
the risk themselves, they are allowed to measured based on the standard of insurance
reinsure with one of the large global penetration. Insurance penetration is defined as
companies like Swiss Re or Munich Re. theratioofpremium underwritteninagiven year
Same model is suggested for India but to the gross domestic product (GDP). Likewise,
for this to happen drastic changes in the insurance density is another well recognised
existinginsurancerulesare required.17 benchmarkandisdefinedastheratioofpremium
(v) Manyoftheexpertsbelievethatinsurance underwritten in a given year to total population
industry should benefit the insurers, (measured in US dollars for convenience of
reinsurers as well as the insured. The comparison). The Indian insurance business has
socialpurposeof the insurance sector is in the past remained under-developed with low
never praiseworthyto bemarginalised by levelsofinsurance penetration.
the corporate interests (be domestic or In India, insurance penetration has grown
—
foreign) atleastitdoesnever tastegood from 2.3 per cent (life 1.8 per cent and non-life
-
inIndiawhichneedsastrongsocialsafety 0.7 per cent) in 2000 to 39 per cent (life 3.1
net .18 per cent and non-life 0.8 per cent) in 2013. In
(vi) Almost all of the private insurance the comparable period, insurance density has
companiesinIndiahavebeendemanding improvedfrom US$11to US$ 32.20
that the government-owned insurance Thelifeinsurance penetration levelcompares
companies (i.e., LIC and the four wellwiththeemergingmarketeconomies.During
general insurance companies) should be 2013 — 14, the life insurance industry recorded a
converted into privatesector companies. premiumincomeofRs.3,14,283croreregistering
Theirreasonsarelogicalasincomparison a growth of 9.4 per cent over the previous year.
with the government-owned insurance While private- sector insurers posted 1.4 per cent
companies, private companies are decline in their premium income, LIC recorded
always ready with highly attractive 13.5 per cent growth during the period. On the
and lucrative insurance schemes, but basis of total premium income, the market share
they have not been able to attract the of LIC increased from 72.7 per cent in 2012 — 13
clients for them. Therefore, the private to75.4per cent in 2013 — 14.
insurance companies have been fetching
hugeoperationallossesdueto lackof the POLICYINITIATIVES
desired level of their expansion and the
Committed to expand and strengthen, the
overheadexpenditure.19
insurance industry in the country (following the
17. Ithasbeen beautifullyshowntakingexampleoftheSelf-employedWomen'sAssociation(SEWA)byRenanaJhabvala
andRaviKanburintheKaushikBasueditedIndia'sEmergingEconomy , OxfordUniv.Press,N.Delhi,2005,pp.309 - 11.
18. BiplabDasgupta,Globalisation:India'sAdjustmentExperience , SagePublication,N.Delhi,2005,pp.221 - 931.
19. G.V.Rao,CMD,OrientalInsuranceCo.Ltd.,SurveyofIndianIndustry2007 , TheHindu,pp.87 - 90.
20. AnnualReport2012 - 13 , IRDA,Gol,N.DelhiandtheEconomicSurvey2014 - 15 , Vol.2,p.48,Gol,MoF,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 400 ---
13.8 I IndianEconomy
recommendations of the Malhotra Committee provided a fillip to propagating micro
Report, 1993), the Gol has taken the following insuranceasaconceptualissue.With the
policyinitiatives21in recentyears: positiveandfacilitativeapproachadopted
(i) Health Insurance: The Insurance under the micro insuranceregulations, it
Regulatory Development Authority is expected that all insurance companies
(IRDA) has been taking a number of would come out with a progressive
proactive steps as part of the initiatives business approach and carryforward the
for the spread of health insurance. It spirit of regulations thereby extending
had set up a National Health Insurance insurance penetration to all segments of
WorkingGroupin2003,whichprovided the society. Presently, there are 10,482
—
a platform for the various stakeholders micro insurance agents operating in the
in the health insurance industry to micro — insurancesector .
work together and suggest solutions
|
on various relevant issues in the sector . NEW REFORM INITIATIVES
The IRDA is also co-ordinating with
With a view to removing archaic and redundant
and supporting insurance industry
provisionsin theinsurancelaws,empoweringthe
initiatives in standardising certain key
InsuranceRegulatoryandDevelopmentAuthority
terminology used in health insurance
(IRDA) to enable more effective regulation, and
documents, for better comprehension
enhancingtheforeignequityinvestmentcapinan
and in the interest of policyholders.The
Indian insurance company with the safeguard of
GeneralInsuranceCouncil,comprising
Indianownershipandcontrol,thegovernmenthas
all non-life insurers, evolved a consensus
implementedtheInsuranceLaws(Ammendment)
on a uniform definition of ‘pre-existing
Act, 2013.
diseases’anditsexclusionwording,which
The Act paved the way for major reform
hasearlier been an expression with many
related amendments in the Insurance Act, 1938,
definitions, still more interpretations,
and certainly a whole lot of grievances. theGeneral Insurance Business (Nationalization)
Act, 1972 and the Insurance Regulatory and
Such standardisation, effective June 1,
Development Authority (IRDA) Act, 1999. It
2008willhelptheinsuredbyminimising
ambiguityandalsobybettercomparability provides greater powers to the IRDAI by which
of health insurance products. Also, with the insurance regulatory framework is supposed
effect from October 1, 2011, portability to become more flexibile, effective and efficient.
Major changesas per theActaregiven below:
in health insurance has been started
in which an insured, if not happy with 1. Promotion of Foreign Investment.in an
services or the product of the existing Indian Insurance Company increased
insurer, can change to another insurer from to 49 per cent (from 26 per cent)
whilst enjoying the benefits (especially with the safeguard of Indian ownership
that of pre-existing diseases) of her/his
andcontrol.
existingpolicy. Greater availability of capital for the
(ii) Micro Insurance: Micro insurance capital intensive insurance sector would
regulations issued by the IRDA have lead to greater distribution reach to
21. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit..
DD
.128 - 129.