--- PAGE 250 ---
8.34 < IndianEconomy
the Dos and Don’ts of trading in the andvegetableswasthehighestatupto18percent
commodityfutures market; of thetotal produce.
(ii) Police training programmes in the states Attendingthecausesofstorageandprocessing
of Madhya Pradesh,Chhattisgarh,Tamil facilities, something the Gol is emphasising, this
Nadu and Delhi with regard to dabba levelcouldcomedownsignificantlyandcanserve
trading/ illegaltrading; great purpose in helping the economy to fight
(iii) A massive awareness and capacity the repeated priceshocks of the past two years in
¬
building programme for various caseoffruits, vegetablesand foodgrains to a great
.
stakeholder groups, with primary focus extent
on farmers. The losses take place in almost all stages of
(iv) On the regulatory front, the FMC farming but the study looked at harvesting,
undertookmeasuresfor thedevelopment collection, grading, cleaning, packaging,
of thecommodityfutures market, which transportation andstorage . If cultivation wasalso
includeensuringmoreeffectiveinspection
includedthelossfigurewouldbemuchhigher.The
of members of the exchanges on regular Gol hassaid thatavailabilityof better technology
basis and in a comprehensive manner and theiradoption hasbroughtabouta reduction
covering all aspects of the regulatory in losses.
regime.
|
IRRIGATION
(v) Bringing out a guidance manual for
improving audit practices, prescribing
The Planning Commission37 classified irrigation
penalty structure for client code projects/schemesin Indiaon thefollowinglines :
modification andforexecutingtrade. —
(i) Major Irrigation Schemes those with
(vi) Grantingexemptions for short hedgefor
cultivable command areas (CCA) of
soyabean/oil futures, issuing directives morethan 10,000hectares.
forsegregation ofclientaccounts . —
(ii) Medium Irrigation Schemes those
| with cultivable command areas (CCA)
FARMWASTE DEBATE
between 2,000and 10,000 hectares.
—
A recent study,36 undertaken by the Central (iii) Minor Irrigation Schemes those with
Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and cultivable command area (CCA) upto
Technology (CIPHET), a government-run 2,000 hectares. Expansion of irrigation
institute, hasestimated thevalueoffarmwastein facilities, alongwith consolidation of the
India at Rs.44,000 crore (at the prices of 2009), existing systems, has been the main part
that is around 7 per cent of the total produce, of thestrategyfor increasing production
which is much lower than the oft-stated 40 per offoodgrains.
cent level. Although cereals, such as wheat and With a view to ensuring early completion of
rice, pulses and oil seeds accounted for around projects for providing irrigation benefits to the
two -thirdsof thewastage,thelossin caseoffruits farmers, Rural Infrastructure Development Fund
36. CentralInstituteof Post - HarvestEngineeringandTechnology(CIPHET) , ICAR,MinistryofAgriculture,Gol,Ludhiana,
StudyreleasedinSeptember,2011.
37. PlanningCommission,Gol,N.Delhi,1961.

--- PAGE 251 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement t 8.35
(RIDF) hasbeeninoperationsince1995-96.The
MACRO MANAGEMENTOF
government launched the Accelerated Irrigation
AGRICULTURE (MMA)
Benefits Programme (AIBP) in 1996-97 to give
loanassistancetothestatesto helpthemcomplete
The MMA was revised in 2008 to improve its
someof theincomplete major/medium irrigation efficacy in supplementing/complementing the
projects, which were in an advanced stage of efforts of the states towards enhancement of
completion.
agricultural productionand productivity.39Italso
provides opportunity to draw upon agricultural
|
NATIONALFOODSECURITYMISSION (NFSM)
development programmesoutoftensub-schemes
The NFSM, launched in 2007, is a crop relating to crop production and natural resource
development scheme of the Government of management, and give it the flexibility to use 20
India that aims at additional production of 10,
per centof resourcesforinnovativecomponents .
8 and 2 million tonnes of rice, wheat and pulses, Therevised MMAschemehasformula-based
respectively by the end of 2011 — 12.The mission allocation criteria and provides assistance in the
interventionsconsistof:38 form of grants: loan to the states/UTs on 90:10
(i) seedsofimproved variety, ratio basis, except in case of the north- eastern
stateswherethecentralshareis100percentgrant .
(ii) soilameliorants,
(iii) plant nutrients, RASHTRIYA KRISHI VIKASYOJANA
(iv) farm machines/implements,and (RKVY)
(v) plant protection measures
The RKVY was launched in 2007-08 for
Inaddition,aspecialinitiativeunderthename
incentivisingstates to enhance publicinvestment
oftheAcceleratedPulsesProductionProgramme
to achieve 4 per cent growth rate in agriculture
was initiated in 2010 to boost the production of and alliedsectorsduringtheEleventh Plan.40The
pulses by active promotion of technologies in
RKVYformatpermitstakingupnationalpriorities
1,000clustersof1,000 ha (hectare) each.
as sub-schemes, allowing the states flexibility in
Considerable achievements under the project selection and implementation. The sub
¬
NFSM have been recorded during the course of —
schemesinclude
implementation of the programme such as new
(i) Bringing Green Revolution to eastern
farmpractices,distributionofseedsofhighyielding
region;
varieties of rice, wheat, pulses, and hybrid rice,
(ii) Integrateddevelopmentof60,000 pulses
and treatingarea withsoil ameliorants to restore
soil fertility for higher productivity. Through villagesin rainfedareas;
targeted interventions, the mission has already (iii) Promotion ofoil palm;
achieved,ayear inadvance, 25 millionstonnesof (iv) Initiativeon vegetableclusters;
additionalproductionoffoodgrainsexceedingthe (v) Nutri-cereals;
target of 20 million tonnes of production set for (vi) National Mission for Protein
theterminalyear2011 — 12,of theEleventh Plan.
Supplements;
38. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.190.
39. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.190.
40. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.190.

--- PAGE 252 ---
8.36 I IndianEconomy
(vii) Accelerated Fodder Development havebeennoticeableachievementsandsignificant
Programme; improvement in the production and productivity
(viii) Rainfed Area Development Programme;
ofvarioushorticulturecrops.
and The NHM scheme was launched42 during
(ix) Saffron Mission. the Tenth Plan for holistic development of the
The RKVY links 50 per cent of central
horticulture sector, duly ensuring forward and
backwardlinkages byadopting a cluster approach,
assistance to those states that have stepped up
with the active participation of all stakeholders.
percentageofstateplanexpenditureonagriculture
and allied sectors . States have indeed increased The supply of quality planting material through
establishment of nurseries and tissue culture
allocation to agriculture and allied sectors from
units, production and productivityimprovement
4.88 per cent of total state plan expenditure in
— — programmes through area expansion and
2006 07 to 6.04 per cent of in 2010 11 (as per
theRevisedEstimates,EconomicSurvey2011 — 12) . rejuvenation, technology promotion, technology
dissemination, human resource development,
| ISOPOM creation of infrastructure for post-harvest
management and marketing in consonance with
The centrally sponsored ISOPOM (Integrated the comparative advantages of each state/region
Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm, and and their diverse agro-climatic conditions are
Maize)41havebeen underimplementation during the major programmes of the Mission. A major
—
the Eleventh Plan in 14 states for oilseeds and initiative has been taken during 2011 12 for
pulses,15formaize,and9foroilpalm.Thepulses enhancing the supply of good quality vegetables
component has been merged with the NFSM to metro cities under the Vegetable Initiative in
witheffectfromApril1,2010.Oilseedsareraised UrbanClusters(VIUC) .
mostlyunderrainfedconditionsandareimportant ~
|
forthelivelihoodofsmallandmarginalfarmersin NATIONAL BAMBOO MISSION (NBM)
thearidandsemi-arid areasofthecountry .
The NBM, a centrally sponsored scheme of
| MISsioN the Ministry of Agriculture for harnessing the
NATIONALHORTICULTURE (NHM)
potential of the bamboo crop in the country, is
The horticulture sector includes a wide range under implementation in 27 states . It envisages
of crops, such as fruits, vegetables, roots and promoting holisticgrowth ofthe bamboo sector by
tuber crops, flowers, aromatic and medicinal adopting an area-based, regionally differentiated
plants, spices, and plantation crops, which strategy to increase the area under bamboo
facilitatediversification in agriculture.It has been cultivation and marketing.43 Under the Mission,
recognisedthatgrowinghorticulturecropsisnow steps have been taken to increase the availability
an ideal option to improve livelihood security, of quality planting material by supporting the
enhance employment generation, attain food setting up of new nurseries/tissue culture units
and nutritional security, and increase income and strengthening existing ones. To address
through value addition. Over the years, there forward integration, the Mission is taking steps
41. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.190 - 191.
42. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.191 - 192.
43. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.192.

--- PAGE 253 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement i 8.37
to strengthen marketing of bamboo products, (viii) Promoting research for developing new
especiallythoserelatedtohandicraftitems.Besides varietiesofcropsandensuringprotection
the Mission has provided financial assistance to to thedevelopedvarieties.
different institutions/universitiesfor twenty-three
|
R&D projects aimed at higher productivity of AGRICULTURAL INSURANCE
bamboo.Agro-forestry trials comprising bamboo
There are various major crop insurance schemes
grown alongwith agricultural/horticultural crops
andmedicinalplantsunderdifferentagro-climatic under implementation in thecountry:
conditionsin variousstates havebeen initiated. (i) National Agricultural Insurance Scheme
(NAIS): The NAIS is a government-
| NATIONALAGRICULTURALPOUCY,200044 sponsored central- sector crop insurance
scheme being implemented in the
The Union Government has announced the new country since 1999 — 2000 season (the
NationalAgricultural Policyin the Parliamenton erstwhile Comprehensive Crop Insurance
July28,2000.Thispolicyhasbeen planned under Scheme-CCISof1985wasmergedintoit)
theprovisionsoftheWorldTradeOrganization with theobjectiveof providingfinancial
so as to face the challenges of the agriculture supporttofarmersintheeventoffailureof
sector . This policy gives emphasis on promoting cropsasaresultofnaturalcalamities,pests
agricultural exports after fulfilling domestic and diseases. The Agriculture Insurance
demand.Thesalientfeatures45of this policyare: Company of India Ltd. (AICIL) is the
(i) 4 per cent growth rate p.a. for the next implementingagencyfor thescheme.At
two decades. present,theschemeisbeingimplemented
(ii) 4 per cent growth rate p.a. target to be by25statesand two UTs.46
achieved by2005. (ii) Modified NAIS (MNAIS): With
(iii) Land reforms to provide land to poor the aim of further improving crop
farmers. insuranceschemes, the MNAIS is under
implementation on pilot basis in 50
(iv) Consolidation of holding in all states of —
thenation. districtsinthecountryfromrabi2010 11
season.Someofthemajorimprovements
(v) Promoting private investments in —
madein theMNAISare47
agriculture.
(a) Actuarial premium with subsidy in
(vi) Provideinsurance umberalla for crops to
farmers.
premiumatdifferent rates;
(vii) Promote bio-technology. (b) All claims liability to be on the
insurer;
44. EconomicSurvey2000 - 01 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
45. NewAgriculturePolicyhasbeendescribedas"RainbowRevolution"whichincludesthefollowingrevolutions:
Green(FoodGrainProduction),White(Milk),Yellow(Oilseeds),Blue(Fisheries),Red(Meat/Tomato),Golden(Fruits -
Apple),Grey(Fertiliser),Black/Brown(Non-conventionalEnergySources),Silver(Eggs)andRound(Potato).
The above Rainbow Revolution also includes "Food Chain Revolution"to put a check on destroying foodgrains,
vegetablesandfruits.
46. EconomicSurvey2011 - 12,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
47. EconomicSurvey2011 - 12 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 254 ---
8.38 < IndianEconomy
— —
(c) Unit area of insurance reduced to whoarebetweentheageof18 50years
village panchayat level for major functions on group-basiswith minimum
crops; of 20 members. No new lives are added
(d) Indemnity for prevented/sowing/ even under existing schemes at the time
planting risk and for post-harvest of renewal. Gram Panchayat acts as the
lossesduetocyclone; nodalagencyandwiththehelpofNGO/
SHG or anyother agencywhichidentify
(e) On account payment up to 25 per
theagriculturalworkers.
cent advance of likely claims as
immediaterelief; (v) Farm Income Insurance Scheme: The
scheme50 commenced in January 2004
(f) More proficient basis for calculation
for providing insurance safeguards and
of threshold yield;and
—
economic security to farmers run by
(g) Allowing privatesector insurers with
the Ministry of Agriculture and Indian
adequateinfrastructure.
Agriculture Insurance Company Ltd.
Only upfront premiumsubsidyisshared
jointly:
by the central and state governments on
(a) Provides‘broaderriskinsurance’
50:50 basisand claimsare theliabilityof
theinsurancecompanies.Theschemehas (b) Conceived to provide income
been notified by17statesbynow. protection to the farmers by
integratingthemechanismofinsuring
(iii) PilotWeatherBasedCropInsuranceScheme
productionaswellas marketrisks
(WBCIS):Beingimplementedasacentral-
sector scheme from kharif 2007 season. (c) Farmer’s income is protected by
ensuring minimum guaranteed
The scheme48 is intended to provide
income.
protection to farmers against adverse
weather incidence, such as deficit and (d) Subsidyin premium payment
excess rainfall, high or low temperature, (e) Available for all the states and
andhumiditythataredeemedtoadversely compulsoryfor farmers availing crop
impactcrop production.Thisis basedon loans.
actuarial rates of premium, but to make NAIS will be withdrawn for the crops
the scheme attractive, premium actually covered under it, but would continue to
charged from farmers has been restricted beapplicablefor othercrops.
to beat par with theNAIS. (vi) Varsha Bima(RainfallInsuranceScheme):
(iv) Krishi Shramik Suraksha Yojana: The Introduced in 2004south- west monsoon
multi-benefitscheme49fortheagricultural period—covers all natural rainfal risks
workers, commenced on July 1, 2001, and provides51 five different options
provides life insurance protection, lump suitingvariedrequirementsofthefarming
sumsurvivalbenefitand pensiontothose community:
48. EconomicSurvey2006 - 07 , op.cit.
49. India2010&2011 , Pub.Division,NDelhi,P.379.
50. EconomicSurvey2004 - 05 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
51. India2005 , Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 255 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement t 8.39
(a) Seasonal rainfall insurance based a need of creating research institutions
on aggregated rainfall from June to on the pattern of Indian Institutes of
September Technology (IIT) and Indian Institutes
(b) Sowing failure insurance based on of Sciences (IIS). In 2015-16, the Gol
rainfall between June 15 and August aimstoset uptwoinstitutesofexcellence
15 in Assam andJharkhand to promote the
cause.
(c) Rainfall distribution insurance with
the weightage assigned to different (b) Greater investment in applied research,
weeks betweenJuneandSeptember education, and extension will serve
—
(d) AgronomicIndexconstructed on the multiple aims in the sector enhanced
basisofwater requirementsofcrops
growth,costcutting,increaseinyieldand
productivitytogether withequippingthe
(e) A catastrophe option covering
countryfortheSecondGreenRevolution.
extremelyadversedeviation of 50per
(c) The latest NSSO Survey (70th Round,
cent and above in rainfall during the
December 2013) indicates that about
season
59 per cent of farmers do not get much
Thisscheme coversall natural rainfall risks at the technical assistance and know-how
followingstages:
from government-funded farm research
(a) Failure of seed crop either in full or in institutes or extension services. So they
partsdueto natural risks have to rely on progressive farmers,
(b) Lossin expected rawseed yield media, and private commercial agents
(c) Lossofseed cropafter harvest such as dealers of farm inputs likeseeds,
fertilizers, and pesticides for technical
(d) Atseed certificationstage
information.
| RESEARCHAND EXTENSION (d) To ensure last-mile connectivity,
extension services need to be geared up
TheIndianCouncilofAgriculturalResearch(ICAR)
to address emerging technological and
is engaged in developing new crop varieties with information needs. Effectiveness of the
specific traits that improve yield and nutritional ‘lab-
to
-farm’programmecanbeimproved
qualityalongwith tolerance /resistanceto various by leveraging information technology
bioticandabioticstresses .Besides,itmatchescrop ande-(net -based)andm-(mobile-based)
production and protection technologies to target applications,participationofprofessional
agro-ecologies.Theadoptionofimprovedvarieties NGOs,etc .
andcropmanagementtechnologieshasresultedin
The government took initiative in 2015 to
enhancement of production and productivity of
set up the Kisan TV for disseminating realtime
cereals,pulses,andotherfieldcrops.TheEconomic
— information to farmers regarding new farming
Survey2014 15outlinestheissuesandchallenges
techniques, water conservation, organic farming,
in thisregardin thefollowingway: etc ., will partly make up for the existing adverse
(a) It is imperative to make Indian ratio of one extension worker for every 800
agricultural growth science-led by to 1,000 farmers and provide farmers a direct
shedding ‘technology fatigue’. There is interfacewithagriculturalexperts .

--- PAGE 256 ---
8.40 < IndianEconomy
Some of the major existing schemes52 in this matter specialists/extension workers of
regardasgiven below: agricultureand allieddepartments;and
(i) Mass media support to agriculture (vi) MANAGE,Hyderabad,an apexinstitute
focusing on Doordarshan infrastructure at the national level, provides training
and All India Radio (AIR) broadcasting to middle and senior level officers of
agriculture-related information; agricultureand allied departments of the
(ii) Kisan Call Centres (KCC) to provide
states/UTs.53
agricultural information to the farming (vii) The Support to State Extension
community through toll-free telephone Programme (SSEP) is being launched
—
lines; by the Gol since 2005 06 with the
(iii) Agri-clinic and agri-business centres objectiveof makingtheextensionsystem
by agriculture graduates to provide farmer-driven as well as accountable to
extensionservices to farmerson payment farmers. For this, ATMAs (Agricultural
basis throughsetting up of economically Technology Management Agencies) has
viable self-employment ventures, and been set up at district level, which have
information dissemination through agri active particiaption of farmers, farmers
¬
fairs; groups, NGOsand otherstakeholders.
(iv) Extension education institutes at |
FARMMECHANIZATION
Nilokher (Haryana), Rajendra Nagar
(Andhra Pradesh), Anand (Gujarat),
Agricultural mechanization is one of the main
and Jorhat (Assam) are operating at drivers of agriculturalsector growth. Farm power
regional level to improve the skills and availability and average foodgrain yield have a
professional competence of extension direct relationship. It increases productivity of
field functionaries of agriculture and
land and labour by meeting timeliness of farm
allieddepartments;
operations and increases work output per unit
(v) There are model training courses on time. Besides its paramount contribution to
thrust areas of agriculture, horticulture, the multiple cropping and diversification of
animal husbandry, and fisheries with the agriculture, mechanisation also enables efficient
objective of improving the professional utilisation of inputssuch as seeds, fertilizers, and
competence, upgrading the knowledge, irrigationwater .Followingobservationsarequite
and developing technicalskillsofsubject relevant in thisregard:
52. SeveralvolumesofEconomicSurveyandIndiaupto2015 - 16.
53. MANAGEwasestablished in1987,asthe NationalCentre forManagementof Agricultural Extensionat Hyderabad,
bytheMinistryofAgriculture,GovernmentofIndiaasanautonomousInstitute,fromwhichitsacronym'MANAGE'is
derived.Inrecognitionofitsimportanceandexpansionofactivitiesalloverthecountry,itsstatuswaselevatedtothat
ofa NationalInstitutein1992and re-christenedtoitspresent namei.e.,NationalInstituteofAgricultural Extension
Management.
MANAGEisthe Indian responsetochallengesof agriculturalextension in a rapidlygrowingand diverseagriculture
sector. The policies of liberalization and globalization of the economy and the level of agricultural technology
becoming more sophisticated and complex, called for major initiatives towards reorientation and modernisation
of the agricultural extensionsystem. Effective waysof managingthe extension system needed to be evolved and
extensionorganisationsenabledtotransformtheexistingsetupthroughprofessionalguidanceandtrainingofcritical
manpower.MANAGEistheresponsetothisimperativeneed.

--- PAGE 257 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement t 8.41
(i) AlthoughIndiaisoneofthetopcountries
NATIONALMISSION FOR SUSTAINABLE
in agricultural production, the current
AGRICULTURE (NMSA)
leveloffarm mechanisation,whichvaries
across states, averages around 40 per The NMSA, launched in 2011-12, aims at
cent as against more than 90 per cent in enhancingfoodsecurityandprotectionofresources
developed countries (Economic Survey such as land, water, biodiversity and genetic
2014-15) .
resourcesbydevelopingstrategies to make Indian
(ii) ThefarmmechanisationinIndiahasbeen agriculturemoreresilienttoclimatechange.54The
growing at a rate of less than 5 per cent EconomicSurvey2011-12discusses the Impacts
in last two decades(Economic Survey of Climate Change on Indian Agriculture in the
2014-15) . followingpoints:
(iii) The economic benefit of adoption of (i) Indianagriculture,withtwo -thirdrainfed
improved implementsis about Rs.80,000 arearemainsvulnerabletovariousvagaries
crore per annum, which is only a small of monsoon, besides facing occurrence
fractionofthepotential(ICAR,2015) . of drought and flood in many parts of
(iv) Farm mechnaisation has resulted in the country . Natural calamities such as
generating employment to rural youth drought and flood occur frequently in
andartisansfortheproduction,operation, manypartsof thecountry .
and maintenance of machines (Economic (ii) Climatechangewill aggravate these risks
Survey2013-14) . andmayconsiderablyaffectfoodsecurity
(v) Due to significant and continuous through direct and indirect effects on
reduction of agricultural workforce, crops, soils, livestock, fisheries and pests .
higher levels of farm mechanisation are Building climate resilience, therefore, is
necessaryforsustaining productivityand critical.
profitability(EconomicSurvey2013 — 14) . (a) Potential adaptation strategies to
India faces mainly two main challenges in its deal with the adverse impacts of
drivetowardsfarm mechanisation:
climatechangeare:
(i) Highly diverse agriculture with different
(b) Developingcultivarstolerantto heat,
soil and climatic zones, requiring moistureandsalinitystresses;
customized farm machinery and (c) Modifying crop management
equipment,and practices; improving water
(ii) Small land holdings with limited management;
resources. (d) Adopting new farm practicessuch as
Inthe12thPlantheGollaunchedadedicated
resource-conservingtechnologies;
Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation with (e) Crop diversification; improving pest
focus on spreading farm mechanisation to small management;
and marginal farmers and regions that have low (f) Making available timely weather-
farm poweravailability. basedadvisories;
54. PrimeMinister'sCouncilonClimateChange(PMCCC)approved theMission inSeptember2010and theMinistryof
AgricultureinitiatedactivitiesundertheMissionin2011 - 12.

--- PAGE 258 ---
8.42 < IndianEconomy
(g) Crop insurance; and harnessing the wasnotbasedonsustainableagriculturalpractices.
indigenous technical knowledge of When the Indian President, Dr.Kalamsuggested
farmers. for the same, he attached much wider meaning
The Indian Council of Agricultural Research to it. For him it consisted of, crop management,
has initiated a scheme on National Initiative cost reduction, value addition, processing and
on Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) . The marketingother than thegreenfarming.
initiativehasbeen plannedasamulti-disciplinary, In January 2004, the Government of India
multi-institutionaleffortcoveringcrops,livestock announced a major agricultural programme
and fisheries, and focusing mainly on adaptation named as the Second Green Revolution with an
and mitigation of climate change in agriculture. initial fund allocation of Rs. 50,000 crore. This
It also has a component for demonstration of programme was so exhaustive that it had hardly
climate-coping technologies on farmers’ fields left any problem area of Indian agriculture
in 100 most vulnerable districts. State-of-the- untouched and had every potential of solving
art infrastructure is being set up at key research all long-standing problems. In a sense it was a
institutestoundertakefrontierresearchonclimate completeagriculturalpolicybasedon theconcept
changeadaptationand mitigation. of sustainable development and well-equipped
to fight the challenges posed by the WTO and
|
SECOND GREEN REVOUTION capable enough to make Indian agriculture to
emergeasawinnerintheglobalisingeconomy.As
Useof all eco-friendlymeansin cultivation is the
therewasagovernmentchangeat theCentre, the
Second Green Revolution (SGR) or Evergreen
completedetailsoftheprogrammewerenotmade
Revoultion or Sustainable Agriculture. For available. The present government at the Centre
experts55itincludestheagriculturalpracticessuch
has not been referring to this programme, but in
as,
practice it looks like promoting the same causes
(i) replacing chemical fertilisers by bio ¬ more vigorously. In the meantime, the President
fertilizers; has been quoting the need for a second green
(ii) in placeof chemical pesticides usingbio
¬
revolution timeand again.
pesticides;
(iii) conserving water, balanced cropping
SUMMINGUPTHESECONDGREEN
pattern, proper cropcombinations,etc; REVOLUTION
^^^^^^^^^
Such agricultural practices are popular in Ifweadd upthedifferentannouncementsbythe
developedeconomiesasorganicfarming.56
governments time to time and the propositions
ofexpertswe maysum up theidea of thesecond
SECONDGREENREVOLUTIONININDIA
greenrevolutionin Indiawiththehelpofitsthree
The Second Green Revolution in India is a broad coordinates:
conceptaswellasthenameofaprogramme.Itwas
(i) Increasing Agricultural Production: It
suggested as an idea of sustainable agriculture in includesfour major things —
mid-1990s by agro-scientists as the ongoing GR
55. AsperM.S.Swaminathan,Dr.A.P.S.AbdulKlam,P.S.Paroda,ICAR,etc.
56. Thiskindoffarminghad alreadycommenced intheEuro- Americaneconomiesbythe1980s.However,theconcept
gained popularity by the early1970s in the wake of environmental pollution due to rapid industrialisation. The
BrundtlandReportonSustainableDevelopment(1987)gavetheultimateboost.

--- PAGE 259 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement i 8.43
(a) Unlike the Green Revolution which accessiblebythevastpoorpopulation
was limited to only five foodgrains of India (already due to costlier
(wheat, rice, jowar, bajra, maize), the outputs, of the GR masses lack the
Second Green Revolution includes required purchasing capacity). That
—
all agricultural products cereals, is why‘costcut’isan integral part of
cash crops, animal husbandry (dairy, thisrevolution.And thatiswhyagro
¬
goatry, piggery, poultry, etc .), scientists have suggested to base our
fisheries, sericulture, etc . It is rightly agriculture on biotechnology. Use
called the Rainbow Revolution, of biotechnology in agriculture does
Naturally, it is the most ambitious not only open new dimensions for
idea in theagriculturesector of India it but it has every potential to cut
everformalised. costs of the agricultural products by
(b) It deals with suitable kinds of doing miraculous and unthinkable
croppingpattern,cropdiversification, kind of research and development.
crop management, plant protection, India is very much aware of this
checking per-harvest losses of realitythat withoutan activesupport
agricultureal products, as well of biotechnology, sustainable
as post-harvest, integrated pest agricultural development will have
management, soil conservation, onlyelitistvalueand nothingelse.57
etc . (ii) Value Addition: Indian agriculture has
(c) Initiation of sustainable practices
beenlackingtheaspectofvalueaddition.
in agriculture are all instrumental In the Indian agriculture sector right
factors of sustainable agriculture to from farmers to the traders there has
be utilised. been a tendencyof deposing agricultural
goods in its primary form. That is why
(d) One veryimportant point should be
the real potential of Indian agriculture
notedherethatIndiacannotaffordto
go for onlygreen farming or organic to create gainful employment has never
been tapped. This green revolution tries
farming in the name of sustainable
agricultural development. As the togo for itin a bigway.In thisdirection
therewill bean increasedemphasis upon
replacement of chemical inputs by
agro-processing, beverages and drinks
the organic ones has every chance of
industries.
reducing production and with useof
costlier inputs, the produce of such (iii) Strengthening the Infrastructural/
a farming will not be economically Institutional Aspects: The last coordinate
—
57. Someoftheknownpotentialwhichtheagro- scientistsareintheprocessofspeedierimplementationare 7to8times
potentialof increasingproductivityofthefoodgrains;droughtandflood resistantseeddevelopment;pest- resistant
seeds;hybridseedslike'pomatonewbio-fertilisersandbio-pesticides;etc.,Allthesenewtechnologiesinitiatedinto
theagriculturalpracticeswillnotonlyboosttheproductionbutcutthecostsenablingIndiatohaveeconomicreachto
foodbeingwiththeeco-friendlymethodsoffarming.
Asthe question of food security isa matter of immediateconcern for countries like India and China,theonusof
popularisingthegeneticallymodifiedfoods(GMFs)remainsonthem.Thatiswhyweseethesetwocountriesallowing
theuseoftheGMFsinrecentyears.

--- PAGE 260 ---
8.44 I IndianEconomy
oftheSecondGreenRevolutionisrelated startedshowingitsvagariesmoreand
to the aspects of timely and adequate morein recent times.
infrastructural/institutional support (f) Everything done till date in the area
without whichitcannot happen: of developing, an adequate kind of
(a) We need to strenghen the credit marketing network for agricultural
delivery aspects for the agriculture products has not been capable of
sector — bothat themicro and macro delivering thesame.And that is why
levels (for corporatefarming). the professionofagriculturehas been
(b) Thestoragefacilitiesfor agricultural failing to emergeasan economicand
products in India is among the profitable area for the farmers. We
weakest in the world. India does need to restructure and strengthen
not have adequate capacity of dry it right from the grassroots level to
godownsandcoldstorage .Inthearea the national level. Only then can
ofrefrigeratedstorage, muchneedsto we internationalise (globalise) our
bedone.A beginning has been made agriculturesector .
recently by the railways with the (g) If there has been anyonearea which
initiation of the refrigerated station hasfailed to havethe propercareand
wagons. Basically, private sector support of insurance it has been the
participation is considered very vital agriculturesector .Evenaftercovering
for thegrowth of thissegment . allagriculturalactivitiesandproducts
(c) The country lacks a suitable kind of under the agricultural insurance
transport connectivity for which scheme (The National Agricultural
super-highwaysandruralconnectivity Insurance Scheme, 1999) it has very
programmes are today the high low penetration basically due to lack
priorityareasforthegovernment .The of awareness among the farmers/
privatesectorisalsobeingencouraged beneficiaries. Now the government
thoughatpresentittooseemstohave is trying hard to do the same which
a limited role in this area, especially also depends upon suitable level
in urban areas and at the micro level of insurance sector reforms, state
only. governments, care to the sector and
awarenessamongthebeneficiaries.At
(d) The development of
telecommunicationwith all modern present India has insurance coverage
means are necessary pre-conditions for the crops, seeds. Now there is a
for the timely development of proposal to cover even the marketing
the agriculture sector and for the
risk,too .
empowermentof thefarmer. If wemakesomestatementsabout theSGR,
(e) The irrigation preparedness of
theremust notseem anyexaggeration init:
India needsgrassroots levelapproach (i) “TheSGRiscapableofsolvingthewhole
(already part of the Bharat Nirman) gamutofproblemsrelatedtoIndianfood
and needs a foolproof systemic
philosophy.”
approach. It becomes specially (ii) “The SGR will give agriculture & rural
important once the climate has developmentthedueitdeserves.”

--- PAGE 261 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement t 8.45
—
(iii) “The SGR will make Indian agriculture its agriculture sector ecologically safe
face the challenges of the WTO and theachievement of ecologicalaccesswill
emerge as a net gainer in the process of becomepossible.
globalisation.”
(iv) The surplus agricultural produce will
(iv) “The SGR is the best route to make enter the world market and agriculture
economic reforms reach the masses and sector will be able to tap the benefits of
benefit those who consider it anti-poor, globalisation thus, farmers, rural areas
anti-agricultureandanti-ruralareas.” and agri-business will be able to feel
(v) “The SGR is the best way to let people the benefits of economic reforms and
feel that economic reform has a human
globalisation.
faceand verymuch essentialfor rich and (v) Itwillcreategainfulemploymentsources
poor,alike.” in the agriculture sector on which more
(vi) “The SGR is, undoubtedly the best than 58 per cent of the population
and the ultimate as well as a complete depends for its livelihood. It will serve
agriculturepolicyof India.” the purposes of poverty alleviation,
bridging economic inequality, boosting
In recent times, the governmental approach
rural development, solving the curse of
has gone for a complete change in favour of the
agriculturesectorand theSGR.Itisclearlyvisible unemployment,etc .
from the streamlining of the New Agricultural (vi) Itwilleliminatehungerandmalnutrition
Policy (2000), the Union Budget, Foreign Trade from India.
Policy, the Credit and Monetary Policy what (vii) India won’t be an example of ‘market
would bethefuturerequirementsoftheSGR. failure’ — its market will succeed by
increasing the purchasingcapacityof the
IMPACTOFSECONDGREEN REVOLUTION population.
TheSecond Green Revolution has every prospect (viii) Living standard of the population will
of revolutionising the agriculture sector of India improve and development has to show
with multi-dimensional positive impact on up. Thus, India’s rank on the human
agriculture in particular and the economy, in development index (HDI) will improve
general: forsure.
(i) As agricultural production will increase, Other than the above-given points, there
India will be safe from food security will be numerous related positive effects on the
concern.Thiswill provide India physical economyasa wholeand on theagriculturesector
accessto food. in particular.
(ii) Every Indian will have economic access Second Green Revolution Strategy was
tofood becauseofincreasein production adopted in the Eleventh Plan.58The urgent need
and cost cut due to genetically modified for taking agriculture to a higher trajectory of
foods (GMFs) will makefood cheaper. four per cent annual growth can be met only
(iii) Asthisisasustainablekindofagriculture with improvement in the scale as well as quality
revolution,Indiawillalso beabletomake of agricultural reforms undertaken bythevarious
58. EconomicSurvey2006 - 07 , op.cit.

--- PAGE 262 ---
—
8.46 I IndianEconomy
states and agencies at various levels. These SECONDPUSHTOAGRICULTURE
reforms must aim at efficient use of resources The post-Green Revolution programmelaunched
and conservation of soil, water and ecology on by the Government of Punjab in 2004, includes
a sustainable basis, and in a holistic framework. introduction of new technology in agriculture
Such a holistic framework must incorporate (green farming techniques, use of biotechnology,
financing of rural infrastructure such as water, etc ., encompassing the idea of sustainable
roadsand power.
development) besides crop diversification,
Theapproach paper totheEleventh FiveYear promotion dairy and bee-keeping, floriculture,
Plan has highlighted such a holistic framework horticulture,modernisingagriculturemarketsand
and suggested the following strategies to raise valueaddition.60
agriculturaloutput:
(i) Doubling the rate of growth of irrigated WTO ANDTHE INDIAN AGRICULTURE:
area; PROSPECTSANDCHALLENGES
(ii) Improvingwatermanagement,rainwater
With the operationalisation of the provisions
harvestingand watersheddevelopment;
of the World Trade Organization (WTO), the
(iii) Reclaiming degraded land and focusing
process of globalisation commenced in the major
onsoilquality;
parts of the world
—
the non-member countries,
(iv) Bridging the knowledge gap through in the coming few years, also started negotiating
effectiveextension; for entry into the club. There has always been
(v) Diversifying into high value outputs, an air of confusion among the members and the
fruits, vegetables, flowers, herbs and non-members of the WTO in assessing the pros
spices, medicinal plants, bamboo, bio ¬ and cons of globalisation on the health of their
diesel, but with adequate measures to economies. The sector which has created the
ensurefoodsecurity; highest number of deliberations in the WTO
(vi) Promotinganimalhusbandryandfishery; as well as views and counterviews has been
—
(vii) Providing easy access to credit at agriculture an area of utmost concern for the
developed and thedeveloping worlds alike. India
affordablerates;
isno exception to it, bettersayit has been among
(viii) Improving the incentive structure and
the few countries in the world spear-heading the
functioningof markets;and
campaign against the biased provisions of the
(ix) Refocusingonland reformsissues.
WTOconcerningagriculture.
The National Commission on Farmers
Indiawasskepticalabouttheissueevenbefore
has already laid the foundation for such a
joiningtheorganisation,butonceitbecameapart
framework.59Programme formulation as well as
of it, it started assessing thesituation objectively
their implementation in thestates must be based andmovedtowardscrisismitigation.Globalisation
on unique regional contexts incorporating agro- as such opened unlimited prospects for the
climaticconditions;andavailabilityofappropriate
economies, but at the same time brought several
research and development (R&D) backed by
challenges too . Yes, the challenges were different
timelyandadequateextensionandfinance.
59. India2007 , (op.cit.)mightbeseenfordetails.
60. MinistryofAgriculture,Governmentof Punjab,June2004,Chandigadh.

--- PAGE 263 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement i 8.47
in nature for the developed and the developing (b) Theagricultural,forestryandfisheries
countries.We need to enquire the prospects and products to have a share of 20 per
the challenges brought by the WTO for Indian cent .
agriculture.
(c) The processed food, beverages and
Had the agriculture of the leading and drinksto haveashareof19 per cent .
politically vocal developing economies not be of Itmeansthatduetotheimplementationofthe
subsistence level, the course of the world would WTO provisions, therewill beonlyonepercent
have been completely different. It is the biggest increase in the trade of all other goods excluding
hurdle in the process of globalisation and the the above-cited sectors . It was a highly inflated
success of the World Trade Organization. Yes, view and became a matter of debate around the
the process of converting the sector into an world.Buttheareaswhichwereprojectedto have
industryhasalreadystartedinmostoftheleading very high increase in their trade were not mere
developing economies amidst tough resistance projections either. Member countries went home
from thefarmers, political parties and the NGOs andstartedgoingfortheirownstudies,estimations
alike. and projections — India being no exception. We
mustseetheassessmentofIndia:
THEPROSPECTS
(i) The products which were projected to
The oldest and the first document regarding the have the maximum increase in their
impact of the implementation of the provisions trade, India hadatraditionalgreatexport
—
of the WTO, Uruguay Round (1995 2005) potentialinthem.ItmeanstheWTOhas
was prepared jointly by the World Bank, the a great prospect for agriculture in store
GATT61and theOECD62 ' Accordingto the joint asmaximumgoodsfell in theagriculture
document,theWTOprovisionsweresupposedto sector .Assumingthat India’ssharein the
have the following positive impacts on the world worldexportsimprovesfrom0.5percent
trade: to 1.0 per cent, and India is able to take
(i) By2005therewillbeanadditionof$745 advantage of the opportunities that are
billion in theworld merchandisetrade.63 created,thetradegainsmayconservatively
(ii) The GATT Secretariat provided a full be placed at $2.7 billion extra exports
break-up of the above-projected trade per year. A more generous estimate will
increasein thefollowingway: rangefrom$3.5 to$7billionworthextra
exports.64
(a) Theclothingsector to haveashareof
60per cent . (ii) The NCAER (National Council for
Applied Economic Research) survey of
61. GeneralAgreementonTradeandTariff(GATT)wasa multi-lateralarrangement(notanorganisationlikeWTOwhose
deliberationsare bindingon the membercountries) promoting multi-lateral world trade. NowtheGATThas been
replaced bytheWTO(sinceJan.1995).
62. Organisation for EconomicCooperationand Development (OECD) wasset up asa world body of the developed
economiesfromtheEuro- AmericanregionwhichtodayincludescountriesfromAsia,too(suchasJapan,S.Korea).The
firstideaof'globalisation'wasproposedbytheOECDintheearly1980satoneofitsAnnualMeet(atBrussels).
63. Merchandisetradedoesnotincludeservices.
64. EconomicSurvey1994 - 95,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 264 ---
8.48 < IndianEconomy
the WTO on the Indian economy is of agricultural products. At the
cited as the best document in this area. same time the cheaper agri-imports
The survey65 had all important things to might devastate Indian agricultural
sayon thisissue: structureand theimport-dependence
(a) The exports of agricultural products mayruin theprospectsofa betterlife
willbeboostedbytheWTOaccepted for millionsof poor Indians.
regime. (g) EvenifIndiadoesnotwanttotapthe
(b) Onlythefoodgrains tradethat too of opportunitiesoftheglobalisingworld
wheat and rice were projected to be it has to gear up in the agriculture
around $270billion. sector since the world market will
(c) The survey also pointed out that
hardlybeableto fulfil theagri-goods
— demandsof India by2025.It means,
almsot80 90percentoftheincreased
supply of foodgrains to the world it is only India which can meet its
ownagri-goodsdemandinthefuture.
is going to originate from only two
countries China and India as they Thereisnodoubt that theWTO hasbrought
are having the scope for increasing problably the last opportunity to make our
production. masses have better incomeandstandard of living
via better income coming from agriculture. But
(d) Butthesurveypaintedaverywretched
provided we go for the right kind of preparation
picture about the preparedness of
Indian agriculture sector to exploit at the right time. There are enough prospects,
the opportunities. It concluded undoubtedly. -
China to be far better than India is
THECHALLENGES66
thismatter . ^^^ ^^
(e) It suggested almost every form of If the WTO brings high prospects for Indian
preparednessfortheagriculturesector agriculture, it also brings in some hard-boiled
(at aglancewemayhave been on the challenges in front of it. These could be seen as
SecondGreen Revolution in India — individual challenges of the similar economies
basically the revolution is modelled as well as joint challenges of such economies.
onthefindingsandsuggestionsofthe The first category of challenges pertains to the
survey). area of relavent preparations, investment and
restructuring of agriculture. And the second
(f) Lastly, the survey ended at a high
category of challenges are nothing less than a
note of caution and concern that if
revision in the veryagricultural provisions of the
Indiafailsin itspreparationsto make
WTO itself (around which today revolves the
agriculture come out as a winner
success and faliureof the organisation itself).We
in the WTO regime the economy
maytakealookatthechallengesbeforetheIndian
will emerge as the biggest importer
agriculture:
65. NCAERSurveyheadedbyitschairmanRakeshMohan,Gol,1994.
66. Thechallengesand their possible remediesdiscussed in thissub- topicare based on someof thefinestand timely
debatesandarticleswhichappearedinmanyrenownedjournalsandnewspapersbetweentheperiod1994 - 2007.For
betterunderstandingofthereadersonlytheconsensualaswellastheless-complexpartshavebeenprovided here.

--- PAGE 265 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement i 8.49
(i) Self-sufficiency of Food: Due to inflow (iv) Weaker Sections: The benefits of
of cheaper foodgrains from the world it globalisation maynot beneutraltoareas,
would not remaineconomicallyviablein crops and the people. There will never
Indiatoproducethemandfarmersmight prevailacertaintyastowhicharea/region
incline in favour of the profitable agri
¬
orcropsorthepeoplearegoingtobenefit
products. This will make India heavily from globalisation in which year. At the
dependent upon theworld marketfor its sametimeglobalisationisaprocesswhere
food supplies, marring its achievement profits can be made, but it is a market-
of food self-sufficiency. This will have based concept . Those who are unable to
seriouspoliticalandethicaloutcomesfor produceduetolackofcapital,investment
India.67 and entrepreneurship will have no gains
(ii) PriceStability:Dependenceon theworld from it. They will be net consumers or
market for the supply of agricultural buyers.Since India hasa vast population
products and specially for foodgrains of the weaker sections (as other third
will never be safe for India. As the world countries have) this population
international market for the products is will neither beabletoincreaseitsincome
highly speculative and full of variations nor be able to purchase the agri-goods
(dueto naturalfactors) the pricestability havingno pricestability.
—
will be always in danger fluctuations It means that the weaker sections of
hamper the producers and consumers India might miss this chance of growth
of agri-goods in India. It would be very and development. We need to make
tough to fight dumping of surplus agri ¬ the benefits of globalisation reach these
goodsfrom other countries. people, too . This could be done by a
(iii) CroppingPattern:Thecroppingpatternof timelyandsociety-orientiedpublicpolicy
agriculturemight takea veryimbalanced whichisa bigchallenge.69
shape, which will be highly detrimental (v) WTO Commitments: There are certain
to the ecology at large68 as the farmers time-bound obligatory commitments
will always be in favour of going for of India towards the provisions of the
the crops and commodities which have WTO in the area of agriculture, which
comparativepriceadvantage. are highlydetrimental to the people and
—
67. Almost50percentoftheIndianpopulationspends75percentofitstotalincomeonthepurchaseoffoodgrains this
iswhytheirstandard of lifeand nutritiondependson the indigenouslygrownfood in a great way.Oncetheself-
sufficiencyislosttheirliveswilldepend uponthediplomaticuncertainties of itsregularsupply.Itwill haveserious
political outcomesfor the politicalscenarioof India.Similarly, irregularsupplyof thefoodgrainswill createa high
ethicaldilemma,too.
68. Farmersmightgoforhighlyrepetitivekindofcroppingpatterncreatingproblemsforsoilfertility,watercrisis,etc.This
willhavehighlyadverseeffectsontheagricultureinsurancecompanies,too.
69. Theprimaryexamplesofcorporateandcontractfarminghavegivenenough hintsth—ateconomicallyweakersections
ofsocietyhavemeagrechancesof benefittingfromtheglobalisationofagriculture with majorprofitsgoingtothe
corporatehouses.Naturally,thegovernments(centreandstates)will needtocomeupwith highlyeffectivepolicies
whichcouldtakecareoftheeconomicinterestsofthemasses.
Thepoliciesmayfocusonareassuchashealthcare,education,insurance,housing,socialsecurity,etc.Alreadythe
governments havestarted emphasisingthe deliveryand performanceof thesocialsector but in thefuture, more
focusedandaccountableprogrammesinthesectorwillberequired.

--- PAGE 266 ---
8.50 < IndianEconomy
theeconomy.We maysee this challenge isessentialtomodify,changeorrevisethe
from twoangles — provisionsof theWTO.
(a) According to the agricultural Similarly, the issue of agricultural subsidies
provisions, the total subsidies (the Boxes) need to be equitably defined so that
forwarded by the government to the theydo not look biased. Herealso the provisions
sector must not cross 10 per cent of of theWTOneed revision.
the total agricultural outputs . At the To fight out this typical challenge, experts
same time, exemptions to farmers suggested that the WTO is not God-given. Its
—
are to be withdrawn hampering provisions may go in for change if concerted
the public distribution system badly. efforts are made by the member countries in this
India’ssubsidiesarestillfarbelowthis direction. Like-minded nations who face the
limit, butcommitmentsposeathreat same kind of crisesshould come together and go
to thesovereign decision making. for a joint effort, from inside the WTO, for the
(b) The subsidies (with different names) revisionsor relaxationsin its provisions.Morality
to agriculture, which are forwarded related and ethical issues might be used as eye-
bythedevelopedcountriesarehighly openersand a handytool to havetheattention of
detrimentalto Indianagricultureand thedeveloped nationsand theWTOalike.
theyareveryhigh, too .70 Primafaciethissuggestionlookedasa preach
None of the above-given challenges are easy easiersaidthandone.Post-1995sawapolarisation
tofight.ThesearenottobefoughtbyIndiaalone, of like-minded countries inside the WTO that
but almost all developing countries are to face finallyculminatedintofailureoftheSeatleRound
it. Once the WTO comes into operation, many of the WTO deliberations. The most powerful
expertsfrom Indiaandabroadhaveprovidedways countryin theworld failed to convene a meeting
—
to fight these challenges, which may be summed that too in itsmostdistant region (theAlaska) a
upin thefollowingway — moral triumph of the poor over the rich. This
(i) To fight the challenges related to self- incidencewhileindicatinga possiblefailureofthe
sufficiency in food, the price stability WTOitself, boosted themoraleofthedeveloping
and the cropping pattern a judicious countries to go for stronger groupings and even
mix of suitable kind of agricultural and sub-groupings under theWTO.
trade policies will be the need of the AftertheDohaRoundtheUSAhadhintedto
hour. To the extent agricultural policy forget multilateralismand indicateditsintentions
is concerned, India has a limited level of towards bilateralism. The European Union
freedom. But theWTO regimedoes not had the same intentions, but it did not show it
allow the member countries to impose as openly as the USA. The year 2002 came as a
higher tarrif or tarrif itself to ward off watershed period for the WTO when the EU
cheaper agri-goods from entering the in its new diplomatic move announced to hear
—
economy this is the main reason the agriculture-related issues of the developing
behind the above challenges. It means it
70. Someofthedevelopedeconomiesarestillforwardingsubsidiestotheagriculturalareastothetuneof180 - 220per
centlAgain—,thejustificationforsuch highsubsidieshavebeenprovidedbydefiningagriculturesubsidiesaccordingto
theirease highlyblurringandconfusing.

--- PAGE 267 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement i 8.51
nations. The USA announced the intentions theworld trade.Suchsubsidiesarenot permitted
—
few days after the EU announcement just few in onesenseas theyhavea minimum permissible
days before the CancunMeet of the WTO.The limit de minimis under the provisions which is 5
Hongkong deliberation of the WTO, though it per centand 10percentoftheir totalagricultural
did notgiveanythingconcrete to thedevelolping output in the case of developed and developing
world, provided enough hope, there is no doubt countries, respectively.
in it. The real picture emerges in the next meet
for which the different pressure groups had
THEBOXES
seriousdeliberationson alternativesof bargaining The agricultural subsidies, in the WTO
power.
terminology have in general been identified by
ThesecondlevelsuggestiontoIndiawasinthe ‘boxes’ which have been given the colours of the
area of preparedness for theWTO regime. India traffic lights — green (means permitted), amber
was required to set new and internationally best (means slow down, i.e., to be reduced) and red
standards in the area of production by boosting (meansforbidden).
—
areas such as research and development, In the agriculture sector, as usual, things
biotechnology, information technology, health are more complicated. The WTO provisions on
and phytosanitarymatters .Thiswill make Indian agriculture has nothing like red box subsidies,
goods and services compete in the international although subsidies exceeding the reduction
market.71 commitmentlevelsisprohibitedinthe‘amberbox’.
SUBSIDIES The ‘blue box’subsidies are tied to programmes
|
WTOANDAGRICULTURAL 72 that limit the level of production.There is also a
provision ofsome exemptions for the developing
AMC countriessometimescalled the‘S & Dbox’.74
Thesubsidies provided bythegovernment to the Wemayseethemindividuallythoughtheyare
agriculturalsector(i.e.,domesticsupport)istermed very much connected in their applied form. The
by the WTO as Aggregate Measure of Support objective meaning of each one of them becomes
(AMS).73 It is calculated in terms of productand clear,onceonehasgonethroughallof them.
inputsubsidies.TheWTOarguesthattheproduct
AMBERBOX
subsidies like minimumsupport prices and input
subsidies (non-product) like credit, fertilizers, All subsidies which are supposed to distort
irrigation and power will cut production cost of production and trade fall into the amber box,
farming and will give undue advantage to such i.e., all agricultural subsidies except those which
—
countries in their access to the world market fallinto the blueandgreen boxes.75Theseinclude
such subsidies are called to cause ‘distortions’to government policies of minimumsupportprices
71. Becauseeventhea—griculturerelatedprovisionsaremodifiedtheglobalmarketwillalwaysrunaftertheagri -products
whicharethebest pricewise,qualitywise,etc.
72. Asimplified and'easy-to-understand'analysisdoneon the basisof thedocumentsof the Informationand Media
RelationsDivisionoftheWorldTradeOrganisationSecretariat,Geneva,Switzerland,October,2007.
73. DefinedinArticle1andAnnexures3&4,AgreementonAgriculture(AoA),WTO,1994.
74. Article6.2 , AoA,WTO,1994.
75. Article6 , AoA,WTO,1994.

--- PAGE 268 ---
8.52 < IndianEconomy
(asMSPin India)foragriculturalproductsorany moving away from distorting the amber box
help directly related to production quantities (as subsidies without causing too much hardship.
power,fertilizers, pesticides, irrigation,etc). Others want to set limits or reduction
Under the WTO provisions, these subsidies commitments on it whilesome advocate moving
are subject to reduction commitment to their thesesubsidiesinto theamber box.
—
minimum level to 5 per cent and 10 per cent
GREENBOX
for the developed and the developing countries,
respectively, of their total value of agricultural Theagriculturalsubsidieswhichcauseminimalor
outputs, per annum accordingly. It means, no distortions to trade are put under the green
the subsidies directly related to production box.77Theymust not involve pricesupport .
promotion above the allowed level (which fall in This box basically includes all forms of
either the blue or green box) must be reduced by government expenses, which arenot targeted at a
thecountriesto the prescribed levels. particular product, and all direct incomesupport
In thecurrent negotiations, various proposals programmes to farmers, which are not related to
deal with issues like deciding the amount by currentlevelsofproductionorprices.Thisisavery
which such subsidies should be reduced further, wide box and includes all government subsidies
and whether to set product-specific subsidies like — public storage for food security, pest and
or to continue with the present practice of the diseasecontrol, research and extension, andsome
‘aggregate’method. direct payments to farmers that do not stimulate
production like restructuring of agriculture,
BLUEBOX
environmental protection, regional development,
This is the amber box with conditions. The cropand incomeinsurance,etc .
conditionsaredesignedtoreducedistortions.Any The green boxsubsidies are allowed without
subsidythatwould normallybein theamber box, limits provided they comply with the policy-
is placed in the blue box if it requires farmers to specificcriteria.78Itmeans,thisboxisexemptfrom
goforacertain productionlevel.76Thesesubsidies the calculation under subsidies under the WTO
are nothing but certain direct payments (i.e., provisions because the subsidies under it are not
directset -aside payments) madeto farmersbythe meantto promote production thusdo notdistort
governmentintheformofassistanceprogrammes trade. That is why this box is called‘production-
to encourageagriculture, ruraldevelopment,etc . neutralbox’.But thefactstelladifferentstory .79
At present there are no limits on spending In the current negotiations, some countries
on subsidies in the blue box. In the current arguethatsomeof thesubsidiesforwarded under
negotiations, some countries want to keep blue thisbox(bythedevelopedeconomies)doseriously
boxas is because theyseeit as a crucial means of distort trade (opposed to the view of minimal
76. Article6,ParaSAoA,WTO,1994.
77. Annexure2 , AoA,andPara1AoA,WTO,1994.
78. Annexure2 , AoA,AoA,WTO,1994.
79. Basically,a large partofthisboxisused bythefarmersintheUSAand theEuropean Unionasbasicinvestmentsin
agriculture.India aswellasotherlike-minded countrieshavethisviewand wantthis boxto be brought underthe
AMSi.e.underthereductioncommitments.TheUSAattheHongkongMinisterialmeet(December2005)announced
toabolishsuchsubsidiesinthenext12yearcommencing2008.TheEUalsoproposedtoreduceits'tradedistorting
subsidies'by70percent.Noneofthem usedthenamegreen boxwhichshowssomeinternalvagueness.

--- PAGE 269 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement i 8.53
—
distortionas used byAnnexure2) itistheview Higher reduction commitment for the
of thedevelopingcountries.Thesecountries have developed countriesand lower for thedeveloping
raised theirfingerson thedirect payments80given countries are the provisions. But the developed
by the developed countries to their farmers via nations forward such an inflated support to their
programmes like income insurance and income- agriculturalexportsthatevenafter thecommitted
safetyschemes,81environmentalprotection,82etc . reductionsitwillbehighlypricedistortingagainst
Some other countries take the opposite view and the agri-exports of the developing countries. It is
argue that the current criteria are adequate, and thereforeopposed bythedevelopingcountries.
advocateto makeit moreflexible(so thatitcould
be increased) to take better care of non-trade SANITARYANDPHYTOSANITARYMEASURES
concerns such as environmental protection and The provisions of the WTO allow member
animalwelfare.
countries to set their own health and safety
standards provided theyare justified on scientific
S&DBOX
groundsanddonotresultinarbitraryorunjustified
Other than the above-discussed highly barrier to trade.The provisions encourage use of
controversial boxes of agricultural subsidies, the international standards and also include certain
WTO provisions have defined yet another box, special and differential treatment in favour of
i.e., the Social and Development Box (S & D developingcountries.84
Box) allows the developing countries for some Though this provision has realised the scope
subsidies to the agriculture sector under certain of unjustified kind of health and phytosanitory
conditions. These conditions revolve around measures on the developing countries, the
human development issues such as poverty, developed nations have been beautifully able
minimum social welfare, health support, etc ., to do so by validating their health and related
specially for the segment of population living rules on scientific grounds. Such instances have
below the povertyline. Developingcountriescan distorted trade in favour of these countries and
forwardsuchsubsidiesto theextentofless than 5 the developing countries’ agriculture has been
per centof their totalagriculturaloutput .83 the real loser. The developing countries accuse
such measures as the non-tarrif barriers used by
EXPORTSUBSIDIES
the developed nations to block goods from the
For export subsidy the WTO has provisions in developingnations.
two categories:
NAMA
(i) Reductionin thetotalbudgetarysupport
on exportsubsidies,and The Non-Agricultural Products Market Access
(ii) Reductioninthetotalquantityofexports (NAMA) is a part of theWTO provisions which
covered bythesubsidy. deals with the idea of encouraging market reach
80. Para5 , GreenBox , AoA , WTO,1994.
81. Para7 , GreenBox , AoA , WTO,1994.
82. Para8,GreenBox,AoA , WTO,1994.
83. Article6.2 , AoA , WTO,1994.
84. Article14 , AoA , WTO,1994.

--- PAGE 270 ---
8.54 < IndianEconomy
to the non-agricultural goods of the member The Swiss Formula86 belongs to the
countries.85But theencouragementwasobjected/ classification of formulas known as having
opposed by the developing countries, especially harmonising impact. Since such a formula
pointing to the non-tariff barriers enforced by prescribesahigher/steepercutonhighertariffsand
thedeveloped countries.At the Doha Ministerial lower cutson lower tariffsit isseen to harmonise
Conference (November 2001), ministers agreed the rates by bringing the final rates becoming
to start negotiations to further liberalise trade closer and bridgingthegap.
of non-agricultural products. By early 2002, a The formula was proposed bySwitzerland in
Negotiating Group on NAMA was created. The the Tokyo round negotiations of GATT (1973 —
members at the meet decided to go for tariff 79). But Switzerland opposes using this method
reductionson non-agricultural productsadopting in thecurrentagriculturenegotiations — it prefers
the Swiss Formula. The negotiations are still in theUruguayRoundformula.
—
the process updated position may be seen in TheUruguayRound (1986 — 94) negotiations
detailin Chapter 16.
in agriculture produced an agreement for
One major concern that the members took developed countries to cut tariffs on agricultural
note was of the small and vulnerable economies productsbyanaverageof36percentoversixyears
forwhomaflexibilitywascommittedwhilegoing (6percent peryear)witha minimumtariffcutof
fortariffreductions.ForIndia,marketaccessisnot 13percentoneach productfor theperiod.Itwas
an issueof tariffs alone, but it means elimination a versionofflatratemethod of tariffreductions.87
of tariff peaks and tariff escalation in the markets ~
of the developed countries. It will also end the | NATIONAL FOOD SECURITYACT
abuse of anti-dumping laws and remove non
¬
tariff barriers (NTBs) used to block goods from The National Food Security Act was enacted
developingcountries. by the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
Public Distribution by end-December 2013.
SwissFORMULA India’s most ambitious and world’s largest social
welfareprogrammeprovideslegalrighttoabout82
A variety of alternative methods are possible in —
— crore peopleforsubsidisedfoodgrains a historic
the process of tariff reductions some are more
commonthanothers.Somearebasedonformulas. initiative towards ensuring food and nutritional
security. Major highlights of the programme are
But one thing should be kept in mind that
asgiven below:
whateverformula beagreed upon itdoesnot have
valueunlessitisproperlyimplemented.Evenafter (i) It will cover upto 75 per cent rural and
a formula or combination of formulas has been 50 per cent urban population (around
agreed upon,thefinaloutcomeoftariffreductions two thirds of the total popultion) with
uniform entitlement of 5 kg foodgrains
may depend on the bargaining capacity between
countries. per month at highly subsidised prices
85. AspertheprovisionsoftheWTOfishes , fisheriesproductsand forestproductsdon'tfall underagricultureand have
beenclassifiedasthenon-agriculturalproducts.
86. "FormulaApproachestoTariff Negotiations"(Revised),WTO,Oct.2007.
87. UruguayRoundofGATT , 1994.

--- PAGE 271 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement i 8.55
of Rs.3, Rs. 2 and Rs. 1 per kg for rice, (vi) Provisions have also been made
wheatandcoarsegrains, respectively.The for disclosure of records relating to
poorest of poor households continue to PDS, social audits and setting up of
receive 33 kg foodgrains per household VigilanceCommittees in order to ensure
per month under the Antyodaya Anna transparencyandaccountability.
Yojnaat thesamesubsidised prices. The work of identification of eligible
(ii) Itprovisionsforspecialfocusonnutritional households is left to the states/UTs, which may
—
supporttowomenandchildren pregnant frame their own criteria or use Social Economic
women and lactating mothers, besides and Caste Census (SECC) data, if theyso desire.
being entitled to nutritious meals as per The central government will provide funds to
theprescribed nutritionalnormswillalso states/UTs in case of short supply of food grains
receive maternity benefit of at least of from the central pool. In case of non-supply
Rs. 6,000. Children in the age group of of food grains or meals to entitled persons, the
6 months to 14 years will be entitled to concernedstate/UTgovernmentswillberequired
take home ration or hot cooked food as to provide such food security allowance as may
per prescribed nutritional norms.
be prescribed by the central government to the
(iii) Eldest woman ofeighteen yearsofageor beneficiaries.Inordertoaddresstheconcernofthe
above will be head of the household for states regarding additional financial burden, The
issue of ration card, and if not available, central government will provide assistance to the
theeldest malemember isto bethehead states towards cost of intra- state transportation,
of thehousehold.
handling of foodgrains and FPS dealers’ margin,
(iv) For effective implementation, the Act forwhichnormswillbedeveloped.Thiswillensure
also contains provisions for reforms timely transportation and efficient handling of
in PDS through doorstep delivery of foodgrains.
foodgrains, application of information
While enacting the Act, the Ministry
and communication technology (ICT)
estimated an annual foodgrains requirement of
including end- to -end computerisation, 61.23 MT, which will accrue estimated food
leveraging Aadhaar’ for identification
subsidyof Rs.1,24,724crore.Meanwhile,a High
of beneficiaries, diversification of
Level Committee (headed by Shanta Kumar),
commodities underTPDS,etc .
by early 2015, suggested the Gol to revise the
(v) TheAct provisionsstateand districtlevel
covergare population under the Act from 67 to
redressal mechanism with designated 40 per cent . The recommendation was severely
officers. The states will be allowed to criticised by the experts and the political parties
use the existing machinery for District in thecountry .Thegovernment isyet to takethe
Grievance Redressal Officer (DGRO),
finalcallon theissue.
StateFoodCommission,iftheysodesire,
to save expenditure on establishment of | FOOD PROCESSING
new redressal set up. It also provides for
penaltyonpublicservantsorauthority,if Indian food processing industry (FPI)88 has not
foundguiltyoffailingtocomplywiththe grownwiththepacewhichweseeinthedeveloped
reliefrecommended bythe DGRO. countries — therehas been certain reasonsfor it:
88. TheanalysesarebasedonseveralvolumesofEconomicSurvey,IndiaandtherelevantdocumentsoftheGovernment
ofIndiabetweentheperiod2005 - 15.

--- PAGE 272 ---
8.56 I IndianEconomy
(a) India has a lower urban population (iii) A very high percentage of food items
(around30percentofthe population). which have short shelf life get wasted in
(b) Whatever urban population India has
India.Itdoesnotlookgoodforacountry
which is crippled by theshort-supply of
it does not have the typical urban food
habits.Asmajorityofitissecondorthird
foodand high rateofhunger.
generation in the urban areas they still Importance: While increased productivity is an
continue with the non-urban/rural food essential component of a vibrant agricultural
habitsdetrimentalto theconsumptionof sector, improved post-harvest handling and
theagro-precessed items. processing is essential to ensure value addition,
(c) In recent times, there has come enough reduction in wastage and to make good quality
awareness among the population across
productsreachthemarkets.Toooften,evenwhen
the country regarding the chemicals theyieldsare high, producersloseincomedue to
which are used in the agro-processing poor post-harvest practices.
—
industries creating a general tendency Aim: Food processing aims to make food more
toavoidsuchfoodarticles(muchdamage digestible, nutritious and extendthe shelflife. Due
has beendoneto theindustrybythe‘fast to the seasonal variations high levels of wastage
foods’,adulterationinfooditemssuchas or shortages can arise if adequate measures are
sweets, milk,etc .). not taken to preserve and store the food. Food
(d) A wave across the world towards processingcoversall theprocesses thatfood items
comsuming more ‘which comes on
gothroughfromthefarmtotheconsumers’plate.It
plants’than‘what is produced in plants’. includes basiccleaning, gradingand packagingas
Asimilar wave of ‘slow food’ has gained in caseof fruitsand vegetablesand also alteration
popularityacross Europeand other parts of the raw material to astage just beforethefinal
of theworld originatingfrom France. preparation. Value addition processes to make
Moreover, India’s agro-processing policy ‘ready- to eat’ food like bakery products, instant
todayguided bythefollowingdrivers: foods, flavored and health drinks, etc ., are also
included in
thisdefinition.
(i) As urban population rises and urban
foodhabitsevolve,therewillbeincreased Food processingoffersan opportunityfor the
demandforprocessedfoodsasithappened creation of sustainable livelihoods and economic
across the urbanising developed world. development for the rural communities. Food
The economy has alreadystarted having processing has come a long way in the last few
an informed and increased demand in decades. The everchanging lifestyles, food habits
such food items as ‘dietary habits’ are in and tastes of customers globally have altered the
theprocessofshift (NSSO, 2014). dynamicsoftheindustry.Foodprocessingbenefits
all thesectionsof thesociety:
(ii) Externaldimensiontoitwasalsoaccepted
bythegovernment bymid-1990s.As per (i) Farmers get better returns, higher yield,
a joint GATT-OECD study, processed andlower therisksdrastically;
food aresupposed to account for around (ii) Consumersget access to a greater variety,
19percentoftheincreasedtradeafterthe better pricesand newproducts;
provisionsoftheWTOareimplemented.

--- PAGE 273 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement t 8.57
(iii) Economy gets benefit via creation of to pay more if the product offered is of good
new business opportunities, while the qualityandeasytouse.Thepolicyinitiativesofthe
workforcegetsemployment. governmentalsoincludeassistanceforopeningup
Witha hugeproduction base,Indiacaneasily of mega food park, cold chain and development
become one of the leading food suppliers to the ofagri-exportzones,skilldevelopmentand R&D
world while at the same time serving the vast activities. Apart from the various schemes from
growingdomesticmarketofovera billion people. thecentralgovernment,variousstategovernments
India’s large market size with growing incomes are implementing their own food processing
and changing life styles also creates incredible promotion policiesandschemes.
market opportunities for food producers, food
Contributions:The sector contributes around 10
processors, machinerymakers, food technologists
percentofGDPinagricultureandmanufacturing
andservice providersin thissector . sector . During the last 5 years, FPI sector has
Growth in the food processing sector is also been growing at an average annual growth rate
expected to open up a lot of opportunities for (AAGR) of around 6 per cent as compared to
players having strong linkages in the agri-value around4percentinagricultureand7 percentin
chain. Significant investment opportunities manufacturing.
are yet to be tapped in the areas of supply chain
management,coldstorages, financing, retailingand Infrastructure Development: The Ministry of
. Food Processing Industries (MoFPI) has been
exports
implementing a scheme for the creation of
Historically, agriculture and FPI have been
modern enabling infrastructure which includes
plagued byfactorssuchas:
mega food parks scheme, scheme for cold chain,
(i) Lowpublicinvestment,
valueadditionandpreservationinfrastructureand
(ii) Poorinfrastructure,
theschemeforconstructionandmodernisationof
(iii) Inadequatecreditavailability,and abattoirs.
(iv) Highlevelsoffragmentation.
MegaFoodParksScheme(MFPS):TheMega Food
Rules & Regulations: Rules and regulations Parks Scheme aims to accelerate the growth of
regardingtheindustryisasgiven below: the food processing industry in the country by
(a) Most food processing enterprises have facilitatingestablishmentofstrongfoodprocessing
been exempted from industrial licensing infrastructurebacked byanefficientsupplychain.
under the Industries (Development and Under thisscheme,capitalgrantof50percent of
Regulation)Act,1951withtheexception theprojectcostisprovidedingeneralareasand75
of beer and alcoholic drinks, and items per cent in difficult and ITDP (IntegratedTribal
reservedfor thesmallscalesector . Development Programme) notified areas (with
(b) For foreign investment, automatic a ceiling of Rs 50 crore). Each Mega Food Park
approvalisgiveneven upto 100percent takesabout30 — 36 monthsto becompleted.
equityfor a majorityof processedfoods. Cold Chain, Value Addition and Preservation:
(c) For manufacture of items reserved The Scheme for Cold Chain, Value Addition,
for MSEs, FDI is permissible under and Preservation Infrastructure was approved
automaticroute upto 24per cent . in 2008 with an objective to provide integrated
Attractivepackagingmakestheproductmore and complete cold chain, value addition and
appealing to consumerswho arethereforewilling preservation infrastructure facilities without

--- PAGE 274 ---
8.58 i IndianEconomy
any break, for perishables from the farm gate to sector . The scheme for Food Safety Codex and
the consumer. The assistance under the scheme R&Dhas beensuccessfulin makingadentin this
includes financial assistance (grant-in-aid) of 50 area in thecountry .
per cent of the total cost of plant and machinery
Human Resource Development: The human
and technical civil works in general areas and 75
resourcedevelopment isverycriticalforsustained
percentfortheNorthEasternregionanddifficult
areas (subjectto a maximumof Rs.10crore). growth in the sector . Extensive training and
entrepreneurship development is given top
Modernisation of Abattoirs: The Ministry has
priority:
approved 10 projects in first phase which are at (i) Creation of infrastructural facilities for
variousstagesofprogress.Two projectshavebeen
runningdegree/diplomacoursesin food
completed.A proposal for up-scaling thescheme
processing
is under consideration.
(ii) Entrepreneurship Development
Technology Upgradation: Under the Scheme Programmes (EDP)
for Technology Upgradation, Establishment,
(iii) Setting up of Food Processing Training
Modernisation of FPIs, financial assistance is
Centres (FPTC)
provided in the form of ‘grants-in-aid’ for the
(iv) Training at recognised national/state -
setting up of new food processing units as well
levelinstitutes,etc .,sponsored byMoFPI
as technological upgradation and expansion of
or other trainingprogramme
existing units in the country . The Gol extends
financial assistancein theform of grant-in-aid to Strengthening of the Indian Institute of Crop
entrepreneursat25percentofthecostofPlant& ProcessingTechnology(IICPT):Indian Instituteof
MachineryandTechnicalCivilWorkssubjecttoa Crop Processing Technology (IICPT) formerly
maximumofRs.50lakhsingeneralareasor33.33 known as Paddy Processing Research Centre
per cent subject to a maximum of Rs. 75 lakhs (PPRC),Thanjavurisanautonomousorganisation
in difficult terrains. The Scheme has now been under theadministrativecontrolofMoFPI.Ithas
transferred to thestateswith thelaunchingof the been in existence for the last three decades. As
NationalMissionon FoodProcessing(NMFP)in other commoditiessuch as millets, pulses and oil
the12th Plan. seeds are gaining importance, it was decided in
QualityAssurance,CodexStandardsandR&Dand 2001 to expand the mandate of this Institute to
includetheabovecommoditiesalso.Theinstitute
PromotionalActivities:Intheglobalmarkettoday,
is being upgraded into a national level institute
quality and food safety gives a competitive edge
now.
which is an important factor for the enterprises
producing processed foods and providing National Meat and Poultry Processing Board
services. Apart from domesticstandards for food (NMPPB):TheGolestablishedtheNationalMeat
products, processes and management practices, and Poultry Processing Board 2009. The Board
Codex prescribes international standards for is an autonomous body and was initially funded
safetyandqualityoffood aswellascodesofgood by the Gol for 2 years and is be managed by the
manufacturing practices, which are accepted industry itself. This industry-driven institution
worldwide.Further,equalemphasisisrequired to has been launched to work as a National Hub
beaccordedtoR&Dactivitiesforthedevelopment for addressing all key issues related to the meat
of innovative products, cost effective processes and poultry processing sector for its systematic
and efficient technologies for the food processing and proper development. The Board serves as a

--- PAGE 275 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement t 8.59
single window service provider for producers, opportunitiesin theexpandingglobalfood trade.
manufacturers and exporters of meat and meat Intheemergingglobalscenario,thereisaneed
products, for promoting the meat industry as a forsettingupofaninstitutionofglobalexcellence,
whole.
which could cater to the needs of the booming
IndianGrapeProcessingBoard:'TheGol, in 2009, food processing sector, various stakeholders
gave its approval for the establishment of the such as entrepreneurs, industry, exporters,
Indian Grape Processing Board (IGPB) at Pune, policymakers, government and other research
Maharashtra which isclose to the principalgrape institutions. NIFTEM was conceived by MoFPI
growingand processing areasin thecountry .The to create an international Center of Excellence in
functionsand objectivesofthe IGPBare: the field of Food Sciences & Food Technology.
(a) To focus on R&D, extension, NIFTEM will grow into an apex world class
quality upgradation, market research, institute to promotecooperation and networking
among existing institutions both within the
information, domestic and
internationalpromotionof Indian wine . country and various international bodies. The
institute will offer high quality educational,
(b) To foster sustainable development of
Indian wineindustry. research and management programmespecific to
thefood industry, provide referraladviseon food
(c) To formulate a vision and action plan
standards, disseminate knowledge on the food
for the growth of Indian wine sector sector and provide businessincubation facility. It
including R&D for quality upgradation issituated (2006) at Kundli,Sonipat (Haryana).
in newtechnologies.
National Mission on Food Processing (NMFP):
During three years of its existence, the
India enjoys a ‘competitive advantage’ in food
Board has focused on the promotion of Wines
processing sector given its huge production
of India in the domestic as well as international
base of a number of agricultural, dairy, fishing
market by participating in important and
and horticultural items. To ensure that this
relevant exhibitions, fairs, consumer awareness
sector gets the stimulus it deserves, the MoFPI
and training programmes, undertaking advocacy
has been implementing a number of schemes
work with the various state governments/central
for infrastructure development, technology
ministries on various issues related to taxes/levies
upgradationandmodernisation, human resources
and promotion aspects . The Board is going to development and R&D in this sector . In the
f
im
or
p
s
l
t
e
a
m
nd
e
a
n
r
t
d
a
sa
t
n
ra
d
ce
q
a
u
b
a
i
l
l
i
i
t
t
y
y
i
p
n
ro
w
g
in
ra
e
m
se
m
c
e
tor
“
.
wine- net”
contextofthe12thPlan, itisfeltthatthereisaneed
to decentralise the implementation of schemes
National Institute of Food Technology, through involvement of thestates/UTs for better
Entrepreneurship &Management (NIFTEM):For outreach, supervision, monitoring and ensuring
developingavibrantfood processingsector, India job creation. Accordingly, National Mission
needs not only world-class food technologists to on Food Processing (NMFP) was launched as a
undertake R&D in frontier areas, develop new centrallysponsored scheme in 2012.The NMFP
products,processes,technologiesandmachineries, contemplatesestablishmentofaNationalMission
set food standards and protocol testing, but also aswellascorrespondingMissionsat thestateand
business leaders and managers well versed with district levels.
the requisite mix of technologies, management
The Challenges: The most important challenges
and entrepreneurship who can exploit major
among others in the sector include avoidance of

--- PAGE 276 ---
8.60 i IndianEconomy
thesignificant‘wastage’ateverylevelandinvalue projects proposals received under these
addition. High food inflation, high post-harvest schemes rather thanlimitingthenumber
wastage particularly in fruits and vegetables, low of projects.
levelofprocessing,etc .,arethemainchallengesin (iv) Thecreditdimension of thesector isalso
the food processingsector .Addressing these core a vitalissue.
concerns by reducing wastageof food, increasing With the idea of ‘Team India’ under the
shelf life and enhancing value of agricultural
NITIAayog, itis believed that a newsynergywill
produce are some of the objectives of the food cometo thefood processingindustry.The nature
processingindustry.In termsofemployment, the
of industry requires active participation from not
contributionofthesectorissignificant.Presently,
only the concerned states, but the loacal bodies,
the total number of persons employedin the food too . Experts believe that the emerging emphasis
processingsector is about 17 lakh. The National
by thegovernment on the issue of ‘ease of doing
Manufacturing Policy, 2011seeks to givespecial business’will beofgreat helpto thesector .
attention to food processing industries to ensure
jobcreation.To promoteindustrialgrowthalong |
CURRENTAGRICULTURALSCENARIO
with the objective of inclusive growth the food
processing sector will get higher attention from The agriculture sector has remained the least
thegovernment . reformed area in the reform era. There has been
several socio-economic reasons behind it. In the
OUTLOOKFORTHEFUTURE meantime, the sector still plays a big role in the
So that the FPI expands as per the expectations proper functioning of the economicsystem even
emphasisisneededon thefollowingfronts: if it contributes just around 14 per cent to the
(i) Given the need for wastage reduction, nation — al income. As per the Economic Survey
2014 15, the outlook and challenges regarding
value addition and the high employment
potential of thesector, there is a need to
thesector areasgiven below:
substantiallystepuptheallocationsgiven 1. The inflation is not expected to rise
—
the importance of the sector in terms of
significantlyfrom thecurrentlevelsas
itscontribution to theeconomy. (i) Theoil prices areexpected to remain
(ii) Thereisalsoaneedforgreaterinvolvement
lowinthecomingmonthsonaccount
ofstategovernments for better outreach, ofweakglobaldemandand increased
supplies.
supervisionand monitoring(keepingthis
inview,governmenthasalreadylaunched (ii) Global commodity prices have
centrallysponsored National Mission on generally been declining and are
Food Processing). expected to remain weak in 2015
(iii) There is a need for greater emphasis due to low demand and comfortable
supply.
on creation of infrastructure with full
participation of state governments and (iii) Factors like high rural wages, higher
private sector . The main infrastructure level of MSP, and rise in input cost
schemes for setting up food parks and have been instrumental for higher
cold chainsareat present‘closed ended’. inflation in the last few years. At
This should be ‘open ended’ permitting present,growthofallthesehavebeen
the Ministry to fund all the viable slowed down considerably and this

--- PAGE 277 ---
AgricultureandFoodManagement i 8.61
could result in keeping foodinflation to increase production by bridging the
within limits. yield-gapto theextentfeasiblewithinthe
2. Agriculture and food sector needs huge climaticzone.
investment in research, education, 3. The focus of public expenditure for
extension, irrigation, fertilizers, and agriculture so far has been on provision
laboratories to test soil, water and of subsidies (public expenditure in
commodities, warehousing,coldstorage. agriculture is only one-fourth of
3. Rationalisation of subsidies and expenditure towards food and fertilizer
better targeting of beneficiaries would subsidies)anditistimeitshifted towards
generate part of the resources for public investmentsto boost productivity.
investment. 6. Recommendations of theShanta Kumar
4. There are wide differences in the yields Committeeprovideusefulsuggestionsfor
within states . Even the best of the states thefutureroad-mapoffood-policy.Every
have much lower yield in different effort should be made to bringstates on
crops when compared to the best in the board for creating national common
world. This provides ample opportunity marketfor agriculturalcommodities.

--- PAGE 279 ---
C H A P T E R
z
I
\\
m
INDUSTRY
K
INFRASTRUCTURE
ip
:
c> Introduction
=> Review of IndustrialPoliciesupto1986 InChinaIwasgreatly attractedtothe
NewIndustrialPolicy,1991 Industrial Co-operatives-theIndusco
=> Disinvestment movement-and it seems to me that
=> InvestmentChallenge some such movement is peculiarly
.
>=> NewStepsto BoostManufacturing
suitedtoIndia Itwouldfit inwiththe
Indian background,givea democratic
o NewStepsto BoostIndustry
basistosmallindustry,anddevelopthe
=> MakeinIndia
co-operativehabit.
Itcouldbemadeto
<=> IndianInfrastructure
.
complement big industry It must be
=> EnergyPricing
rememberedthat,howeverrapidmight
=> DedicatedFreightCorridor
bethedevelopmentofheavy industry in
=> RestructuringThePPP India,avastfieldwillremainopento
=> BoostingEnergy Sector smalland cottage industries . Even in
RailwaysasGrowthEngine theSoviet Russia owner-producer co
¬
=> StateDiscoms operatives haveplayed an important
ImportantIssues part in
industrialgrowth.
*
=> BoostingPublic Investment
*AsJawaharlalNehruwritesinTheDiscoveryofIndia,OxfordUniversity
Press,6thImpression(1stEdition1946,Oxford,London),N . Delhi,1994,
p.406.

--- PAGE 280 ---
9.2 < IndianEconomy
| visible on the economy. The industrial policies
INTRODUCTION
which the governments announced from time
Many of the western economies have already to time basically moulded the very nature and
written their success stories of industrialisation structure of the economy. Anydiscussion on the
leadingtoacceleratedgrowthanddevelopmentby Indian economy must start with a survey of the
the time India becamean independenteconomy. industrial policies of the country . Here we have
Independent India needed to rejuvenate its a brief review of the various industrial policies of
economy from a completely dilapidated state . India tilldate.
—
The country had many tasks in front of it the
abject mass poverty, shortage of foodgrains, REVIEWOF INDUSTRIAL POLICIES UPTO
healthcare, etc ., calling for immediate attention. 1986
The other areas of attention included industry,
ForabetterunderstandingoftheIndianeconomy,
infrastructure,scienceand technologyand higher
education, to name a few. All these areas of it is advisable to look into the various industrial
polices. The official stances keep changing with
developmentrequired heavycapitalinvestmentas
every upcoming industrial policy. Understanding
theyhadbeenseverlyavoidedbythecolonialruler
for thelast 150yearsorso.Increasing thegrowth these policies become even more important to
understand thefiner aspectsof thereform process
of the economy and that too with a faster pace
was the urgent need of the economy. Lookingat which the country will commence by the early
1990s. Here, a brief review of India’s industrial
the pros and cons of the available options, India
policiesarebeingdicussed toservethepurpose.
decided the industrial sector to be the ‘prime
—
movingforce’(PMF)oftheeconomy thelogical
INDUSTRIALPOLICYRESOLUTION, 1948
choicefor afaster growth (a fullyestablished idea
at that time, all over the world). The secondary Announced on April 8, 1948 this was not only
sector will lead theeconomy, waswell-decided in the first industrial policystatement of India, but
the 1930s itself by the dominant political forces it decided the model of the economic system
amongthefreedomfighters. (i.e., the mixed economy), too . Thus, it was the
As the government of the time had decided first economic policy of the country . The major
highlightsof thepolicyaregiven below:
upon an active role for the governments in the
economy, naturally, the industrial sector was to (i) India will bea mixedeconomy.1
—
havea dominantstate role theexpansion of the (ii) Some of the important industries were
government-owned companies (i.e., the PSUs) to put under the CentralListsuch as coal,
glorious heights. In many ways the development power, railways, civil aviation, arms and
of theIndianeconomyhas been thedevelopment ammunition,defence,etc .
ofthegovernmentsector .Oncethisideaofstate’s (iii) Someotherindustries(usuallyofmedium
role in the economy went for a radical change category) were put under a State List
in the early 1990s with the process of economic such as paper, medicines, textiles, cycles,
reforms, the hangover or the drag of it is still rickshaws, two -wheelers,etc .
1. Herethisshould benotedthatIndiawillbea plannedeconomy,waswell-decided beforethisindustrialpolicywhich
articulatedforanactiveroleofthestateintheeconomy.Themainobjectiveofplanningpointedoutatthistimewas
povertyalleviationbyajudiciousexploitationoftheresourcesofthecountry.Only'mixedeconomy'didfitsuchawish
(ConferenceofStateIndustryMinisters , 1938).

--- PAGE 281 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.3
(iv) Rest of the industries (not covered by (ii)ScheduleB
either the central or the state lists) we — re There were 12 industrial areas put under this
left open for privatesector investment
schedule in which the state governments were
with manyof them having the provision
supposed to take up the initiatives with a more
ofcompulsorylicencing.
expansive follow up by the private sector . This
(v) There was a 10 year period for review of schedulealsocarriedtheprovisionsofcompulsory
thepolicy. licencing. It should be noted here that neither
INDUSTRIALPOLICYRESOLUTION
,1956 the states nor the private sector had monopolies
in these industries unlike Schedule A, which
The government was encouraged by the impact provided monopolyto theCentre.3
of the industrial policy of 1948 and it was only (Hi)ScheduleC
aftereightyearsthatthenewandmorecrystallised
policieswereannouncedfortheIndianindustries. All industrial areas left out of Schedules A and
B were put under this in which the private
The new industrial policy of 1956 had the
followingmajor provisions:
enterpriseshad theprovisionstoset upindustries.
Manyofthem hadtheprovisionsoflicencingand
.
1 ReservationofIndustries have necessarily to fit into the framework of the
social and economic policy of the state and were
Aclear- cutclassificationofindustries(alsoknown
subject to control and regulation in terms of the
as the Reservation of Industries) were affected
Industries Development and Regulation (IDR)
with threeschedules:
Actand other relevantlegislations.4
(i)ScheduleA
The above classification of industries had
This schedule had 17 industrial areas in which an in-built bias in favour of government-owned
the Centre was given complete monopoly. The companies(i.e.,theCPSUs)whichwentaccording
industriesset up underthisprovisionwereknown to the ideas of the planning process, too . Thus,
astheCentralPublicSectorUndertakings(CPSUs) expansion of the public sector became almost a
later getting popularity as ‘PSUs’. Though the directive principle of economic policy and the
numberofindustrieswereonly17,thenumberof PSUsdidexpandin thecomingtimes.5
PSUsset up bytheGovernmentof India went to It wasthisindustrial policyin whichthethen
254by1991.Theseincludedthoseindustrialunits
PM Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru had termed the
too which were taken over by the government PSUsthe‘templesofmodemIndia\symbolically
between I960to1980under thenationalisation pointing to their importance.6 There was a time
drives.2Theseindustries belonged to Schedules B soon after Independence when the PSUs were
andC (other thanScheduleA).
2. The nationalisation of industrial unitsallowed thegovernmenttoenterthe unreserved areaswhich consequently
increaseditsindustrial presence.Thoughthenationalisationwasprovideda highlyrationalofficial reasonof greater
,
publicbenefit theprivatesectoralwaysdoubteditandtookitasaninsecurityandmajorunseenfuturehurdleinthe
expansionofprivateindustriesinthecountry.
3. TheCentralGovernmenthadalwayst—heoptiontosetupanindustryinanyofthese12industrialareas.Thishappened
inthecomingyearsviatwomethods
first,thenationalisationandsecond,thejointsector.
4. IndustrialPolicyResolution,1956(30October).
5. V.M.Dandekar,FortyYearsAfterIndependenceinBim
6. ThestatementwegetintheSecondFiveYearPlan(1956 - 61) , too.

--- PAGE 282 ---
9.4 < IndianEconomy
regarded as the principal instrument for raising IMPORTANCE
savings and growth in the economy.7 The rapid
Thisisconsideredasthemostimportantindustrial
e
o
x
f
p
th
an
e
s
G
io
D
n
P
of
o
P
f
S
th
U
e
s
e
a
c
c
o
c
n
o
o
u
m
nt
y
ed
by
fo
1
r
98
m
8
o
—
r
8
e
9
t
.
h
®
an half policyofIndiabytheexpertsasitdecidednotonly
the industrial expansion but structured the very
. nature and scope of the economy till 1991 with
2 ProvisionofLicencing
minor modifications. All the industrial policies
One of the most important developments of werenothingbutminormodificationsinitexcept
independent India, the provision of compulsory the new industrial policyof 1991 which affected
licencing for industries, was cemented in this deeper and structural changes in it with which
policy. All the schedule B industries and a Indiastartedawiderprocessofeconomicreforms.
number of schedule C industries came under
this proivision.This provision established theso- INDUSTRIALPOLICYSTATEMENT,1969
- -
called ‘Licence Quota Permit’ regime (raj) in
Thiswas basicallya licencing policywhich aimed
theeconomy.9
at solving the shortcomings of the licencing
policy started by the Industrial Policy of 1956.
3 ExpansionofthePublicSector
(cid:127)
The experts and industrialists (new comers)
Expansion of the public sector was pledged for complained that the industrial licencing policy
the accelerated industrialisation and growth wasserving just theopposite purposefor whichit
—
in the economy glorification of government was mooted. Inspired bythesocialisticidealsand
companiesdidstartwiththispolicy.Theemphasis
nationalistic feelings the licencing policy had the
wason heavyindustries. followingreasons:
4 . RegionalDisparity (i) exploitation of resources for the
developmentofall;
To tackle the widening regional disparity, the
(ii) priority of resource exploitation for the
policycommittedtosetuptheupcomingPSUsin
industries;
the comparatively backward and underdeveloped
(iii) price-control of the goods produced by
regions/areasin theeconomy.10
thelicenced industries;
.
5 EmphasisonSmallIndustries (iv) checking concentration of economic
power;
Therewas emphasison small industries as well as
thekhadiandvillageindustries. (v) channelising investment into desired
direction (according to the planning
.
6 AgriculturalSector process).
Theagriculturalsector was pledgedasa priority. Inpractice,thelicencingpolicywasnotserving
the above-given purpose properly. A powerful
7. BimalJalan,India'sEconomicPolicy,PenguinBooks,N.Delhi,1992,p.23.
8. V.M.,Dandekar,'FortyyearsAfterIndependence',p.64.
9. These industrieswhich wereset upafter procuring'licences'from thegovernment had fixed upper limitsof their
productio—n known as'quota' and they needed to procure timely'permit' (i.e., permission) for thesupply of, raw
materials thatiswhysuchanamewasgiventothewholesystem.
10. Suchacommitmentwentcompletelyagainstthe'theoryofindustriallocation'.

--- PAGE 283 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.5
industrial house was always able to procure fresh The upper limit (known as the ‘MRTP
licencesatthecostofanewbuddingentrepreneur . limit) for such companies was revised
The price regulation policy via licencing was upward to Rs. 50 crorein 1980 and Rs.
aimedat helpingthe publicbyprovidingcheaper 100crorein 1985.13
goods, butitindirectlyserved theprivatelicenced (iii) For the redressal of the prohibited
industries ultimately (as central subsidies were and restricted practices of trade, the
given to the private companies from where it government did set up an MRTP
was to benefit the poor in the form of cheaper Commission.
goods). Similarly, the older and well-established
industrial houseswerecapableofcreatinghurdles
INDUSTRIALPOLICYSTATEMENT,1973
fortheneweroneswiththehelpofdifferentkinds
The Industrial Policy Statement of 1973
of trade practices forcing the latter to agree for introducedsome new thinkinginto theeconomy
sell- outs and takeovers.A number of committees with majoronesbeingasfollows:
wereset up by thegovernment to look into the
matter and suggest remedies.11 The committees (i) A new classificatory term i.e., core
industries was created. The industries
on industrial licencing policy review pointed out
which were of fundamental importance
several shortcomings of the policy, but it also
for the development of industries were
accepted the useful role of industrial licencing.12
putinthiscategorysuchasironandsteel,
Finally, it was in 1969 that the new industrial
cement, coal, crude oil, oil refining and
licencing policy was announced which affected
electricity. In the future, these industries
thefollowingmajor changesin thearea:
came to be known as basic industries,
(i) The Monopolistic and Restrictive Trade infrastructureindustriesin thecountry .
Practices (MRTP) Act was passed. The
(ii) Out of thesixcore industries defined by
Act intended to regulate the tradingand
the policy, the private sector may apply
commercial practices of the firms and
for licencesfor theindustrieswhichwere
checkingmonopolyandconcentrationof
economicpower. not a part ofscheduleAof the Industrial
Policy, 1956.14The private firms eligible
(ii) The firms with assets of Rs. 25 crore or to applyfor such licences weresupposed
morewereput underobligationoftaking tohavetheirtotalassetsatRs.20croreor
permission from the Government of more.
India before any expansion, greenfield
(iii) Some industries were put under the
venture and takeover of other firms (as
reserved list in which only the small or
per the MRTPAct).Such firms came to
mediumindustriescould beset up.15
be known as the ‘MRTP Companies’.
11. There were four specificcommitteesset up on this issue, namelySwaminathanCommittee(1964) , Mahalanobis
, . . . .
Committee (1964) RK Hazari Committee (1967) and S Dutt Committee (1969) The Administrative Reform
Commission(1969)alsopointedouttheshortcomingsoftheindustriallicencingpolicyperpetuatedsince1956.
12. DuttCommittee , 1969. —
13. The upward revision was logical as it was hindering the organic growth of such companies neither the capacity
additionwaspossiblenoraninvestmentfortechnologicalupgrading.
14. Outofthesixcoreindustriesonlythecementandiron&steelindustrieswereopenfortheprivateinvestmentwith
therestfullyreservedforthecentralpublicsectorinvestment.
15. Thisisconsideredafollowuptosuchsuggestionsforwarded bytheIndustrialLicensingPolicyInquiryCommittee(S.
Dutt,Chairman),GovernmentofIndia,N.Delhi,1969.

--- PAGE 284 ---
9.6 I IndianEconomy
(iv) The concept of ‘joint sector’ was IPS of 1973 which promoted foreign
developed which allowed partnership investmentvia technologytransfer in the
among the Centre, state and the private areas of lack of capital or technology).
sector while setting up some industries. In practice, there was a complete ‘no’ to
The governments had the discretionary foreign investment.18
power to exit such ventures in future. (ii) Emphasis on village industries with a
Here,thegovernmentwantedtopromote redefinition of the small and cottage
theprivatesector withstatesupport . industries.
(v) TheGovernmentofIndiahadbeenfacing (iii) Decentralised industrialisation wasgiven
the foreign exchange crunch during attentionwiththeobjectiveoflinkingthe
that time. To regulate foreign exchange massesto theprocessofindustrialisation.
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act The District Industries Centres (DICs)
(FERA) was passed in 1973.16 Experts were set to promote the expansion of
have called it a 'draconian’ Act which small and cottage industries at a mass
hamperedthegrowthand modernisation scale.
of Indian industries.
(iv) Democratic decentralisation got
(vi) Alimitedpermissionofforeigninvestment emphasised and the khadi and village
was given with the multinational industrieswererestructured.
corporations (MNCs) being allowed to (v) Serious attention was given on the level
set up theirsubsidiariesin thecountry .17 of production and the prices of essential
INDUSTRIALPOLICYSTATEMENT,1977
commoditiesofeverydayuse.
The Industrial Policy Statement of 1977 was INDUSTRIALPOLICYRESOLUTION
,1980
chalked out by a different political set up
—
from Theyear1980sawthereturnofthesamepolitical
the past with a different political fervour the partyat theCentre.Thenewgovernment revised
dominant voicein thegovernment washavingan
the Industrial Policyof 1977with fewexceptions
anti-Indirastancewithaninclination towardsthe in the Industrial Policy Resolution, 1980. The
Gandhian-socialisticviews towards theeconomy.
majorinitiativesofthepolicywereasgiven below:
Weseesuchelementsin thispolicystatement:
(i) Foreign investment via the technology
(i) Foreign investment in the unnecessary
transfer route was allowed again (similar
areas were prohibited (opposite to the to the provisionsof the IPS,1973).
16. TheFERAgotexecutedonJanuary1,1974.Theprivatesectorinthecountryalwayscomplainedagainstthisactand
doubteditsofficialintentions.
17. Thislimitedpermissionwasrestrictedtotheareaswh—eretherewasaneedofforeigncapital.SuchMNCsenteredthe
IndianeconomywiththehelpofapartnerfromIndia thepartnerbeingthemajoronewith74percentsharesinthe
subsidiariessetupbytheMNCs.TheMNCsinvestedviatechnologytransferroute . Basically,thiswasanattemptto
makeupthelossbeingincurred bytheFERA.Thiswastheperiodwhen mostoftheMNCshadthechancestoenter
India.Onceeconomicreformsstarted by1991,manyofthemincreasedtheirholdingsintheIndiansubsidiarieswith
theIndianpartnergettingtheminoritysharesoratotalexit.
18. ThepermissionofworkingwaswithdrawninthecaseofalreadyfunctioningsoftdrinkMNCtheCocaCola . Theongoing
process of entrytothe computer giant IBM and automobile majorChrysllerwassoon called off.These instances
playedahighlynegativerolewhenIndiainvitedtheforeigndirectinvestmentinthereformerapost- 1991.

--- PAGE 285 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.7
(ii) The‘MRTPLimit’wasrevisedupwardto (iv) High level attention on the sunrise
Rs. 50croreto promotesettingof bigger industries such as telecommunication,
companies. computerisation andelectronics.
(iii) TheDICswerecontinued with. (v) Modernisation and the profitability
(iv) Industriallicencingwassimplified. aspects of public sector undertakings
wereemphasised.
(v) Overall liberal attitude followed towards
theexpansionof privateindustries. (vi) Industries based on imported raw
materialsgota boost.20
INDUSTRIALPOLICYRESOLUTION , (vii) Under the overall regime of FERA,
, some relaxations concerning the use of
1985& QQg
foreign exchange was permitted so that
Theindustrialpolicyresolutionsannouncedbythe essential technologycould beassimilated
governments in 1985 and 1986 were very much into Indian industries and international
similar in nature and the latter tried to promote standardcould beachieved.
the initiative of the former.The main highlights (viii) Theagriculturesector wasattendedwith
of thepoliciesare: a new scientific approach with many
(i) Foreigninvestmentwasfurthersimplified technologymissionsbeinglaunched bythe
withmoreindustrialareasbeingopenfor government .
their entries. The dominant method of Theseindustrial policies were mooted out by
foreign investment remained as in the the government when the developed world was
past, i.e., technology transfer, but now pushing for the formation of the WTO and a
the equity holding of the MNCs in the new world economic order looked like a reality.
Indian subsidiaries could be upto 49 per Once the world had become one market, only
cent with the Indian partner holding the bigger industrial firms could have managed to
rest of the 51 percentshares. cater to such a big market. Side by side sorting
(ii) The ‘MRTP Limit’ was revised upward out the historical hurdles to industrial expansion
to Rs. 100 crore — promoting theidea of perpetuated by the past industrial policies, these
biggercompanies. new industrial policy resolutions were basically a
preparation for theglobalisedfutureworld.
(iii) The provision of industrial licencing was
simplified. Compulsory licencing now These industrial provisions were attempted
remainedfor64industriesonly.19 at liberalisingtheeconomywithoutanyslogan of
‘economic reforms’.The government of the time
19. Atotal numberof95industrieshadthecompulsionsoflicencingtillthen.TheseindustriesbelongedtoSchedulesB
andCoftheIndustrialPolicyResolution,1956.
—
20. ThiswassimilartothepolicybeingfollowedbyGorbachevintheUSSRwiththesimilarfiscalresults aseverebalance
ofpayment(BoP)crisisbyend1980sandtheearly1990s(Rosser&Rosser,ComparativeEconomicsinATransforming
World , PHI&MITPress,N.Delhi,2004,pp.469 - 75).

--- PAGE 286 ---
9.8 < IndianEconomy
had the mood and willingness of going for the With this policy the government kickstarted
kind of economic reforms which India pursued the very process of reform in the economy, that
post-1991 but it lacked the required political is why the policyis taken moreasaprocessthana
support
.21 policy.
The industrial policies conjoined with the Background: India was faced with severe balance
overall micro-economic policy followed by the of paymentcrisisbyJune1991.Basically, inearly
government had one major loophole that it was 1990s, there were inter-connected set of events,
moredependentonforeigncapitalwitha bigpart which weregrowing unfavourable for the Indian
beingcostlier ones.Oncetheeconomycould not economy:
meet industrial performance, it became t — ough (i) Due to the Gulf War (1990 — 91), the
for India to service the external borr — owings the higher oil prices were fastly23depleting
external events (the Gulf war, 1990 91) vitiated India’sforeign reserves.
the situation, too . Finally, by the end of 1980s
(ii) Sharp decline in the private remittances
Indiawasinthegripofaseverebalanceofpayment
from the overseas Indian workers in the
crisis with higher rate of inflation (over 13 per
wake of the Gulf War24, specially from
cent) and higher fiscal deficit (over 8 per cent).22
theGulf region.
The deep crisis put the economy in a financial
crunch, which made India opt for a new way of (iii) Inflation peakingat nearly17 per cent .25
economicmanagementin thecomingtimes. (iv) The gross fiscal deficit of the Central
Government reaching8.4 per centof the
?T
| NEW INDUSTIRIAL POLICY, f 9 GDP.26
(v) By the month of June 1991, India’s
It were the industrial policies of past which had
foreignexchangehaddeclinedto justtwo
shaped the nature and structure of the Indian weeksofimport coverage.27
economy. The need of the hour was to change
India’s near miss with a serious balance of
the natureandstructureof the economy byearly
1990s.TheGoldecidedtochangetheverynature payments crisis was the proximate cause that
of the industrial policy which will automatically started India’s market liberalisation measures in
lead to change in the nature and scope of the
1991 followed bya gradualist approach.28As the
economy. And here came the New Industrial reforms were induced by the crisis of the BoP,
Policyof1991. the initial phase focussed on macroeconomic
21. The Seventh Five Year Plan(1985 - 90)as well as the Sixth FiveYear Plan (1980 - 85) had already suggested the
government to re-define the role of thestate in the economyand permit the private sector into those areas of
industrieswherethe presenceofthegovernmentwasnon-essential,etc.Butsucha radicalapproach might not be
digested bythecountryasitwaslike'rollingback'thestate.Thisiswhythegovernmentofthetimelooks notgoing
forfull-scaleeconomicreformsorvocalmovesofliberalisation.
22. VijayJoshiandI.M.D.Little,India'sEconomicReforms , 1991 - 2001 , OUP:ClarendonPress,London,1996,p.17.
23. EconomicSurvey , 1990 - 91St1991 - 92 , GOI,N.Delhi.
24. Sach,VarshneyandBajpai,op.cit.,p.2.
25. 'EconomicReforms:TwoYearsAfterandtheTaskAhead' , DiscussionPaper, DepartmentofEconomicAffairs,Gol,N.
Delhi,1993,p.6.
26. Ibid.
27. BimalJalan,India'sEconomicCrisis:TheWayAhead , OUP,Delhi,1991,p.2 - 12.
28. Sach,VarshneyandBajpai,op.cit.,p.2.

--- PAGE 287 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.9
stabilisation while the reforms of industrial management, fuel fabrication, export-
policy, trade and exchange rate policies, foreign import, waste management, etc ., of
investment policy, financial and tax reforms radioactiveminerals (noneof thenuclear
as well as public sector reforms did also follow powers in the world have allowed the
soon. entry private sector in these activities,
Thefinancialsupport India recievedfrom the thus no such attempts look logical in
IMF to fight out the BoP crisis of 1990 — 91 were India, too).
havingatagofconditionsto befulfilled byIndia. (ii) Railways (many of the functions related
These IMF conditionalities required the Indian to the railways have been allowed private
economy to go for a structural re-adjustment. entry, but still the private sector cannot
As the nature and scope of the economy were enter the sector as a full-fledged railway
moulded by the various industrial policies India service provider).
did follow till date, any desired change in the . -
economic structure had to be induced with
2 DEUCENCINGOFTHEINDUSTRIES
the help of another industrial policy. The new The number of industries put under the
industrial policy, announced by the government compulsory provision of licencing (belonging to
on July 23, 1991 had initiated a bigger process Schedules B and C as per the IPR, 1956) were
of economic reforms in the country, seriously cut down to only18. Reforms regarding the area
motivated towards the structural readjustment were further followed and presently there are
naturallyobliged to‘fulfil’IMFconditionalities.29 onlyfive industries which carry the burden of
Themajor highlightsofthe policyareasfollows: compulsorylicencing:
. - (i) Aerospaceanddefencerelatedelectronics
1 DERESERVATIONOFTHEINDUSTRIES
(ii) Gun powder, industrial explosives and
TheindustrieswhichwerereservedfortheCentral
detonatingfuse
Government bytheIPR, 1936, werecutdown to
(iii) Dangerouschemicals
onlyeight.Incomingyearsmanyotherindustries
were also opened for private sector investment. (iv) Tobacco,cigaretteand related products
At present there are only two industries which (v) Alcoholicdrinks
are fully or partially reserved for the Central .
3 ABOLITIONOFTHEMRTPLIMIT
Government:
(i) Atomic energy and nuclear research The MRTP limit was Rs. 100 crore so that
and related activities, i.e., mining, use, the mergers, acquisitions and takeovers of the
29. RakeshMohan,IndustrialPolicyandControlsintheBimalJalanedited,TheIndianEconomy:Problems&Prospects,
op.cit.,p.92 - 123.
30. In1985 - 86therewerejust64industriesunderthecompulsorylicencingprovision.Bythefiscal2015 - 16thenumber
remained five (India- 2015, Pub. Div., Gol, N. Delhi).Though the numbersarestill six,all thesesix industries have
manyinternalareaswhichtodaycarrynoobligation of licencing.Asforexample,theelectronicindustrywasunder
this provision and entrepreneurs needed licencesto produce radio,tv,tape-recorder,etc.,what toask of mobile
phones,computers, DVDsand i -pods. Nowonly—thoseelectronicgoodscarry licencing provision which are related
toeither theaero-space or the defencesectors thusweseea great number of electronic industriesfreed from
thelicencingprovisiontheitem'electronics'stillremainsunderit.Similarlywhile'drug&pharma'stillbelongtothe
licencedindustries,dozensofdrugsand pharmaceuticalshavebeenmadefreeofit.Thesixindustrieshavegonefor
high-levelinternalde-licencingsincethereformsstarted.

--- PAGE 288 ---
9.10 < IndianEconomy
industries could become possible. In 2002, a register themselvesasastockbrokerwithSEBI.It
competitionActwaspassedwhichhasreplacedthe means India has not allowed individualforeign
MRTP Act. In place of the MRTP commission, investment in the security market still, only
the Competition Commission has started institutional investment has been_allowed till
functioning (though there are still some hitches now.32
regardingthecompositionalformofthelatterand
itsrealfunctionsand jurisdictions). 5.FERAREPLACEDBYFEMA
. The government committed in 1991 to itself to
4 PROMOTIONTOFOREIGNINVESTMENT
replace thedraconian FERAwith a highlyliberal
Functioning as a typical closed economy, the FEMA, which same into effected in the year
Indian economy had never shown any good 2000 — 01withasun- setclauseof two years.33
faith towards foreign capital. The new industrial .
policywasa pathbreakingstepin thisregard. Not 6 LOCATIONOFINDUSTRIES
only the draconian FERA was committed to be Related provisions were simplified by the policy
diluted, but the government went to encourage which was highly cumbersome and had time-
—
foreign investment (FI) in both its forms direct consuming process. Now, the industries were
and indirect. The direct form of FI was called as classified into ‘polluting’ and ‘non-polluting’
theforeign direct investment (FDI) under which categoriesand a highlysimple provision deciding
the MNCs were allowed to set up their firms in theirlocationwasannounced:
India in the different sectors varying from
—
26 (i) Non-pollutingindustriesmight beset up
per cent to 100 per cent ownership with them anywhere.
Enronand Coke being the flag-bearers.The FDI
startedin1991itself.Theindirectformofforeign (ii) Polluting industries to be set up at least
25 kmsawayfrom themillioncities.
investment(i.e.,intheassetsowned bytheIndian
firms in equity capital) was called the portfolio 7 . COMPULSIONOFPHASEDPRODUCTION
investment scheme (PIS) in the country, which
ABOLISHED
formally commenced in 1994.31 Under the PIS
the foreign institutional investors (Fils) having With the compulsion of phased production
good track record are allowed to invest in the abolished, now the private firms could go
Indian security/stock market. The Fils need to for producing as many goods and models
31. EconomicSurvey , 1994 - 95 , Gol,N.Delhi.
32. Itbecomesverycomplexandtoughtoregulatetheindividualforeigninvestmentinthesharemarketthoughit
isaneasierwayof attractingforeignexchange.Itshould benotedthattheSouth EastAsianeconomieswhich
faced financial crisis in 1996-97 all had allowed individual foreign investment in theirshare market. Asthe
Indian security market was learningtheart of regulation in its nascent phase, thegovernment decided not
toallowsuchforeign investment.The logicwasvindicatedaftertheS.E.Asiancurrencycrisiswhen India had
almostnoshocks(EconomicSurvey , 1996 - 97 , Gol,N.Delhij .
33. Thedelayed action bythegovernment in theforeign exchange liberalisation wasdue tothe delayed comfort the
economyfeltregardingtheavailabilityofforeignexchange.

--- PAGE 289 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.11
simultaneously.34 Now the capacity and capital of firms. Such a compulsion which hampered the
industriescouldbeutilisedtotheiroptimumlevel. growth and development of the Indian industries
. waswithdrawn bythegovernment in 1991.35
8 COMPULSIONTOCONVERTLOANSINTO
The picture presented by the New Industrial
SHARESABOLISHED
^^^^
Policy of 1991 was taken by many experts, the
opposition in the Parliamentand even the public
The policy of nationalisation started by the
figures aswell as the business and industryof the
Governmentof India in thelate1960swas based
on thesound logicof greater public benefitand
countryasa‘rollingback’ofthestate .Theglorious
had itsorigin in theidea of welfarestate — it was rolegiven to thestate bythe Nehruvian economy
criticised by the victims and the experts alike. In seemed completely toppled down. Any one idea
the new policychallenged was an emphaticgood
the early 1970s, the Gol came with a new idea
of it. The major banks of the country were now
byetothe‘controlregime’perpetuatedtillnowby
fully nationalised (14 in number by that time),
thegovernment .Therewasacoalitionofinterests
of politicians, bureaucrats, multinationals as well
which had to mobilise resources for the purpose
of planned development of India. The private as the domestic industrial and business houses
whose interests weresheltered and bythecontrol
companies who had borrowed capital from these
regime.36Thus,amemorandumtothegovernment
banks(whenthebankswereprivatelyowned)now
wantedtheirloanstobepaidback.Thegovernment requestingnot to dismantlethecontrolregimeby
themajorindustrialhousesofIndiaaswellasarrival
came with a novel provision for the companies
who were unable to repay their loans (most of
ofthe‘SwadeshiJagaranManctiwerenotillogical.
— But the governments continued with the reform
them were like it) they could opt to convert
programme with politically permissible pace and
their loan amounts into equity shares and hand
them over to the banks. The private companies a time came when the same industrial houses
requested thegovernment (2002) to expedite the
which opted this route (this was a compulsory
process of reform. Now the Indian industry and
option) ultimately became a government-owned
— business class has been able to understand the
companyas the banks wereowned bytheGol
economics of ‘openness’ and a different kind of
this was an indirect route to nationalise private
34. Thiswasanotherhurdlewhichtheprivatesectorindustrieshavebeencomplainingabout.Astheindustrial products
werecompletelynewtotheIndianmarketanditsconsumersalike,thegovernmentfollowedthispolicywiththelogic
toprovideenoughtimesothattheproductsbecomedomesticisedi.e.,developmentofawarenessabouttheproduct
anditsservicing,maintenance,etc.Asforexample,theMNCsubsidiaryPhillipsIndiawasallowedtoproduceahighly
simple radioCommandarand Jawan modelsforcomparativelylonger periodsof timethen theywere allowed to
come upwiththesmallerfashionable radiosetsortwo- in -onesand three- in -ones.Such provisionshampered their
fullcapacityutilisationaswellasachievingtheeconomyofscalehadalsobeentougher.Thenewindustrialpolicyof
1991didawaywithsuchimpediments.Bythattime,theIndianconsumeraswellasthemarketwasfullyawareofthe
modernindustrialgoods.
35. Combined with nationalisation, this indirect route to nationalisation failed to provide the confidence among
theentrepreneursthat the industrial unitstheyare intending toset up will be owned bythem.Thisdiscouraged
entrepreneurship in India while taking risk. The abolition of this compulsion was an indirect indication by the
governmentofnomoredirectorindirectnationalisationinfuture.Thishasservedthepurpose,thereisnodoubtinit.
36. Thisnexusoftheinterestsofthevestedgroupstothecontrolregimeoftheeconomyhasbeenbeautifullyelaboratedby
RakeshMohanin'IndustrialPolicyandControls'intheBimalJalaneditedTheIndianEconomy:Problems&Prospects,
pp.92 - 123.Healsopointsoutthatthecontrolsystemperpetuatingtheacademicandintellectualideologicalleanings
negatedtheveryneedforre- examinationofthesystem.The'planners'andthe'bureaucrats'wereabletopreserve
theirpowersviathecontrolregimedideverythingtomaintainthestatusquo,RakeshMohanfurtheradds.

--- PAGE 290 ---
9.12 < IndianEconomy
the mixed economy. But the process of reforms slogan of the outgoing government (i.e., the
have still to go miles before its real benefits start NDA) was correct, but remained localised in its
reaching the masses and development together effects to the urban middle class only.38The new
with reform could bemadea mass movement . government seemed taking lessons from the past
This is why experts have suggested that only andtried tomakeIndiashinefor theruralmasses,
assuming that reforms will benefit the masses too . Its one programme, the Bharat Nirman (a
will not beenough to makeit happen politically, ruralinfrastructurefocusedprogramme),couldbe
but thegovernments, the administrative agencies seen asa politicalattemptto makeit happen.39
and the economists all need to link it positively Only the coming times will tell as to what
—
to mass welfare it might require to create a extent the government has been able to educate
popular climate and form the political coalitions the masses (better say the voters who vote!) the
in favour of the argument that privatisation and needfullogicof thereforms.
accordingly restructured labour laws are basically
|
aimed at creating jobs, better job prospects, DISINVESTMENT
alleviating poverty, enriching education and
providing healthcare to the masses.37 In the Disinvestment is a process of selling government
coming times, thegovernment went from one to
equitiesinpublicsectorenterprises.Disinvestment
another generations of the reforms, setting new in India is seen conn — ected to three major inter ¬
relatedareas, namely
targets and every time trying to make reforms
socio-politicallypossible. (i) Atoolof publicsector reforms40
Reforms with the human face was one (ii) A part of the economic reforms started
such attempt of the United Progressive Alliance in mid-1991. It has to be done as
in 2003 when it formed the government at the a complementary part of the ‘de ¬
Centre. It was believed that the ‘India Shining’ reservationofindustries’.41
37. First of theseries of such suggestionscamefrom Sach,Varshneyand Bajpai (eds.) Indiainthe Eraof Economic
Reforms , p.24).
38. Itshouldbenotedthat'reformwiththehumanface'wasnotanewsloganorcallgivenbytheUPAGovernmentbut
thisw—asthesameslogan with which the reform programmewaslaunched bythe Rao-Manmohan Government in
1991 ithasonlybeen're-called back'bythenewgovernmentwithanewcommittmenttoliveitup.
39. Pointshould be noted thatBharat Niraman hasbeentheonlytime -bound programmeof infrastructure buildingin
ruralareaswhichissupposedtobecompletedwithinfouryears(thetimeleftoutofthetotaltermoftheGovernment
whentheprogram—mewaslaunched).TheUPAnaturally,triestomakeitapoliticalstatementandapointforthenext
GeneralElections developmentbecominganissueofrealpoliticsLet'sseewhathappens.
40. Pub.Div.,India1991 , Gol,N.Delhi.
41. Thede- reservationof industrieshad allowed the privatesectortoentertheareashithertoreservedfortheCentral
Government.ItmeansinthecomingtimesintheunreservedareasthePSUsweregoingtofacetheinternationalclass
competitivenessposedbythenewprivatecompanies.TofaceupthechallengestheexistingPSUsneedednewkindof
technological,managerialand marketingstrategies(similartotheprivatecompanies).Forallsuchpreparationsthere
wasarequirementofhugecapital.Thegovernmentthoughttopartlyfundtherequiredcapitaloutoftheproceedsof
disinvestmentofthePSUs.In thiswaydisinvestmentshould beviewed in Indiaasawayof increasinginvestmentin
thedivestedPSUs(whichweseetakingplaceinthecasesof BALCO,VSNL,etc.).

--- PAGE 291 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.13
(iii) Initially motivated by the need to raise was set up.44 The new government (UPA)
resourcesfor budgetaryallocations.42 dismantled the Ministry of Disinvestment and
The approach towards public sector reforms today only the Department of Disinvestment
in India has been much more cautious than that is taking care of the matter, working under the
of the other developing countries. India did not Ministryof Finance.
—
follow the radical solution to it under which
TYPESOFDISINVESTMENT
outright privatisation of commercially viable
PSUsisdoneandtheunviableonesarecompletely Since the process of disinvestment wasstarted in
closed.43 There was an emphasis on increasing India (1991),itsconsistedoftwoofficialtypes.A
functionalautonomyofpublicsectororganisations briefdiscussion on them isgiven below:
to improve their efficiencyin the 1980s in India
as part of the public sector reforms. Once the (i) TokenDisinvestment
process of economic reforms started in the early Disinvestment started in India with a high
1990s, disinvestment becamea part of the public political caution — in a symbolic way known as
sector reforms. The C. Rangarajan Commission the ‘token’ disinvestment. The general policy
on DisinvestmentofthePublicsector Enterprises wastosell thesharesof the PSUsmaximum upto
(1991) wenton tosuggest thegovernmenton the the 49 per cent (i.e., maintaining government
issue in a highly commendable and systematic ownership of the companies). But in practice,
way, takingempirical notes from the experiences sharesweresoldtothetuneof5 — 10percentonly.
of disinvestment around the world. The Thisphaseofdisinvestmentthough broughtsome
government started the process of disinvestment extra funds to the government (which were used
in 1991 itself. In 1997 thegoverment did set up tofillupthefiscaldeficitconsideringtheproceeds
a Disinvestment Commission to advice upon the as the ‘capital receipts’) it could not initiate any
various aspects of the disinvestment process.The new element to the PSUs, which could enhance
—
financialyear1999 2000sawaseriousattemptby their efficiency. It remained the major criticism
thegovernmentto makedisinvestmenta political of this type of disinvestment, and experts around
processtoexpeditetheprocessofdisinvestmentin the world started suggesting the government to
—
the country first a Disinvestment Department go for it in the way that the ownership could be
andlaterafull-fledgedMinistryof Disinvestment transferred from the government to the private
42. Rightsince1991when disinvestment began,thetotalgovernmentshavebeen usingthedisinvestmentproceedsto
fulfilthefiscaldeficitsineverybudgetatleastupto2000 - 01.From2000 - 01to2002 - 03someoftheproceedswent
forsomesocialsectorworksor labourer'ssecurity.After 2003India hasa National Investment Fund towhich the
proceeds of disinvestment automaticallyflowand is notsupposed asa capitalreceipt of the Union Government.
, ,
Thisideaof Indianexperimentwithdisinvestmentwasarticulated bySach VarshneyandBajpai IndiaintheEraof
EconomicReformsp.62 - 63.
43. AswasdonebyMargaretThatcherintheUKinthemid- 1980s.Herbrandofprivatisationwasdrivenbytheconviction
that government control makes PSUs inherently less efficient and privatisation therefore improves its economic
efficiencyand isgood fortheconsumers. However,thisidea has been rejected around theworld on theempirical
bases.APSUscouldalsohavecomparableeconomicefficiencyevenbeingunderfullgovernmentcontrol . Thiswas
followedbyMrs.Thatcher(1979 - 90)forcefullyinGreatBritainconjoinedwiththesupply-sideeconomicsaswasdone
byRonaldReagan(1981 - 89)intheUnitedStatesasdiscussedbySamuelsonandNordhausin Economics , p.703.
44. Ahighlyexperiencedpersonfromthemediaworld,ArunShourieremainedtheMinisterforthewholetermoftheNDA
government.Some highlyaccelerated andsuccessfuldisinvestmentsweredoneduringthis period but notwithout
controversies.

--- PAGE 292 ---
9.14 < IndianEconomy
sector . The other hot issue raised by the experts and experts, alike. The other PSUs were CMC
wasrelatedtothequestionof usingtheproceedsof Ltd, HTL, IBPL, VSNL, ITDC (13 hotels),
disinvestment. Hotel Corporation of India Ltd. (3 hotels),
Paradeep Phosphate Ltd (PPL), HZL, IPCL,
(ii) StrategicDisinvestment
MUL and Lagan Jute Manufacturing Company
In order to make disinvestment a process by Ltd.(LJMC) — a totalnumberof13publicsector
which efficiency of the PSUs could be enhanced enterprises, were part of the ‘strategic sale’ or
and thegovernmentcould de-burden itself of the ‘strategicdisinvestment’of the PSEs.46 The new
activitiesinwhichtheprivatesectorhasdeveloped government at the Centre did put this policy of
better efficiency (so that the government could strategicdisinvestmentontheholdpracticallyand
concentrateon theareaswhich have noattraction came upwitha new policyin place.
for the privatesectorsuch associalsectorsupport
CURRENTDISINVESTMENTPOLICY
forthepoormasses),thegovernmentinitiatedthe
processofstrategicdisinvestment.Thegovernment
Thepresentdisinvestmentpolicy47wasarticulated
classifying the PSUs into 'strategic’ and ‘non by the UPA-II under its restructured Common
strategic’announced in March 1999 that it will Minimum Prgramme (CMP) in 2009 which is
generally reduce its stake (share holding) in the basedon themainideologythat:
non-strategic’ public sector enterprises (PSEs) (i) Citizens have every right to own part of
to 26 per cent or below if necessary and in the thesharesof PublicSector Undertakings
'strategic’ PSEs (i.e., arms and ammunition;
(ii) PublicSectorUndertakingsarethewealth
atomicenergyand relatedactivities;and railways)
it will retain its majority holding.45 There was of the nation and this wealthshould rest
in thehandsofthe people,and
a major shift in the disinvestment policy from
selling small lots of share in the profit-making (iii) While pursuing disinvestment, the
PSUs (i.e., token disinvestment) to the strategic government has to retain majority
sale with change in management control both in
shareholding,i.e.,atleast31per centand
profitand loss-makingenterprises.Theessenceof managementcontrolof the PSUs.
thestrategicdisinvestment was — The action plan for disinvestment in profit
(i) The minimum shares to be divested will
makinggovernmentcompaniesis:
be 51 per cent,and (i) Already listed profitable PSUs (not
(ii) thewholesalesaleofshareswillbedoneto meeting mandatory shareholding of 10
a ‘strategicpartner’havinginternational per cent) are to be made compliant by
class experience and expertise in the ‘Offer for Sale’ bygovernment or by the
. PSUs through issue of fresh shares or a
sector
combination of both;
This form of disinvestment commenced
with the Modern Food Industries Ltd. (MFIL). (ii) Unlisted PSUs with no accumulated
Thesecond PSUswas the BALCO which invited losses and having earned net profit in
every kind of criticism from the opposition three preceding consecutive years are to
political parties, the Government of Chattisgarh belisted;
45. ConceptClassificationofthePSEs , GovernmentofIndia,16.03.1999.
46. India2003,Pub.Div.,Gol,N.Delhi.
47. Ministryof Finance, DisinvestmentPolicyAnnouncement , Deptt.of Disinvestment,Gol,N.Delhi,Nov.5,2009.

--- PAGE 293 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.15
(iii) Follow-on public offers would be used the money for some other good purposes,
—
considered taking into consideration the suchas re-investmentin thePSEs, pre-payment
needs for capital investment of PSUs, of public debt and on the social sector . Second,
—
on a case-by-case basis, and government bytheearly2000 01a broad concensusemerged
could simultaneously or independently on the issue of the proposal by the then Finance
offera portionofitsequityshareholding; Minister.49The proposal regarding the use of the
(iv) In all cases of disinvestment, the proceedsofdisinvestmentwasasgiven below:
government would retain at least 51 per Someportionsof thedisinvestment proceeds
centequityand themanagementcontrol; should be used:
(v) All cases of disinvestment are to be (i) in the divested PSU itself for upgrading
decidedon a case-by-case basis;and purposes
(vi) The Department of Disinvestment is (ii) in theturn -aroundoftheother PSUs
to identify PSUs in consultation with (iii) in the public debt repayment/pre-
respective administrative ministries and
payment
submit proposal to government in cases (iv) in the social infrastructure (education,
requiring Offer for Sale of Government healthcare,etc .)
equity.
(v) in the rehabilitation of the labour-force
PROCEEDSOFDISINVESTMENT:DEBATE (of thedivested PSUs) and
(vi) infulfillingthe budgetaryrequirements.
CONCERNINGTHEUSE
Phase III: The current policy regarding the use
Intheverynextyearofdisinvestment,therestarted
of thedisinvestment proceedsareasgiven below:
a debate in the country concerning the suitable
useoftheproceedsofdisinvestment(i.e.,accruing
1. National Investment Fund: In January
2005, the Government of India decided
to thegovernment out of thesaleof thesharesin
the PSUs). The debate has by now evolved to a to constitute a ‘National Investment
Fund’ (NIF)50 which has the following
certainstagecomingoffbasicallyin three phases:
salientfeatures:
Phase I: This phase could be considered from
—
(a) The proceeds from disinvestment
1991 2000 in which whatever money the
will be channelised into the NIF,
governments received out of disinvestment were
whichisto bemaintainedoutsidethe
used for fulfilling the budgetary requirements Consolidated Fund of India.
(bettersaybridgingthegapoffiscaldeficit).48
(b) ThecorpusoftheNationalInvestment
Phase II:This phase which has a veryshortspan Fund will beofa permanent nature .
(2000 — 03) saw two new developments. First, the
(c) The Fund will be professionally
governmentstartedapracticeofusingtheproceeds
managed, to provide sustainable
not onlyforfulfillingtheneed offiscaldeficit but
48. VariousissuesofEconomicSurvey,GOI,N.Delhi.
49. It was proposed by Yashwant Sinha and thus got popularity as the yashwant Formula' of using disinvestment
proceeds.Beinghispersonal proposal,theGovernmentofthetimewasnotofficiallyboundtoit.However,theidea
gotsupportinsideandoutsideoftheParliamentandlookedhavinganimpactonthegovernment'sthinkingaboutthe
issue.
50. Ministryof Finance,Deptt.of Disinvestment,Gol,N.Delhi,DisinvestmentPolicyAnnouncement,Jan.27,2005.

--- PAGE 294 ---
9.16 I IndianEconomy
returns without depleting the was accorded to disinvestment proceeds
—
corpus, by selected Public Sector being deposited into NIF to be
—
Mutual Funds (they are, UTI Asset operationalforthefiscals2009 12,which
ManagementCompanyLtd. ;SBIFunds wasfurhterextendedto2012 — 13,inview
Management Company Pvt. Ltd. ; ofthepersistentdifficultconditionofthe
LLC Mutual Fund Asset Management economy. All disinvestment proceeds
CompanyLtd. ) . (inplaceoftheincomeaccruingoutofthe
(d) 75 per cent of the annual income investment of the NLF corpus) obtained
of the Fund will be used to finance during the three year period were to be
selected social sector schemes,
usedforselectedsocialsectorschemes.
which promote education, health In January 2013, the government
and employment. The residual 25 approved restructuring of the NIF and
per cent of the annual income of decided that the disinvestment proceeds
—
the Fund will be used to meet the with effect from the fiscal year 2013 14
capital investment requirements of will be credited to the existing ‘Public
profitable and revivable PSUs that Account’ under the head NIF and they
yield adequate returns, in order to would remain there until withdrawn/
enlarge their capital base to finance investedfor theapproved purpose.Itwas
expansion/diversification. decided that the NIF would be utilised
TheincomefromtheNIFinvestmentswas for thefollowingpurposes:
utilisedonselectedsocialsectorschemes, (a) Subscribingtothesharesbeingissued
namely the Jawaharlal Nehru National by the CPSE including PSBs and
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), public sector insurance companies,
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits on rights basisso as to ensure 51 per
Programme (AIBP), Rajiv Gandhi centgovernmentownershipin them.
GraminVidyutikaranYojana (RGGVY), (b) Preferential allotment of shares of
Accelerated Power Development and the CPSE to promoters, so that
Reform Programme, Indira Awas government shareholding does not
Yojana and National Rural Employment go down below 51 per cent in all
GuaranteeScheme (NREGS). cases where the CPSE is going to
2. Restructuring of NIF: In November raisefreshequityto meet itsCapex51
2009, the governement approved a programme.
change in the policy on utilisation of (c) Recapitalisation of public sector
disinvestment proceeds. In view of the banks and public sector insurance
difficult situation caused by the global companies.
—
slowdown of 2008 09 and a severe (d) Investment byGovernmentin RRBs,
droughtin2009 — 10,aone-timeexemption
IIFCL, NABARD,Exim Bank;
51. ThePrimeMinister'sOffice hasbeen monitoringtheCAPEX(Capital Expenditure) programmeand investment plans
of selected Central PublicSector Enterprises (CPSEs) since 2012 - 13.The purpose of thisexercise wastoenhance
investmentintheeconomy,utilizingthesubstantialcashsurplusesthatareavailablewithsomeoftheCPSEstodrive
economicgrowth.

--- PAGE 295 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.17
(e) Equity infusion in various metro of likely investment flow to industry and of
projects; entrepreneurs’ perception. The investment
(f) Investment in Bhartiya Nabhikiya intentions also provide thesectoral preferencesof
Vidyut NigamLimitedand Uranium investorsandshiftsinthesepreferencesover time.
—
Corporation of India Ltd. ; During2001 10, overallinvestment indicated in
(g) Investment in Indian Railways theIEMsfiled increasedatanaverageannual rate
towardscapitalexpenditure. of38.7 per cent .
TheallocationsoutoftheNIFwillbedecided Foreign DirectInvestment (FDI):FDI, beinga
in thegovernment budget. For the financial year non-debtcapitalflow, isaleadingsourceofexternal
2013
—
14 the government approved allocations
financing,especiallyforthedevelopingeconomies.
fromtheNIFtowardsspendingonrecapitalisation It not only brings in capital and technical know ¬
of publicsector banks and capital expenditure of how but also increases the competitiveness of
theIndian Railways. the economy. Overall it supplements domestic
investment,muchrequiredforsustainingthehigh
| INVESTMENTCHALLENGE growthrateofthecountry .Since2000,significant
changeshavebeen madeintheFDI policyregime
As per the recent informations released52 by the by thegovernment to ensure that India becomes
Gol, the concerns and policies regarding the an increasingly attractive and investor-friendly
investment scenario in the industrial sector is as destination.
given below:
ThecurrentphaseofFDIpolicyischaracterised
Gross Capital Formation (GCF)s Investment by three broad entry options for foreign direct
and capacity additions are critical for sustained investors:
industrial growth data clearly indicate a (i) In few sectors, FDI is not permitted
—
moderation in thegrowth of GCF in industry (negativelist);
therateofgrowthofGCFinfour broadsectorsof
(ii) in another small category of sectors,
the industry comprising mining, manufacturing,
foreign investment is permitted only
electricity and construction, averaged 10.9 per
till a specified level of foreign equity
centduring2004— 11, almostthesameastherate
participation;and
ofgrowthofGCFintheeconomyasawhole.The
(iii) the third category, comprising all the
micro, small, and medium enterprises segment
othersectors,iswhereforeigninvestment
had thelowest medium- term growth of only0.8
per cent during this period.Theshareof GCF in i u s p a t l o lo 1 w 0 e 0 d. pe T r h c e en t t h o ir f d eq c u a i t t e y g p o a ry rtic h i a p s at t i w on o
industry as a per cent of the overall GCF, after
— subsets:
peaking to a level of 54.9 per cent in 2007 8,
moderated to48.3percentin 2010 — 11. (a) one consisting of sectors where
automaticapprovalisgrantedforFDI
Investment Intentions: While GCF indicates
(often foreign equity participation
actualisation of investment, investment
lessthan 100percent) and
intentionsindicatedintheIndustrialEntrepreneur
(b) the other consisting of sectors where
Memorandums (IEMs) filed are lead indicators
prior approval from the Foreign
52 . MinistryofFinance,Gol,March16,2012,N .Delhi&theEconomicSurvey2011-12,op . cit .

--- PAGE 296 ---
9.18 < IndianEconomy
Investment Approval Board (FIAB) million additional jobs over a decade or
is required. so.
Cumulative amount of FDI inflows from (ii) providing special focus to industries
April 2000 to December 2011 stood at US$ that are employment intensive, those
240.06 billion, out of which FDI equity inflows producing capital goods, those having
amounted to US$ 157.97 billion. FDI inflows strategicsignificance, small and medium
declined globallyin 2009and 2010.While India enterprises, and publicsector enterprises
wasabletolargelyinsulateitselffromthedeclinein besides industries where India enjoys a
global inflows in 2009 — 10, FDI flows moderated competitiveadvantage.
in 2010-11. (iii) Promotion of clusters and aggregation,
Services (financial and non-financial), especially through the creation of
telecom, construction, drugs & pharmaceuticals, National Investment and Manufacturing
metallurgical industries and power were the Zones (NIMZs).
sectors that attracted maximum (around 84 per (iv) Out of twelve NIMZsso far announced,
cent) FDI during2011 — 12. Cabinet cleared100 eight are along the DMIC. Besides,
per cent FDI insingle brand retailand 5 per cent four other NIMZs have been given in
¬
FDI in multi-brand retail.Thedecision regarding principleapproval —
multi-brand retail issuspended till the consensus (a) Nagpur in Maharashtra,
isdeveloped through consultation amongvarious
(b) Tumkur in Karnataka,
stakeholders.
(c) Chittoor district in Andhra Pradesh,
| and
NEWSTEPSTO BOOSTMANUFACTURING
(d) Medakdistrict inAndhra Pradesh.
The Gol has taken several specific initiatives
to strengthen industry, particularly the DMICPROJECT
manufacturing sector . The Twelfth Plan
The industrial development initiatives under
documentlaysdown broadstrategiesforspurring
DMIC (Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor)54
industrialgrowthand recommendssectorspecific
project presently cover eightindustrial cities that
measurescoveringmicro,small,mediumandlarge
are proposed to be developed along the railway
industriesintheformalaswellasinformalsectors .
corridor.The master planningfor theinvestment
Someof the major initiatives thatcan changethe
regions and industrial areas taken up initially to
manufacturinglandscapeofIndiaareasfollows:53
be developed as new cities in Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Haryana, Rajasthan and Maharashtra
NATIONALMANUFACTURING POLICY
have been completed and master planning in
Uttar Pradesh hasstarted.Thestategovernments
It was approved by the government in October have initiated the process of obtaining land for
2011.Themajor objectivesofthe policyare: the new industrial regions/areas as well as for the
early bird projects. For five industrial cities EIA
(i) Enhancing the share of manufacturing
(Environmental Impact Assessment) studies have
in gross domestic product (GDP) to 25
been initiated.
per cent and creating an additional 100
53.
EconomicSurvey2012-13,op.
cit
.,p.
203
.
54. ForadetaileddiscussionseeChapter - 21,p. 21.12 .

--- PAGE 297 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie t 9.19
FDIPOLICY among the business community and boosting
Following the policy reform process, the FDI
industrialgrowth.Theemphasisofthegovernment
policy is being progressively liberalised on an is on rapidly improving ‘ease of doing business’
ongoing basis in order to allow FDI in more and launchingfresh initiatives like Makein India
industriesundertheautomaticroute .Somerecent and Digital India, creating a National Industrial
Corridors Authority (NICA), streamlining
changes in FDI policy, besides consolidation
of the policy into a single document include environment and forest clearances and labour
FDI in multi-brand retail trading up to 51 per reforms.Some of the majorsteps55 taken by the
cent subject to specified conditions; increasing government in thisregardareasgiven below:
FDI limit to 100 per cent in single-brand retail (i) EaseofDoingBusiness:India’s ranking
trading; FDI up to 49 percent in civil aviation in the ‘Doing Business-2015’ (a World
and power exchanges; FDI up to 49 percent in Bankannualreport)isverylow, at142nd.
thebroadcastingsector undertheautomaticroute To improve India’s ranking, reforms are
and FDI above 49 percent and up to 74 percent beingundertakeninareassuchasstarting
under the government route both for teleports a business, dealing with construction
and mobileTV. permits, registration of property, power
supply, payingtaxes,enforcingcontracts,
-
THEEBIZPROJECT and resolving insolvency. The important
recentmeasurestaken in thisregardare:
The government has announced the setting
up of Invest India — a joint- venture company (a) liberalisation of licensing and
between the Department of Industrial Policy deregulation of a large number of
and Promotion and FICCI, as a not -for-profit, defence products,
singlewindow facilitator,forprospectiveoverseas (b) extending the validity of licencses to
investorsand to act asastructured mechanism to provide enough time to licencees to
attract investment. In addition, the government procurelandandobtainthenecessary
hasinitiatedimplementation of thee-Biz Project, clearances/approvalsfromauthorities,
amissionmodeprojectundertheNeGP(National (c) adoption of a checklist with
e-GovernancePlan)forpromotinganonlinesingle specific time-lines for processing all
window at the national level for business users. applicationsfiled byforeign investors
Theobjectivesofsettingupofthee-Bizportalare in cases relating to retail and the
to providea number ofservices to business users, export-oriented unit (EoU),
covering the entire life cycle of their operation. (d) automation of processes for
The project aims at enhancing India’s business registration with the Employees
competitivenessthroughaserviceoriented,event -
Provident Fund Organization
drivenG2B(GovernmenttoBusiness)interaction.
and Employees State Insurance
| "
Corporation,
NEWSTEPSTO BOOST INDUSTRY
(e) processingofenvironmentandforest
The new government at the Centre has been in clearancesonline,
repair-damage mode for instilling confidence
55. EconomicSurvey2014 - 15,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi,Vol.2,p.91.

--- PAGE 298 ---
9.20 < IndianEconomy
(f) reducing the number of documents entrepreneurial activities. New steps
for exports, takenare:
(g) adoption of best practices by states (a) Common norms for skill training
in granting clearances and ensuring across central ministries/departments
compliance through peer evaluation, are beingevolved.
self-certification,etc . (b) Thirty-one industry/employer-led
(ii) MakeinIndia:Thisprogrammeisaimed Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) are
tofacilitateinvestment,fosterinnovation, nowoperationaland these have been
enhance skill development, protect aligned with thetwenty-fivesectorsof
intellectual property, and build best-in- ‘Makein India’.
—
classmanufacturinginfrastructure (c) To create a common standard for
(a) Informationontwenty-fivesectorshas skills training and certification in
been provided on a web portalalong the country efforts are on to align
with details of FDI policy, National the National Council for Vocational
Manufacturing Policy, intellectual Training(NCVT),schoolboards,and
property rights, and the Delhi- the University Grants Commission
Mumbai Industrial Corridor and (UGC).
other NationalIndustrialCorridors. (v) Streamlining Environment and Forest
—
(b) An InvestorFacilitationCellhasbeen Clearances:Newstepsinthisregardare
created in ‘Invest India’ to guide, (a) A process for online submission of
assist,and handhold investors. applicationsfor environment, coastal
(iii) E-Biz Project: Under this, sveral new regulation zone (CRZ), and forest
steps have been taken bynow — clearances has beenstarted.
(a) Government to Business (G2B) (b) The decision-making process has
portal is being set up to serve as a been decentralised by strengthening
one-stopshop for deliveryofservices federalism.
totheinvestorsandaddresstheneeds (c) To ensure industrial and education
of the business and industry from growth, the requirement of
inceptionthroughtheentirelifecycle environment clearance has been
of the business. done away with for projects for
(b) The process of applying for construction of industrial sheds
industrial licence (IL) and industrial which house plant and machinery,
entrepreneur memorandum (IEM) educationalinstitutionsand hostels.
hasbeen madeonlineand thisservice (vi) Labour-sector Reforms: New steps
is now available to entrepreneur on regardinglabour reformsare:
24x7 basisat theE-Bizwebsite.
(a) ‘Shram Suvidha’ portal has been
(c) Other services of the central launched for online registration
governmentarealso beingintegrated. of units, filing of self-certified,
(iv) Skill Development: A new Ministry of simplified, single online return by
SkillDevelopmentandEntrepreneurship units, introduction of a transparent
has been set up to promote skill and labour inspection scheme via

--- PAGE 299 ---
Industry8Infiastiuctuie i 9.21
computerizedsystemasperrisk-based characteristics and not just in terms of the
criteria, uploading of inspection traditional manufacturing-services distinction.
reportswithinseventy- two hoursand There are five such important characteristics in
timelyredressalofgrievances. thesector:
(b) Universal Account Number (UAN) (i) High levels of productivity (for income
has been launched facilitating increase).
portable, hassle-free, and universally (ii) Rapid rate of growth of productivity
accessible Provident Fund accounts (on both external and domesticfronts —
for employees. interanationalanddomesticconvergence,
(c) The Apprentices Act, 1961 has been respectively).
amendedsoasto makeitflexibleand (iii) Ability to attract resources (to spread the
attractivetoyouthand industry. benefits to therestoftheeconomy).
(d) ‘Apprentice Protsahan Yojana’ has (iv) Alignment with country’s resources
beenlaunchedtosupportmicrosmall (human resources remain typically
and mediumenterprises(MSMEs)in unskilled).
themanufacturingsectorinengaging
(v) Tradability of the sector (it determines
apprentices.
whether the sector can expand without
runninginto demandconstraints).
|
MAKE IN INDIA
—
As per the Economic Survey 2014 15, the
‘Make in India’ campaign is aimed at the revival comparativeadvantageofIndiainmanufacturing
of the manufacturing sector . The objective is andsevicescan beseen in thefollowingway:
laudable but it faces hugechallenges, too . Indian (i) The formal segment (registered) of
manufacturing has been stagnant at low levels, manufacturing in India has some traits
especially when compared with the East Asian of ‘transformational sector’ (such as
successes.56 high productivity and rapid growth
Out of the two sectors, services and in productivity). But non-formal
manufacturing, which has got the potential to segment can not be such a sector .Thus,
playthetransformationalroleincaseofIndia,the ‘formalisation’should beencouraged.
services sector, contributing over 60 per cent to (ii) Some sub- sectors in services (such as
theGDPin thelastdecade, makesthiseven more telecommunications and finance) are
contemporary debate. Studies and the growth highly productive and dynamic (like
theory suggest that transformational sectors57 formal manufacturing sector). But these
should be assessed in light of their underlying sectorshave not beenableto attractlarge
amounts of unskilledlabour,limiting the
56. TherecentupwardrevisionstothelevelofmanufacturingshareinGDParetosomeextentstatisticalratherthanreal.
Moreover,eventhereviseddatadonotchangethepatternoftrenddeclineinthisshare.Whathashappenedisthe
statisticaloppositeofthetechnologicalchangewhichJagdishBhagwati["Splinteringand DisembodimentofServices
andDevelopingNations",1984,TheWorldEconomy,7(2)]referredtoas'splintering'servicesfromgoods.
57. Thesectorwhich can playthelead rolein bringingthelargest numberof benefitstotheeconomyis knownasthe
'transformationalsector’.These benefitscould beofvariouskinds- employmentopprtunities,growthand income
enhancing propects,trdae promotion, povertyalleviation synergy, transition of labourforcefrom one toanother
sector(incaseofIndiafromagriculturetoindustryorservices,etc.

--- PAGE 300 ---
9.22 < IndianEconomy
benefits of their dynamism (this unlike investments. These measures would not
theformalmanufacturing).Theseservices justbenefitmanufacturing,butallsectors
areskill-intensivesectors while India has of theeconomy.
more unskilled labour. Construction (ii) The next category of means could be
is one service sector which is unskilled looselycalled — ‘industrial policy’.Under
labour-intensive, but it is fairly dynamic. this, the major required steps, for the
However, construction is not a tradable promotion of manufacturing,are —
sector, which limits its potential to be a (a) Providingsubsidies,
transformationalsector .
(b) Loweringthecost ofcapital,and
(iii) One policy conclusion is that efforts
(c) Creating special economic zones
shouldbemadetoimprovetheconditions
(SEZs)
for labour-intensive manufacturing with
rapid skill upgradation. This is need of The above-given measures should be
taken for all manufacturing industries
the hour as skill-intensive sectors are
dynamic sectors in India and sustaining to have the right benifit coming to the
economy.
their dynamism will require skilled
labour — otherwise even these sectors (iii) The next category of tools are related
could become uncompetitive. It means, to the is the ‘tradability’ factor of the
to make the ‘Make in India’ happen, manufacturing sector . The normal
India will first need to make‘Skill India’ tools applied by India might be called
—
happen. ‘protectionist’
India needs to use the right tools (means)to (a) Higher custom on imported
makethe‘MakeinIndia’happen.AspertheSurvey, manufacturedgoods,
these ‘means’ are as given below (in decreasing (b) Imposing the compulsions of
order of their effectiveness and increasing order local procurement on the foreign
ofcontroversy): companies,
(i) To attract enough investment from the (c) Providingexport-relatedincentivesto
privatesector(domesticaswellasforeign) domesticmanufacturing.
improvement in business environment is But such policy actions go against India’s
needed. For this, India needs to take the external obligations under the WTO and also
followingsteps: undermineitscredentialsofopenness.
(a) Regulatorysimplification,
INDIANSCENARIO&THERIGHTWAY
(b) Lessoneroustaxstructure,
(c) Buildinginfrastructure, India has been depending more on the last two
(d) Reforminglabourlaws,and
of the above-given ‘means’, which have been
(e) Enablingconnectivity. counterpro — ductive to the manufacturing sector
in general resulting into an environment of
The above-given measures, aimed at negativeprotectionto it.Together withimproving
improving the ‘ease of doing business’
the ‘business environment’ (which is difficult
would reduce thecost of doing business,
and a long- term process), India needs to impart
increase profitability, and hence
a competitive edge to its manufacturing industry
encourage the private sector to increase bytweakingitstaxregimewithoutcompromising