--- PAGE 50 ---
1.16 I IndianEconomy
market mechanism in front ofaforeign currency, asa tool of economicpolicymaking, which is the
itisthesituationof‘depreciation’in thedomestic thirdwayhowdepreciationis usedineconomics.
currency,calculatedintermsoflossinvalueofthe
domesticcurrency. ^K1D
Thus, NDP= GDP-Depreciation. Gross National Product (GNP) is the GDP of
This way, NDP of an economy has to be a country added with its ‘income from abroad’.
always lower than its GDP for the same year, Here, the trans -boundary economic activities of
since there is no way to cut the depreciation to an economyisalso taken into account .Theitems
zero.But mankind hasachieved too much in this which are counted in the segment ‘Income from
areathroughdevelopments,suchas‘ball-bearing’, Abroad’are:
‘lubricants’, etc ., all innovated to minimise the (i) Trade Balance: the net outcome at the
levelsofdepreciation. year end of thetotalexportsand imports
Thedifferentusesoftheconceptof NDPare of a country may be positive or negative
asgiven below: accordingly added with the GDP (in
(a) For domestic use only: to understand India’s case it has always been negative
the historicalsituation of the loss due to except the three consecutive years 2000-
depreciation to the economy. Also used 03whenitwaspositive,duetohighlevels
to understand and analyse the sectoral
of‘servicessector’exportduringtheyears,
situation of depreciation in industryand
courtseytheboomingBPOindustry).
tradeincomparativeperiods. (ii) InterestofExternalLoans:thenetoutcome
(b) Toshowtheachievementsoftheeconomy
onthefrontoftheinterestpayments,i.e.,
in thearea of research and development,
balanceoftheinflow(on themoneylend
which have tried cutting the levels of
outbytheeconomy)and theoutflow(on
depreciationin a historicaltimeperiod. themoneyborrowed bytheeconomy) of
the external interests. In India’s case it
However, NDP is not used in comparative
economics, i.e., to compare theeconomies of the
has always been negativeas theeconomy
world. Why this is so? This is due to different
has been a‘net borrower’from theworld
economies.
rates of depreciation which isset by the different
economies of the world. Rates of depreciation (iii) Private Remittances: the net outcome of
may be based on logic (as it is in the case of the money which inflows and outflows
houses in India — the cement, bricks, sand and on account of the ‘private transfers’ by
iron rodswhich are used to build housesin India
IndiannationalsworkingoutsideIndia(to
India) and theforeign nationals working
can sustain it for the coming 100 years, thus
the rate of depreciation is fixed at 1 per cent per in India (to their home countries). On
annum). But it maynot be based on logicall the thisfront India has been alwaysagainer-
time, for example, upto February 2000 the rate till theearly1990s from theGulf region
of depreciation for heavy vehicles (vehicles with (which fell down afterwards in the wake
6-wheels and above) was 20 per cent whileit was of the heavy country-bound movements
raisedto40percentafterwards — toboostthesales of Indians working there due to the
of heavy vehicles in the country . There was no GulfWar) and afterwardsfrom the USA
logicin doubling the rate . Basically, depreciation and other European nations. Today,
anditsratesarealso usedbymoderngovernments India is the highest recipient of private

--- PAGE 51 ---
Introduction t 1.17
—
remittances in the world as per the for the same (numerically shown by
World Bank projected at $71 billion in the size and net flow of its ‘balance of
2014 (in 2013 it was $70 billion, the trade’);whatisthestandardofitshuman
year’s highest). China falls second ($ 64 resourceininternationalparlance(shown
billion) in 2014. bythesizeand thenetflowofits‘private
Ultimately, the balance of all the three remittances’); what position it holds
componentsofthe‘IncomefromAbroad’segment regarding financial support from and to
mayturnout to bepositiveor negative.In India’s the world economies (shown by the net
case it has always been negative (due to heavy flow of ‘interests’ on external lending/
outflows on account of trade deficits and interest
borrowing).
payments on the foreign loans). It means, the
NNP
‘Income from Abroad’ issubtracted from India’s
GDP tocalculateitsGNP. NetNationalProduct(NNP)ofaneconomyisthe
ThenormalformulaisGNP= GDP + Income
GNPafterdeductingthelossdueto‘depreciation’.
from Abroad. But it becomes GNP = GDP + ( — Theformula to deriveit maybewritten like:
— —
Income from Abroad) = GDP Income from NNP = GNP Depreciation
Abroad, in the case of India. This means that
or,
India’sGNPisalwayslower thanitsGDP. —
NNP = GDP + Income from Abroad
ThedifferentusesoftheconceptGNPareas
Depreciation.
given below:
Thedifferentusesoftheconceptof NNPare
(i) This is the ‘national income’ according
asgiven below:
to which the IMF ranks the nations of
— (i) Thisis the‘NationalIncome’(NI) ofan
the world in terms of the volumes at
economy. Though, the GDP, NDP and
Purchasing Power Parity (at PPP). For a
GNP, all are ‘national income’ they are
detailed discussion on PPP readers may
search for italphabeticallyin Chapter 24. not written withcapitalised‘N’and‘I’.
Indiaisrankedasthe4thlargesteconomy (ii) Thisis thepurestformof theincomeof a
of the world (after the USA, China
nation.
and Japan), while as per the nominal/ (iii) When we divide NNP by the total
prevailing exchange rate of rupee, India population of a nation we get the ‘per
isthe 11thlargesteconomy. capita income’ (PCI) of that nation,
(ii) It is the more exhaustive concept of i.e., ‘income per head per year’. A very
basic point should be noted here that
national income than the GDP as it
indicatestowardsthe‘quantitative’aswell this is the point where the rates of
asthe‘qualitative’aspectsoftheeconomy,
dipreciationfollowedbydifferentnations
i.e., the‘internal’as well as the‘external’ make a difference. Higher the rates of
strengthof theeconomy. depreciation lower the PCI of thenation
(whatever be the reason for it logical or
(iii) It enables us to learn several facts about
artificial as in the case of depreciation
the production behaviour and pattern
being used as a tool of policymaking).
of an economy, such as, how much the
Though, economies are free to fix any
outsideworldisdependentonitsproduct
rate of depreciation for different assets,
and how much it depends on the world

--- PAGE 52 ---
1.18 < IndianEconomy
the rates fixed by them make difference market, i.e., showrooms (these are the
when theNIofthenationsarecompared cenvat/centralexciseand theCSTwhich
bytheinternationalfinancialinstitutions are paid by the producers to the central
likethe IMF,WB,ADB,etc . governmentin India).Thisisalso known
The1BaseYear’togetherwiththe‘Methodology’ as the‘ex-factoryprice’. Theweightof the
forcalculatingtheNationalAccountswererevised state taxes are then added to it, to finally
bytheCentralStatistics Office (CSO) inJanuary derive the‘market cost’. In general, they
2015, which is given in the forthcoming pages. are also called factor price’ and ‘market
So that readers are able to understand the ‘main
price’.
differences’intheaccountingprocess,theliterature In India, income is calculated at factor
relatedto the‘old methodology’isleft unchanged cost, and so is the case with most of the
in thisedition.Wemayexpectquestionson their developing countries (but among the
comparativeaspectsin thefutreexaminations. developed economies it is calculated at
themarketcost).Thereasonsare, lackof
COSTANDPRICEOFNATIONALINCOME uniformityintaxes,goodsarenotprinted
While calculating national income the issues with their prices,etc .In present time, we
related to ‘cost’ and ‘price’ also needs to be
seeagreatdegreeoftax -relateduniformity
decided. Basically, thereare two sets of costs and coming to India upto the extent of the
prices;andan economyneeds to chooseat which central taxes only, but thestate taxes are
of thetwo costsand two pricesit willcalculateits still neither single nor uniform. Once
nationalincome.Let us understand theconfusion the GST is implemented this abberation
and therelevanceof thisconfusion.14 will end.Though forstatistical purposes,
(i) Cost:Incomeofaneconomy,i.e.,valueof income at market cost is also released
by the Central Statistical Organisation
itstotalproducedgoodsandservicesmay
(CSO).
becalculated at either the‘factor cost’or
the‘market cost’.What is the difference (ii) Price:Incomecanbederivedattwoprices
between them? Basically, ‘factor cost’ is constant and current . The difference in
the‘inputcost’theproducer hasto incur the constant and current prices is only
in the process of producing something that
oftheimpactofinflation.Inflationis
(such as cost of capital, i.e., interest on consideredstandstillata year of thepast
loans, rawmaterials, labour, rent, power, (thisyear of the past isalso known asthe
etc .).This is also termed as‘factoryprice’ ‘base year’) in the case of the constant
or‘productioncost/price’.Thisisnothing price while in the current price the
but ‘price’ of the commodity from the present day inflation is added. Current
producer’sside.While the ‘market cost’ price is, basically, the maximum retail
is derived after adding the indirect taxes price(MRP) whichweseeprintedonthe
to thefactorcostoftheproduct,itmeans goodssellingin themarket.
the cost at which the goods reach the
14. Theinformationsontheissueslike'cost','price','taxes'and'subsidies'arebasedonthedifferentDiscussionPapersreleased
bytheCentralStatisticalOrganisation(Gol)fromtimetotime.

--- PAGE 53 ---
Introduction i 1.19
As per the new guidelines the base year in income at current prices. They get more reliable
India has been revised from the 1993 — 94 to and realisticdataof their income).
—
2004 03(thedatabasedonthenewconstantyear
is presentlyknown as the‘newseries’of data)
— TAXES&NATIONALINCOME
announced in September, 2010. India calculates While accounting/calculating national income
—
its national income at constant prices so is the the taxes, direct and indirect, collected by the
situation among other developing economies, governments, needs to beconsidered. In the case
while the developed nations calculate it at the ofIndia, to theextentthedirecttaxes(individual
current prices. Though, for statistical purposes income tax, corpoarate income tax, i.e., the
the CSO releases the national income data at corporate tax, divident tax, interest tax, etc .) are
the current prices, too . Why? Basically, inflation concerned,thereisnoneedofadjustmentwhether
has been a challengingaspect of policymaking in thenationalincomeisaccountedatfactor costor
India because of its level (i.e., range in which it market cost .This isso becauseat both the‘costs’
dwindles) and stability (how stable it has been). they have to be the same; besides these taxes are
Insuchsituationsthegrowthin theincomelevels collected at theincomes of the concerned person
of the population living below the poverty level orgroup.
(BPL) can never be measured accurately (due
But the amount of indirect taxes (cenvat,
to higher inflation the section will show higher customs,centralsalestax,salestax/vat,stateexcise,
income)and thegovernmentwill never beableto etc .) needs to be taken care of if the national
measurethe realimpactof the povertyalleviation
income is accounted at ‘factor cost’ (which is
programmesit runsfor thepopulation. the case with India). If the national income is
Here, one important aspect of income calculated at factor cost then the corpus of the
needs to be understood. Income of a person has total indirect taxes needs to be deducted from it.
—
three forms the first form is nominal income Why so? This is because, they have been added
(the wage someone gets in hand per day or per twice: once in the hands of the people/group
month), the second form is real income (this is who paythem (because theypayfor it from their
nominal income minus the present day rate of ‘disposable income’ while puchasing things) and
—
inflation adjusted in percentage form), and the other in the hands of the governments (as their
last one is the disposable income (the net part income receipts). Collection/source of indirect
of wage one is free to use which is derived after taxesarethe‘disposableincome’(whichindividuals
deducting the direct taxes from the real/nominal and companies have with them after paying their
income,depending upon theneedofdata).What direct taxes — from which theydo anypurchasing
happens in practice is that while the nominal and finally, the indirect taxes reach the various
income might have increased byonly 5 per cent, governments). Thus, if the national income is
it looks 15 per cent if the inflation is at the 10 calculatedatfactorcost,theformulatoseekitwill
percentlevel.UnlikeIndia,amongthedeveloped
be:
nations, inflation has been around 2 per cent for National Income at Factor Cost = NNP at
manydecades (it meansit has beenatlower levels
MarketCost
—
IndirectTaxes
andstable,too .Thisiswhythedifferencebetween
However, if the national income is being
theincomesatconstantandcurrent pricesamong
derived at ‘market cost’, the indirect taxes do
them arenarrowand theycalculatetheir national
not need to bededucted from it. In thiscase, the

--- PAGE 54 ---
1.20 < IndianEconomy
governments need not add their incomeaccruing REVISIONINTHEBASEYEARANDMETHOD
from indirect taxes to the national incomeeither. OFNATIONALINCOMEACCOUNTING
Itmeans,thattheconfusioninthecaseofnational
The Central Statistics Office (CSO), in January
income accounting at factor cost is only related
2015, released the new and revised data of
withindirecttaxes .
NationalAccounts,effectingtwo changes:
SUBSIDIES&NATIONALINCOME 1. The Base Yearwas revisedfrom 2004 — 05
to2011 — 12.Thiswasdoneinaccordance
Similar to theindirect taxes, thevarioussubsidies
withtherecommendationoftheNational
which areforwarded bythegovernments need to Statistical Commission (NSC), which
be adjusted while calculating national income.
had advised to revise the base year of all
Theyareadded to the national incomeat market economicindiceseveryfiveyears.
cost, in case of India. Subsidies are added in the
2. This time, the methodologyof calculating
national income at market cost to derive the
the National Accounts has also been
nationalincomeatfactorcost .Thisisbecausethe
revised in line with the requirements
priceatwhichthesubsidisedgoodsandservicesare
of the System of National Accounts
made available by the governments are not their
(SNA)-2008,an internationallyaccepted
real factor costs (subsidies are forwarded on the
standard.
factor costs of the goods and services) otherwise
we will have a distorted value (which will be less The majorchangesincorporated in this revision
than itsrealvalue).Thustheformula will be: areasgiven below:
National Income at Factor Cost = NNP at (i) Headline growth rate will now be
MarketCost + Subsidies
measuredbyGDPatconstantmarketprices,
Ifthenationalincomeisderivedatthemarket which will henceforth be referred to as
cost and governments forward no subsidies there
‘GDP’(asisthepracticeinternationally).
is no need of adjustments for the subsidies, but Earlier,growthwas measured in termsof
afterallthereisnotasingleeconomyintheworld growth rate in GDPat factor costandat
.
todaywhichdoes notforwardsubsidiesin oneor
constantprices
theotherform. (ii) Sector-wise estimates of Gross Value
Putting ‘indirect taxes’ and ‘subsidies’ Added (GVA)15 will now be given at
together, India’s National Incomewill bederived basic prices16instead of factor cost . The
with the following formula (as India does it at
relationship between GVAatfactor cost,
factor cost):
GVAatbasicprices,andGDP(atmarket
prices) isgiven below:
National Income at Factor Cost = NNP at
—
MarketCost IndirectTaxes + Subsidies
15. GVA,whichmeasuresthedifferenceinvaluebetweenthefinalgoodandthecostofingredien—tsusedinitsproduction,
widensthescopeofcapturingmoreeconomicactivitythantheearlier'factorcost'approach asumofthetotalcost
ofallfactorsusedtoproduceagoodorservice,netoftaxesandsubsidies.
16. Thebasicpriceistheamountreceivablebytheproducerfromthepurchaserforaunitofagoodorserviceproduced
asoutput minusanytax payable(suchassalestaxorVATthebuyerpays),and plusanysubsidyreceivable,onthat
unitasaconsequenceofitsproductionorsale;itexcludesanytransportchargesinvoicedseparatelybytheproducer.
Inotherwords,thebasicpriceiswhatthesellercollectsforthesale,asopposedtowhatthebuyerpays.

--- PAGE 55 ---
Introduction I 1.21
GVAat basic prices = CE + OS/MI + activities other than manufacturing
CFC + production taxes less production undertaken bythesecompanies.
subsidies.
(iv) Comprehensive coverage of the financial
GVA at factor cost = GVA at basic sector by inclusion of information from
—
prices production taxesless production the accounts of stock brokers, stock
subsidies. exchanges,assetmanagementcompanies,
GDP = GVA at basic prices + product mutual funds and pension funds, and
taxes
— productsubsidies. the regulatory bodies including the
Securities and Exchange Board of India
[Where,CE:compensationofemployees;
(SEBI), Pension Fund Regulatory and
OS: operating surplus; MI: mixed
Development Authority (PFRDA) and
income; and CFC:consumption of fixed
capital.Productiontaxesorproduction Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority(IRDA).
subsidiesarepaidorreceivedwithrelation
to production and are independent of (v) Improved coverage of activities of local
the volume of actual production. Some bodies and autonomous institutions,
examples of production taxes are land coveringaround60percentofthegrants/
revenues, stamps and registration fees and transfers provided to theseinstitutions.
tax on profession. Some production Owing to these changes, estimates of GVA
subsidiesaresubsidiesto Railways,input bothataggregateandsectorallevelshaveundergone
subsidies to farmers, subsidies to village changes.Thesector -wisesharesinaggregateGVA
and small industries, administrative have undergone significant revision especially in
subsidiesto corporationsor cooperatives, the case of manufacturing and services. Changes
etc . Product taxes or subsidies are paid have also been observed in the growth rates in
or receivedon per unit of product.Some GVAs of individual sectors and contribution of
examples of product taxes are excise eachsector to overallGVAdueto useofsales tax
tax, sales tax, service tax and import and service tax data for estimation in the years
and export duties. Product subsidies 2012-13 and 2013-14. Caution needed to be
include food, petroleum and fertilizer exercised while comparing estimates and growth
subsidies, interest subsidies given to rates from the earlier series to the new series, as
farmers, households,etc ., through banks, per theCSO.
and subsidies for providing insurance to Thelatesset of data for the National Income
householdsatlower rates]. of India for 2014—15 (asperthe revisedBase Year
(iii) Comprehensivecoverageof the corporate and new Methodology of the CSO, announced in
sectorbothin manufacturingandservices January2015)areasgiven below:
by incorporation of annual accounts of (i) GDP (at Constant Market Price): Rs.
companies as filed with the Ministry of 1,06,56,925andGrowthRateat7.4percent .
Corporate Affairs (MCA) under their
(ii) GVAat Basic Price (at 2011-12 prices):
e-governance initiative, MCA21. Use Rs. 98, 57, 672 and Growth Rate at 7.5
of MCA21 database for manufacturing per cent .
companies has helped account for
(iii) Per Capita Net National Income (at
Current Market Prices):Rs.88,533.

--- PAGE 56 ---
1.22 < IndianEconomy
— —
|
UNIQUENESSOFTHE INDIAN ECONOMY
(v) Inthelastdecade(2003 04to2014 15),
growth has increasingly come from the
Indian economy did show some traits17 which servicessector,whosecontribution to the
were unique: overall growth of the economy has been
(i) Thecontributionoftheprimarysectorin
64 per cent, while that of the industry
the GDP has fallen down regularly and
and agriculturesectors have been 26 per
todayitstands at 14.1 per cent, which is centand10 per cent, respectively.
sufficient to conclude that it is no more (vi) India has been basically the first case
anagrarian economy. which directly had either over 50 per
(ii) Theshareofitstertiarysectorincreasedto
centofitsGDPcomingfrom
—
theprimary
over66percentintheGDPby2014 — 15. sector or the tertiarysector an agrarian
ThisprovesIndia isaserviceeconomy. economy shifting directly to the service
economy (at least partially, if we forget
(iii) The dependency of population on the
the dependency ratio of the population
primary sector for its employment still on the sectors). It means India jumped
remainsatover 56.8 percent,asymptom
ofanagrarianeconomy.Theexpansionof the stage of being a fully-developed
industrialeconomy.
industrieswasnotsufficienttoattractthe
labour force from the primary activities. Without fully realising the industrial and
India isstilllaggingon thisfront badly. manufacturing potential and directly converting
intoaserviceeconomy,hascreatedtoughermacro
(iv) The share of the secondarysector in the
and micro challengesfor policymakersin India.
GDPisat18.4percentandnevercrossed
40percent .
, -
17. AsperinformationmadeavailablebytheCentralStatisticalOrganisation Feb.2014,Gol,NewDelhi;EconomicSurvey2014
15 , MoF,Gol,NewDelhiandtheIndia201S , Pub.Div.,MolB,Gol,NewDelhi.

--- PAGE 57 ---
C H A P T E R
Ct
%
I
i
I
m
w
1 J
'
GROWTH
,,
i
s'v
—
DEVELOPMENT
AND HAPPINESS
Since 1971, Bhutan has rejected GDP as the
only way to measureprogress-in itsplace, it has
o Introduction championed a new approach to development,
=> Progress which measures prosperity through formal
=> EconomicGrowth principlesofgrossnationalhappiness(GNH)and
Economic Development the spiritual,physical,social and environmental
=> Happiness health of its citizens and natural environment.
Fordecades , thisbeliefthatwellbeingshouldtake
preference over material growth has remained a
globaloddity . Now , ina worldbeset bycollapsing
financial systems, gross inequity and wide-scale
environmental destruction , this tiny Buddhist
.
state's approach is attracting a lot of interest In
2011,theUNadoptedBhutan’scallforaholistic
approachtodevelopment ,a moveendorsed by 68
countries . A UN panel is now considering ways
thatBhutan’sGNHmodelcanbereplicatedacross
.
theglobe*
*AsAnnieKellywritesinTheGuardian,Washington,DC,1stDecember.2012.

--- PAGE 58 ---
2.2 < IndianEconomy
| |
INTRODUCTION ECONOMIC GROWTH
Similartoseersand philosopherseconomistswere Aterm comingfrom thelifesciences,‘growth’in
alsopartytohuman’squestforabettertomorrow . economics means economic growth. An increase
—
We have been a witness to a number of notions in economic variables over a period of time is
cominginfromtheliteratureofEconomicsinthis economic growth. The term can be used in an
—
area starting with a very humble and layman’s individualcaseorinthecaseofaneconomyorfor
wordlike‘progress’totechnicaltermslike‘growth’, the whole world. The most important aspect of
‘development’ and ‘human development’. With growth is its quantifiability,i.e., one can measure
greater dependence on the idea of the‘economic itinabsoluteterms .2Alltheunitsofmeasurement
man’, the world created immense wealth in may be applied to show it, depending upon the
the post-War decades. It was in the 1980s that economic variable, where the growth is being
socialscientistsstarted finerstudiesin thearea of studied.Wehaveafewexamples:
mankind’s actions, finally challenging the very (i) An economy might have been able to
idea of the‘economicman’ (‘rational man’).And see growth in food production during
therestarts mankind’s urgeto introspect thelives a decade which could be measured in
of humanity on the planet earth. Meanwhile, .
tonnes
humanity was faced with an unique riddle of
(ii) The growth of road network in an
climate change. By now, courtesy the UNO, the economymightbemeasuredforadecade
world hastheWorld Happiness Report. or anyperiod in milesor kilometres.
| (iii) Similarly,thevalueofthetotalproduction
PROGRESS
of an economy might be measured in
Progress is a general term frequently used by currencytermswhichmeanstheeconomy
experts to denote betterment or improvement
isgrowing.
in anything. In economics, the term was used (iv) Per capita incomefor an economymight
for a long time to show the positive movement be measured in monetary terms over a
in the lives of people and in an economy. It had period.
both quantitative and qualitative aspects to it. We may say that economic growth is a
After a point of time, some economists started quantitativeprogress.
—
using all the three terms progress, growth and To calculate thegrowthrateof an economic
—
development interchangeably to mean almost variable the difference between the concerned
the same thing. But it was only during the period is converted into percentage form. For
1960s, 1970s and 1980s that a clear meaningsof
example,ifadairyfarmowner produced100litre
these terms really evolved.1 The term ‘progress’ of milklast month and 105 litrein thefollowing
became a general term with no specific meaning month, his dairyhas a growth rate of 5 per cent .
in economics or denoting both growth and
Similarly, we maycalculate thegrowth rateof an
development. But growth and development were economyforanygivensuccessiveperiods.Growth
allotted their clear- cut meanings. rate is an annual concept which may be used
1. BasedontheanalysesinMichaelP.TodaroandStephenC.Smith,EconomicDevelopment , PearsonEducation,8thEd.,
NewDelhi,2004,pp.9 - 11.
2. AstheIMFandtheWBconsideredthisyardstickofdevelopmentasquotedinGerald M.MeierandJamesE.Rauch,
LeadingIssuesinEconomicDevelopment , Oxford UniversityPress,NewDelhi,2006,pp.12 - 14.

--- PAGE 59 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness t 2.3
otherwise with the clear reference to the period higher, but the quality of life was comparatively
forwhichit is used. low. The time had come to define economic
Thoughgrowth isa valueneutralterm, i.e., it development differently from what the world
might be positiveor negativefor an economyfor meant by economic growth. For economists,
a period, wegenerallyuse it in the positivesense. development indicates the quality of life in the
Ifeconomistssayaneconomyisgrowingitmeans economywhichmightbeseeninaccordancewith
theeconomyishavingapositivegrowthotherwise theavailabilityofso manyvariablessuchas:
theyusetheterm‘negativegrowth'. (i) Thelevelof nutrition
Economic growth is a widely used term in (ii) Theexpansionandthereachofhealthcare
—
economics which is useful in not only national facilities hospitals, medicines, safe
level economic analyses and policymaking but drinking water, vaccination, sanitation,
also highly useful in the study of comparative etc .
economics. International level financial and (iii) Thelevelofeducationamongthepeople
commercial institutions go for policymaking
(iv) Other variables on which the quality of
and future financial planning on the basis of the
lifedepends
growthratedataavailablefortheeconomiesofthe
world. Here, one basic thing must be kept in mind
that if the masses are to be guaranteed with a
| basicminimum level of quality-enhancing inputs
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
(above-given variables such as food, health,
For a comparatively longer period of time after education, etc .) in their life, a minimum level of
the birth of economics, economists remained incomehas to beguaranteed for them. Incomeis
focused on aspects of expanding the quantity of
generatedfromproductiveactivities.Itmeansthat
production and income of a country’s economy. before assuring development we need to assure
The main issue economists discussed was — how growth. Higher economic development requires
toincreasethequantityofproductionandincome
highereconomicgrowth.Butitdoesnotmeanthat
ofacountryora nation- state .Itwas believed that a higher economic growth automatically brings
—
onceaneconomyisabletoincreaseitsproduction in higher economic development a confusion
its income will also increase and there will be an the early economists failed to clear.We may cite
automatic betterment (quality increase) in the an example to understand the confusion: two
lives of the people of the economy. There was familieshavingsamelevelsofincomebutspending
no conscious discussion over the issue of quality differing amounts of money on developmental
expansion in the lives of the people. Economic aspects . One might be giving little attention to
growth was considered as a cause and effect for health, education and going for saving and the
the betterment of lives of the people. This was other mightnotbesavingbut takingpossiblecare
the reason why economists till the 1950s failed of the issues of health and education. Here the
to distinguish between growth and development latter necessarily will have higher development
though they knew the difference between these in comparison to theformer.Thus, we mayhave
terms
. somediversecasesofgrowthand development:
It was during the 1960s and in the later (i) Highergrowthand higherdevelopment
decades that economists came across many (ii) Highergrowth but lowerdevelopment
countries where the growth was comparatively (iii) Lowergrowth but higherdevelopment

--- PAGE 60 ---
_
2.4 < IndianEconomy
The above-given combinations, though theconceptofwelfarestateand theimmediacyof
comparativein naturemakeonethingclear, that, development.
just as for higher income and growth we need
consciousefforts,sameistrueabouttheeconomic MEASURING DEVELOPMENT
developmentand higher economicdevelopment. Although economists were able to articulate the
Without a conscious public policy, differences between growth and development
development has not been possible anywhere in (Mahbub ul Haq, a leading Pakistani economist
the world. Similarly, we can say, that without had done it by the early 1970s), it took some
growth therecannot bedevelopmenteither. more time when the right method of measuring
The first such instance of growth without development could be developed. It was an
development, which the economists saw, was in established fact that the goal of progress goes
theGulfcountries.Theseeconomies,thoughthey beyond mere ‘increase in income’. International
had far higher levels of income and growth, the bodies such as the UNO, IMF and WB were
levels of development were not of comparable concerned about the development of the
levels.Herestartedthebranchofeconomicswhich comparatively underdeveloped regions of the
will be known as ‘development economics’. After world. Butanyattempt in thisdirection wasonly
the arrival of the WB and the IMF, conscious possibleoncetherewasatooltoknowandmeasure
economic policies were framed and prescribed the developmental level of an economy and the
for thegrowthanddevelopmentoflessdeveloped determinants which could be considered as the
economies. traits of development. The idea of developing a
We can say that economic development is formula/method to measurethedevelopmentwas
quantitativeaswellasqualitativeprogressinan
basicallyfacingtwo kindsofdifficulties:
economy.3Itmeans,whenweusethetermgrowth (i) At one level it was difficult to define
we mean quantitative progress and when we use as to what constitutes development.
the term development we mean quantitative as Factors which could show development
well as qualitative progress. If economic growth might bemany,suchaslevelsofincome/
is suitably used for development, it comes back consumption, quality of consumption,
to accelerate the growth and ultimately greater healthcare,nutrition,safedrinkingwater,
and greater population brought under the arena literacy and education, social security,
of development. Similarly, high growth with peaceful community life, availability of
low development and ill-cared development social prestige, entertainment, pollution-
finally results in fall in growth. Thus, there is free environment, etc . It has been a real
a circular relationship between growth and difficult tasktoachieveconsensusamong
development. This circular relationship broke the experts on these determinants of
downwhen theGreatDepressionoccurred.Once development.
the concept of the‘welfare state’got established, (ii) At the second level it looked highly
development became a matter of high concern difficult to quantify a concept as
for the governments of the world, policymakers development constitutes quantitative
and economists alike. A whole new branch of as well as qualitative aspects . It is easy
—
economics welfare economics has its origin in to compare qualitative aspects such as
3. WorldBank , WorldDevelopmentReport1991,Oxford UniversityPress,NewYork,1991,p.4.

--- PAGE 61 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness i 2.5
beauty, taste, etc ., but to measure them UNESCOInstituteforStatisticsdatabase
wedon’t haveanymeasuringscale. and BarroandLee(2010) methodology.
(ii) Expectedyearsofschooling(forchildren
HUMAN DEVELOPMENTINDEX
of school entering age): These estimates
Thedilemmabehindcomparativelymeasuringthe arebasedonenrolmentbyageatalllevelsof
developmentallevelofeconomieswassolvedonce educationandpopulationofofficialschool
the United Nations Development Programme age for each level of education. Expected
(UNDP) publisheditsfirstHuman Development yearsofschoolingiscappedat18years.
Report (HDR) in 1990.The report had a human These indicators are normalised using a
development index (HDI) which was the first minimum valueof zero and maximum valuesare
attempt to define and measure the levels of settotheactualobservedmaximumvalueofmean
development.The‘index’was a product ofselect years ofschoolingfrom the countries in the time
teamofleadingscholars,developmentpractioners series,1980 — 2012,thatis13.3yearsestimatedfor
andmembersoftheHumanDevelopmentReport the UnitedStates in 2010.Theeducationindexis
office of the UNDP. The first such team which thegeometricmean of two indices.
developed the HDI was led by Mahbub ul Haq The Health component is measured by the
andIngeKaul.Theterm‘humandevelopment’is
lifeexpectancyatbirthcomponentoftheHDIand
acorollaryof‘development’in theindex.
is calculated using a minimum value of 20 years
The HDR measures development by and maximum value of 83.57 years. This is the
—
combining three indicators Health, Education observed maximum value of the indicators from
and Standard of Living — converted into a thecountriesinthetimeseries,1980 — 2012.Thus,
composite human development index, the HDI. thelongevitycomponent for a countrywherelife
The creation of a single statistic in HDI was a expectancybirthis55 yearswould be0.551.
real breakthrough which was to serve as a frame The Standard of Living component is
of reference for both ‘social’ and ‘economic’
measured by GNI (Gross National Income/
development. The HDI sets a minimum and a Product) percapitaat‘PurchasingPowerParityin
maximum for each dimension, called goalposts, USDollars’(PPP$)insteadofGDPpercapita(PPP
and then shows where each country stands in $) of past .Thegoalposttakenfor minimum income
relation to these goalposts, expressed as a value is $100 (PPP) and the maximum is US $87,478
between0and1(i.e.,theindexispreparedonthe
(PPP), estimated for Qatar in 2012.The HDI uses
scaleofone) . Thethreeindicators4 used to develop thelogarithm of income, to reflect thediminishing
thecompositeindexareasgiven below: importanceofincomewithincreasingGNI.
The Education component of the HDI is The scores for the three HDI dimension
now (since HDR-2010) measured by two other indices are then aggregated into a composite
—
indicators index usinggeometric mean.The HDI facilitates
(i) Meanofyearsofschooling (foradults instructivecomparisonsof theexperienceswithin
aged 25 years): This is estimated based and between differentcountries.
on educational attainment data from The UNDP ranked5 the economies in
censuses and surveys available in the accordance of their achievements on the above-
4. HumanDevelopmentReport , 2013andHumanDevelopmentReport , 2010 , UnitedNationsDevelopmentProgramme,
NewYork,USA,2013.
5. TodaroandSmith,EconomicDevelopment,p.58.

--- PAGE 62 ---
2.6 I IndianEconomy
given three parameters on the scale of one (i.e., attempts were not prescriptions for an alternative
0.000 — 1.000). As per their achievements the developmentindex, but theywerebasicallytrying
countries were broadly classified into three to show the incompleteness of the HDI, via
categorieswitha rangeof pointson theindex: intellectual satires. One such attempt was made
(i) High Human Development Countries: by the economists and scholars of the London
0.800 — 1.000 pointson theindex. School of Economics in 1999 which concluded
(ii) Medium Human Development Bangladesh as the most developed countryin the
— worldwiththeUSA,Norway,Swedengettingone
Countries: 0.500 0.799 points on the
index. of thelowest ranksin theindex.
(iii) Low Human Development Countries: Basically, it is very much possible to come
0.000 — 0.499 pointson theindex. out with such an index. As for example, we may
say that peace of mind is a necessary element of
The Human Development Report, 2013 is
developmentandbettermentin human lifewhich
discussed in Chapter 22 together with India’s
relativepositionin theworld. depends heavilyon thefactas to howmuchsleep
we get everyday. Housetheft and burglary are
THEDEBATECONTINUES major determinants of a good night sleep which
in turn depends on the fact as how assured we
Though the UNDP commissioned team had go to sleep in our homes at night from burglars
evolved a consensus as to what constitutes and thieves. It meanswemaytryto knowa good
development, academicians and experts around sleepbythedataoftheftsandburglariesin homes.
the world have been debating this issue. By
Sinceminor housetheftsand burglariesareunder
¬
1995 economies around the world had officially reported in policestations, thesurveyor, suppose
accepted the concept of human development tried to knowsuch cases with data as how much
propounded bytheUNDP.Basically,theUNDP ‘locks’weresold in a countryin a particular year.
designedHDRwasused bytheWorldBanksince
In this way a country where people hardly have
the1990stoquantifythedevelopmentaleffortsof
anything to bestolen or no risk of being burgled
the member countries and cheap developmental mightbeconsideredhavingthebestsleepinnight,
funds were allocated in accordance. Naturally, thus the best peace of mind and that is why this
the member countries started emphasising on will bethemost developedcountry .
the parameters of income, education and life
Basically,theHDIcouldbeconsideredasone
expectancy in their policymaking and in this
possiblewayofmeasuringdevelopmentwhichwas
way the idea of HDI got obligatory or voluntary
evolved by the concerned group of experts with
acceptancearound theworld.
themaximum degreeof consensus. But theindex
For manyyears,expertsandscholarscame up which calculates the development of economies
with their own versionsof definingdevelopment. on certain parameters might be overlooking
Theygave unequalweightageto thedeterminants
many other important factors which affect the
defining development, as well as selected some development of an economy and standard of
completely different parameters which could living. As per experts, such other determinants
also denote development in a more suitable way affectingour livingconditions might be:
according to them. Since quality is a matter of
(i) Culturalaspectsof theeconomy,
value judgement and a normative concept, there
was scope for this representation. Most of such
(ii) Outlook towardsaestheticsand purityof
theenvironment,

--- PAGE 63 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness i 2.7
(iii) Aspects related to the rule and been declared the developed countries having
administration in theeconomy, top twenty ranks on the HDI, social scientists
(iv) People’sideaof happinessand prestige, started evaluating the conditons of life in these
(v) Ethicaldimension of human life,etc . economies. Most of such studies concluded that
life in the developed world is every thing but
INTROSPECTINGDEVELOPMENT6 happy. Crime, corruption, burglaries, extortion,
drugtrafficking,fleshtrade,rape,homicide,moral
Confusionabouttherealmeaningofdevelopment
degradation, sexual perversion, etc
.—
all kinds of
did start only after the World Bank and the theso-called vices were thrivingin thedeveloped
International Monetary Fund came into being,
world. It means development had failed to
i.e., post-war. As experts were studying the
deliver them happiness, peace of mind, a general
development process of the developing world,
well-being and a feeling of being in good state .
theywere also surveying the performance reports
Scholarsstartedquestioningtheveryeffortsbeing
of thedeveloped world.Asthewestern world had
madefordevelopmentaround theworld.Mostof
— —
6. There were diverse opinions about the real meaning of—'development' by mid 1940s upto almost the whole
1950sit meant5 - 7 percentgrowth ratein aneconomy even bythe IMFand WB.Bythe late1960snewviews
of development started emerging.Arthur Lewis had seen development in thesense of human freedom in 1963
itselfwhenheconcludedthat"theadvantageofeconomicgrowthisnotthatwealthincreasesh—appiness,butthatit
increasestherangeof humanchoice."Forhimdevelopment meansafreedomfrom'servitude' mankindcould be
freetohavechoicestoleadalifefullofmaterialgoodsorinspiritualcontemplation(W.ArthurLewis,TheTheoryof
EconomicGrowth , Allen&Unwin,London,1963,p.420).
ForDudleySeersdevelopment meantmoreemploymentandequality besidesafallingpoverty[TheMeaningof
Development , a paperpresentedatthe11thWorld ConferenceoftheSocietyforInternationalDevelopment, New
Delhi,1969, p.3). DudleySeerswas latersupported by manyother economistssuch asDenisGoulet(TheCruel
Choice:ANewConceptintheTheoryof Development , Atheneum,NewYork,1971,p.23),Richard Brinkman(1995),
P.JegadishGandhi(1996)andmanyothers.
TheInternationalLabourOrganization(ILO)hadalsoarticulatedbythemid- 1970sthateconomicdevelopmentmust
beabletodelivertheeconomicabilitythatpeoplecanmeettheirbasicneeds(theconceptof'sustenance')besides
the elimination of absolute poverty, creating more employment and lessening income inequalities(Employment ,
GrowthandBasicNeeds , ILO,Geneva,1976).AmartyaSenarticulatedasimilarviewviahisideasof'capabilities'and
'entitlements'("Development:WhichWayNow?",EconomicJournal93 , December1983,pp.754 - 57.).
By1994,theUnitedNationslookedtoincludingtheelementof'capabilities'initsideaofdevelopmentwhenit
concludesthathumanbeingsarebornwithcertainpotentialcapabilitiesandthepurposeofdevelopmentisto
.
createanenvironmentinwhichallpeoplecanexpandtheircapabilitiesinpresenttimesandinfuture Wealth
isimportant forhumanlife . Buttoconcentrateexclusivelyonitiswrong fortworeasons . First , accumulating
wealthisnotnecessaryforthefulfillmentofsomeimportanthumanchoices .... Second , humanchoicesextend
farbeyondeconomicwell - being(HumanDevelopmentReport1994 , UNDP , Oxford UniversityPress,NewYork,
1994,pp.13 - 15).
The WorldBank by1991had alsochanged itsviewabout development and had concluded thatfor improving
qualityoflifeweshould included education,health,nutrition,lessproverty,cleanerenvironment,equality,greater
freedomand richerculturallifeasthegoalsofdevelopment.
Amartya Sen, a leading thinker on the meaning of development attracted attention for articulating human
goalsof development.Heopined thatenhancingthe livesand thefreedoms,weenjoyshould betheconcernsof
development known asthe'capabilities'approach todevelopment (see hisCommoditiesandCapabilities,North
Holland,Amsterdam,1985andDevelopmentasFreedom . AlfredKnopf.NewYork,1999.).

--- PAGE 64 ---
2.8 < IndianEconomy
themhavesuggestedare-definingofdevelopment Somehow a very small kingdom had been
whichcould deliver happinessto mankind. ableto definedevelopment in itsown way,which
Why development has not delivered included material as well as non-material aspects
happiness to the developed world?The answer to of life into it and named it the Gross National
thisquestiondoesnotlieinanyoneobjectivefact Happiness (GNH).Thiscountryis Bhutan.
but touches so many areas of human life. First, Gross National Happiness: Bhutan, a small
whenevereconomistsfromtheoutsettalkedabout Himalayankingdomandaneconomicnon-entity,
progress they meant overall happiness of human developedanewconceptofassessingdevelopment
life.
intheearly1970s
—
theGrossNationalHappiness
Social scientists, somehow have been using (GNH). Without rejecting the idea of human
terms such as progress, growth, development, development propounded by the UNDP, the
well-being, welfare as synonyms of ‘happiness kingdom has been officially following the targets
Happinessisa normativeconceptaswellasastate set by the GNH. Bhutan has been following up
of mind.Therefore, its idea might varyfrom one the GNH since 1972 which has the following
economyto theother. parametersto attain happiness/development:
Second,theperiodinwhichdevelopmentwas (i) Higher real percapitaincome
defined, it wasconsidered that with thesupplyof (ii) Goodgovernance
someselectedmaterialresourceshumanlifecanbe
(iii) Environmental protection
improved.These resourceswere pin-pointed as, a
(iv) Cultural promotion (i.e., inculcation of
better level of income, proper level of nutrition,
ethicaland spiritualvaluesin lifewithout
healthcare facilities, proper levels of literacy and
which, it says, progress may become a
education,etc .
curserather thana blessing)
Happinessisabroaderthingthandevelopment.
At the level of real per capita income, the
The so-called ‘development’ for which the world
GNH and the HDI are the same. Though the
has been striving hard for the last many decades
HDI is silent on the issue of ‘good governance’,
is capable of delivering material happiness to
todayit should be considered as being promoted
mankind. Happiness has its non-material side
around the world once the World Bank came
also. It means while the world has been trying
to maximise its developmental prospects, i.e., w th i e th m it e s m re b p e o r rt st o a n te i s t . in O 1 n 99 th 5 e an is d su e e nf o o f rce p d ro i t t e u ct p i o n n g
m
m
a
a
t
t
e
e
r
r
i
i
a
a
l
l p
h
a
a
r
p
t
p
o
in
f
e
h
s
a
s
p
,
p
it
in
c
e
o
s
u
s.
ld
Th
n
e
ot
no
a
n
tt
-
e
m
nd
ate
th
ri
e
al
n
p
o
a
n
r
¬
t
environment, though the HDI didn’t say
anythingdirectly, theWorld Bankand theUNO
ofourlifeisrootedinethics, religion,spiritualism
hadalreadyacceptedtheimmediacyofsustainable
and cultural values. As development or human
developmentbythenandbyearly1990stherewas
development was defined in material terms, it
aseperate UN Convention on the matter (follow
could onlydeliver us material happiness which is
upon thisconvention has been reallyverylowtill
visibly available in the developed world. Due to datewhich isadifferentissue).
partial definition of development the developed
world has been able to achievedevelopment, i.e., ItmeansthebasicdifferencebetweentheGNH
happiness but only of material kind and for the
and the HDI looksat thelevelofassimilatingthe
non-material partof happiness, we naturallyneed ethical and spiritual aspects into our (UNDP’s)
ideaofdevelopment.
to redefine our ‘ideas’ of development today or
tomorrow.

--- PAGE 65 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness i 2.9
Animpartialanalysissufficientlysuggeststhat is in the process of globalisation at one hand has
material achievements are unable to deliver us started introspecting whether multicultural co ¬
happiness devoid of some ethics at its base. And existence is possible. The Human Development
ethicsarerootedinthereligiousandspiritualtexts . Report of 2004 was titled as Cultural Liberty
But the newworld isguided byits own scientific in Today’s Diverse World. We may conclude
and secular interpretation of life and the world that mankind is passing through a phase of
has always been suspicious about recognising serious introspection and transition where the
the spiritual factor in the human life. Rather dominant view in the world may metamorphose
the western idea of secularism was defined after into redefining the very idea of development
rejecting the veryexistence of anything like God by including ethical values and spiritualism as
andalsorejectingthewholetraditionalhypothesis important parts . But till now the proponents of
of spiritualism as instances of ignorance and development lookshyin believingand accepting
orthodoxy. And there should not be any doubt that thereexistsa non-material part oflife, which
in accepting it that the western ideology in the needs to be realised to make our development
name of development has ultimately, dominated resultinto happiness.
the modern world and its way of life. The idea
|
of development which was followed bythelarger HAPPINESS
part of the world has been cent per cent ‘this-
worldly’.Andanybodycanassesstodaywhatkind The World Happiness Report2013 was published
by the United NationsSustainable Development
of happiness the world has been able to have for
itselfat theend. Solutio
—
ns Network, in Sept
—
ember 2013. The
report a 156-nation survey is second of its
Arecentstudybyasenioreconomistfromthe
kind(aftertheWHR2012)releasedbyacoalition
UNDPontheBhutanesedevelopmentexperience
ofresearchers.8Thereportmeasureshappinessand
under the GNH has vindicated the idea of ‘gross
well-beingin countries around the world to help
happiness’ which development must result into.
— guidepublicpolicy.The Happinessreport ranks
As per the study, the period 1984 98 has been
nationson the basisofsixkeyfactors:
spectacular in terms of development with life
(i) GDP per capita,
expectancyincreasingbyahopping19years,gross
schoolenrolmentreaching72percentandliteracy (ii) Healthylifeexpectancy,
touching47.5 percent (from just 17per cent).7 (iii) Someoneto counton,
After the terror attack on the World Trade (iv) Perceivedfreedom to makelifechoices,
CentreintheUSAthewholeworldhasgonefora (v) Freedomfrom corruption,and
psychic metamorphosis and at least the euphoria (vi) Generosity.
ofdevelopmentfrom thisworld to thatworld has
The happiest nation was Denmark followed
been shaken from its very base.The world which
by Norway, Switzerland, Netherlands, Sweden,
7. StefanPriesner,asenioreconomistwiththeUNDPconductedthestudyfortheJohnHopkinsUniversity,USA,in2005.
8. BoththeWHRshavethreeeditors:1.JohnF.Helliwell,VancouverSchoolofEconomics,UniversityofBritishColumbia,
andtheCanadianInstituteforAdvancedResearch(CIFAR);2.RichardLayard,Director,Well- BeingProgramme,Centre
forEconomicPerformance,LondonSchoolof Economics;3.JeffreyD.Sachs,Director,TheEarth Institute—,Columbia
University.[Thereportswerewrittenbyagroupofindependentexpertsactingintheirpersonalcapacities anyviews
expressedinthisreportdonotnecessarilyreflecttheviewsofanyorganisation,agencyorprogrammeoftheUnited
Nations]
,

--- PAGE 66 ---
2.10 < IndianEconomy
Canada, Finland, Austria, Iceland and Australia measures of happiness might tell us very little.
in thetop10 positions, respectively.Interestingly Changesinreportedhappinessusedtotracksocial
andironically,theUSwasrankednumber17, just progress would perhaps reflect little more than
behind Mexico.Last year, theUS was ranked 23. transient changes in emotion. Or impoverished
India is ranked 111. persons who express happiness in terms of
The world is now in the midst of a major emotion might inadvertently diminish society’s
policy debate about the objectives of public will to fight poverty . Fortunately, respondents
policy. What should be the world’s Sustainable to the happiness surveys do not tend to make
DevelopmentGoalsfor the period 2013 — 2030 — such confusing mistakes. Both the WHRs did
the World Happiness Report (WHR) of 2013 is show that the respondents of the surveys clearly
offeredasacontributionto thatcrucialdebate.As recognise the difference between happiness as an
perJefferySachs,‘thereisnowa risingworldwide
emotionandhappinessinthesenseoflifesatisfaction.
demand that policy be more closelyaligned with The responses of individuals to these different
what really matters to people as they themselves questions are highly distinct. Avery poor person
characterizetheir well-being’. might report himself to be happy emotionally at
aspecifictime, whilealso reportinga muchlower
THEMEANINGOFHAPPINESS senseofhappinesswithlifeasawhole;andindeed,
Theword‘happiness’isquitecomplexand is not people living in extreme poverty do express low
used lightly. Happiness is an aspiration of every levels of happiness with life as a whole. Such
human being, and can also bea measureofsocial answersshould spur our societies to work harder
progress.Yet,arethecitizensofdifferentcountries, to endextreme poverty .
happy?Iftheyarenot,whatifanythingcanbedone The WHR2013 is based on the primary
about it? The key to proper measurement must measures of subjective well-being;9 life
begin with the meaning of the word ‘happiness.’ evaluations;10 life satisfaction;11 and happiness
As per theWHR2013, the problem,ofcourse, is with life as a whole.12 Thus, happiness, appears
that happinessis used in at leasttwoways: twice, once as an emotional report, and once
as part of a life evaluation, giving considerable
(i) As an emotion [‘Were you happy
yesterday?’],and
evidenceaboutthenatureandcausesofhappiness
in bothits majorsenses.
(ii) As an evaluation [‘Are you happy with
yourlifeasa whole?’]. TrendsinHappiness
If individuals were to routinely mix up their
The report presents data for the world showing
responses to these very different questions, then
the levels, explanations, changes and equality
9. GuidelinesonMeasuringSubjectiveWell - being,OECD,Paris,2013.
10. UsedintheWorldValuesSurvey,theEuropeanSocialSurveyandmanyothernationalandinternationalsurveys.Itis
thecore'lifeevaluation'questionrecommendedbytheOECD(2013),andinthefirstWorldHappinessReport.
11. TheGallupWorldPoll(GWP) - theGWPincludesthe'lifesatisfaction'questionon0to10scaleonanexperimental
basis,givingasamplesufficientlylargetoshowthatwhen used withconsistentsamplesthetwoquestionsprovide
mutuallysupportiveinformationonthesizeandrelativeimportanceofthecorrelates.
12. The EuropeanSocialSurveycontainsquestionsabout 'happinesswith life as a whole', and about lifesatisfaction,
bothonthesame0to10numericalscale.TheresponsesprovidethescientificbasetosupporttheWHRfindingsthat
answerstothetwoquestionsgiveconsistent(and mutuallysupportive)informationaboutthecorrelatesofagood
life.

--- PAGE 67 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness i 2.11
of happiness. The world has become a slightly Conclusion
happier and more generous place over the
At the end, it may be concluded that there is
past five years despite the obvious detrimental
now a rising worldwide demand that policy be
happiness impacts of the financial crisis (2007-
more closely aligned with what really matters
OS), as per the report . Because of continuing
to people as they themselves characterise their
improvements in most supports for better lives. In past few years, more and more world
lives in Sub-Saharan Africa, and of continued
leaders (such as the German Chancellor Angela
convergence in the quality of the social fabric
Merkel, South Korean President Park Geun-hye
within greater Europe, there has also been some
andBritish PrimeMinisterDavidCameron) have
progress toward equality in the distribution of
been talking about the importance of well-being
well-beingamongglobalregions.Therehavebeen
as a guide for their nations and the world. The
important continental crosscurrents within this
2013 WorldHappiness Reporthas been published
broader picture. Improvements in quality of life
in support of these efforts to bring the study of
have been particularly notable in Latin America happinessintopublicawarenessandpublicpolicy.
and the Caribbean, while reductions have been
Thisreportoffersrichevidencethatthesystematic
the norm in the regions most affected by the
measurement and analysis of happinesscan teach
financialcrisis,WesternEuropeandotherwestern
us much about ways to improve the world’s
industrial countries; or by some combination of well-being and sustainable development. Now
financialcrisis,and politicalandsocialinstability,
it depends on the nations as how they use the
asin theMiddleEastand NorthAfrica. findingsof theWHR .
TheHDRLinkage
THEBACKGROUND
The WHR 2013 investigates the conceptual
InJuly 2011 the UN General Assembly passed a
and empirical relationships between ‘human
historicresolution.13 It invited member countries
development’ (the UNDP idea used in the
tomeasurethehappinessoftheirpeopleandtouse
Human Development Report) and ‘life evaluation’
approaches to understanding human progress. It this to help guide their public policies. This was
followedinApril2012 bythefirstUN high-level
arguesthat bothapproacheswere, at least in part,
meetingon happiness and well-being, chaired by
motivated by a desire to consider progress and the Prime Minister of Bhutan. At the same time
developmentinwaysthatwentbeyondGDP,and
thefirst World Happiness Reportwas published,14
to put people at the centre . And while ‘human
followed some months later by the OECD
development’ is at heart a conceptual approach,
Guidelines setting an international standard for
and ‘life evaluation’ an empirical one, there is
—
themeasurementofwell-being.15
considerable overlap in practice many aspects
of humandevelopmentarefrequentlyused askey
REIMAGININGTHEIDEAOFHAPPINESS
variablestoexplainsubjectivewell-being.Thetwo
approaches provide complementary lenses which Search for a ‘happier’ life for humanity has been
enrich our ability to assess whether life is getting the ultimate aim of not only saints, seers, and
better. philosophers but of economists too . The whole
13. UNGeneralAssembly,Happiness:TowardsaHolisticApproachtoDevelopment,19July2011.
14. J.F.Helliwell,R.Layard&J.Sachs(Eds.),WorldHappinessReport2012,EarthInstitute,NewYork,USA,2012.
15. GuidelinesonMeasuringSubjectiveWell-being,OECD,Paris,2013.

--- PAGE 68 ---
2.12 < IndianEconomy
gamut of economics literature on progress, modern life.These contradictions would
growth, development is ultimately aimed at not comeas ashock to thegreatestsages
bringingmore‘happiness’into thelivesofhuman of humanity, includingAristotleand the
beings.Overthetime,diverseideologicalcurrents Buddha, who taught humanity, time
impressed upon the humanity to take variety and again, that material gain alone will
of ‘meanings’ out of the highly subjective term not fulfil our deepest needs.Material life
—
‘happiness’ and finally, the humanity is where must be harnessed to meet these human
itistoday. needs, most importantly to promote the
A time also came when many scholars and end of suffering, social justice and the
world leaders raised the ultimate question — attainmentof happiness.
are we happier today? And in the wake of this (ii) The WHR 2012 takes one key example
—
increased‘scrutiny’around theworld, therecame from the USA the world’s economic
—
theUNresolutionof2011whichinvitedmember superpower whichhasachievedstriking
countries to measure the happiness of their economicandtechnologicalprogressover
people and to use this to help guide their public thepast halfcenturywithoutgainsin the
policies. The WHR 2012 itself provides a very self-reported happiness of the citizenry
interestingand eye-openinginquiryinto thestate with the following serious ‘concerns’ of
of human happinessin theworld.To understand today:
the‘shift’ which is expected to take place among (a) uncertaintiesand anxietiesare high,
policymakers around the world in coming years,
(b) socialandeconomicinequalitieshave
it will be better to lift some ideasfrom the first widenedconsiderably,
WHR
.'6
(c) social trustisin decline,and
(i) This is an age of stark contradictions.
(d) confidenceingovernmentisatanall-
While at the one hand the world timelow.
enjoys technologies of unimaginable
Perhapsfor thesereasons, lifesatisfaction
sophistication at the other hand, at least
one billion people ae living without
in theUSAhasremained nearlyconstant
enough to eat . The world economy during the decades of rising Gross
National Product (GNP) percapita.
is propelled to soaring new heights
of productivity through ongoing (iii) The realities of poverty, anxiety,
technological and organisational environmental degradation, and
advances; yet it is relentlessly destroying unhappiness in the midst of great plenty
the natural environment in the process. shouldnotberegardedasmerecuriosities.
Countries achieve great progress in They require our urgent attention, and
economicdevelopmentasconventionally especially so at this juncture in human
measured; yet along the way countries history.Forwehaveentereda new phase
succumbtonewcrisesofobesity,smoking, of the world, termed the Anthropocene17
diabetes, depression, and other ills of
bytheworld’sEarthsystemscientists.The
16. J.F.Helliwell,R.Layard&J.Sachs(Eds.),WorldHappinessReport-2012,EarthInstitute,NewYork,USA,2012.
17. TheAnthropoceneisa newlyinventedtermthatcombinestwoGreekwords:'anthropo'for human;and 'cene'for
new,asina newgeologicalepoch.TheAnthropoceneisthenewepochinwhichhumanity,throughitstechnological
prowessandpopulationof7billion,hasbecomethemajordriverofchangesofEarth'sphysicalsystems,includingthe
climate,carboncycle,watercycle,nitrogencycleandbiodiversity.

--- PAGE 69 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness i 2.13
Anthropocene will necessarily reshape On the opposite end of the income
our societies. If we continue mindlessly spectrum, for most individuals in the
alongthecurrenteconomictrajectory,we high-incomeworld,thebasicdeprivations
risk underminingtheEarth’slifesupport have been vanquished. There is enough
—
systems food supplies, clean water and food, shelter, basic amenities (such as
—
stable climate necessary for human clean water andsanitation),and clothing
health and even survival in some places. to meet their daily needs. In fact, there
Inyearsordecades,conditionsoflifemay is a hugesurfeit of amenities above basic
become dire in several fragile regions of needs.Poor peoplewouldswapwith rich
the world. We are already experiencing people in a heartbeat. Yet all is not well.
deterioration of life support systems in Theconditionsofaffluencehavecreated
the dry lands of the Horn of Africa and theirownsetoftraps.
partsofCentralAsia.
Most importantly, the lifestyles of
On the other hand, if we act wisely, the rich imperil thesurvival of the poor.
we can protect the Earth while raising Human-induced climate change is
qualityof life broadlyaround the world. already hitting the poorest regions and
Wecan do this byadopting lifestylesand claiminglivesandlivelihoods.Itistelling
technologies that improve happiness (or that in much of the rich world, affluent
life satisfaction) while reducing human populationsaresoseparatedfromthepoor
damage to the environment.Sustainable that there is little recognition, practical
Development is the term given to the or moral, of the adverse spillovers (or
combination of human well-being, ‘externalities’) from their own behaviour.
social inclusion and environmental (v) Affluence has also created its own set of
sustainability. There is no doubt in afflictions and addictions (problems) —
concluding that the‘quest for happiness’ obesity, adult- onset diabetes, tobacco-
is intimately linked to the ‘quest for related illnesses, eating disorders such
sustainabledevelopment’.
as anorexia and bulimia, psychosocial
(iv) In an impoverished society, the urge disorders, and addictions to shopping,
for material gain typically makes a lot TV and gambling, are all examples
of sense. Higher household income (or of disorders of development. So too
higherpercapitaGNP)generallysignifies is the loss of community, the decline
an improvement in the life conditions of social trust and the rising anxiety
of the poor. The poor suffer from dire levels associated with the vagaries of the
deprivations of various kinds: lack of modern globalised economy, including
adequate food supplies, remunerative thethreatsof unemploymentor episodes
jobs, access to health care, safe homes, ofillnessnot covered byhealthinsurance
safewaterandsanitation,andeducational in the United States (and many other
opportunities.As incomes rise from very countries).
low levels, human well-being improves. (vi) Higher average incomes do not
Notsurprisingly, the poor report a rising necessarily improve average well-being,
satisfactionwiththeirlivesastheirmeager the US being a clear case in point, as
incomesincrease.
noted famously by Professor Richard

--- PAGE 70 ---
2.14 < IndianEconomy
—
Easterlin18 where GNP per capita has rises, but then at least partly return
risen by a factor of three since I960, to earlier levels as theyadaptto their
while measures of average happiness newhigher income.
have remained essentially unchanged (vii) These phenomena put a clear limit on
over the half-century . The increased US the extent to which rich countries can
outputhascausedmassiveenvironmental become happier through the simple
damages, notably through greenhouse device of economicgrowth. In fact, there
gas concentrations and human-induced arestillothergeneralreasonstodoubtthe
climate change, without doing much formula of ever rising GNP per person
at all to raise the well-being even of as the route to happiness. While higher
Americans. Thus, we don’t have a trade income may raise happiness to some
offbetweenshort-rungainstowell-being extent, the quest for higher income may
versuslong-runcoststotheenvironment; actuallyreduce one’s happiness. In other
we have a pure loss to the environment words,itmaybenicetohavemoremoney
withoutoffsettingshort- termgains. but notso niceto craveit.Psychologists
The paradox that Easterlin noted in the have found repeatedly that individuals
US was that at any particular time richer who put a high premium on higher
individualsare happier than poorer ones, incomes generally are less happy and
but over timethesocietydid not become more vulnerable to other psychological
happierasitbecamericher.Thisisdueto ills than individuals who do not crave
fourreasons: higherincomes.AristotleandtheBuddha
(a) Individuals compare themselves to advisedhumanitytofollowamiddlepath
others. They are happier when they between asceticism on the one side and
are higher on the social (or income) cravingmaterialgoodson theother.
ladder. Yet when everybody rises (viii) Another problem is the creation of new
together, relative status remains material ‘wants’ through the incessant
unchanged. advertising of products using powerful
(b) Thegainshavenotbeenevenlyshared, imagery and other means of persuasion.
but have gone disproportionately to Since the imagery is ubiquitous on all
those at the top of the income and of our digital devices, the stream of
educationdistribution. advertising is more relentless than ever
(c) Theothersocietalfactors — insecurity, before. Advertising is now a business of
around US$500billion peryear.Itsgoal
loss of social trust, declining
confidence in government — have is to overcomesatiety bycreatingwants
and longings where none previously
counteracted any benefits felt from
higher incomes. existed. Advertisers and marketers do
this in part by preying on psychological
(d) Individuals mayexperience an initial
weaknesses and unconscious urges.
jumpinhappinesswhentheirincome
18. Amongtheforemost contributor tothe Happiness Economics, Easterlin is particularly known for his1974 article
'DoesEconomicGrowthImprovetheHumanLot?SomeEmpiricalEvidence'(hisidea,todayknownastheEasterlin
Paradox,wasproposedbyhiminthisarticle).Hereheconcludedthatcontrarytoexpectation,happinessatanational
leveldoesnotincreasewithwealthoncebasicneedsarefulfilled.

--- PAGE 71 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness i 2.15
Cigarettes, caffeine, sugar, and trans¬ individual’s preferences as consumers
fats all cause cravings if not outright are a given or change in ways actually
addictions. Fashions are sold through anticipatedin advance bytheindividuals
increasingly explicit sexual imagery. themselves. Some economists even say
Product lines are generally sold by that drug addicts have acted ‘rationally’,
associating the products with high social consciously trading off the early benefits
statusrather thanwith real needs. of drug use with the later high toll of
(ix) The thinking of becoming happier by
addiction.
becoming richer is challenged by the (xi) We understand that we need a very
law of diminishing marginal utility of different model of humanity, one in
—
income19 after a certain point, thegains which we are a complicated interplay
are very small. This means that poor of emotions and rational thought,
people benefit far more than rich people unconscious and conscious decision
¬
froman addeddollarofincome.Thisisa making, fast and slow thinking. Many
goodreasonwhytax -and-transfersystems of our decisions areled byemotions and
among high-income OECD countries instincts, and only later rationalised by
on balance take in net revenues from conscious thought. Our decisions are
high-income households and make net easily“primed” byassociations, imagery,
transfers to low-income households. Put social context and advertising. We are
another way, theinequalityof household inconsistent or “irrational” in sequential
income is systematically lower net of choices,failingto meetbasicstandardsof
taxes and transfers than before taxes and rational consistency. And we are largely
transfers.20 unaware of our own mental apparatus,
(x) The Western economist’s logic of ever so we easily fall into traps and mistakes.
higherGNPisbuiltonavisionofhumanity Addicts do not anticipate their future
completely at variance with the wisdom pain; we spend now and suffer the
ofthesages,theresearchofpsychologists, consequences of bankruptcy later; we
and the practices of advertisers. The break our diets now because we aren’t
economist assumes that individuals are thinking clearlyabout the consequences.
‘rational decision-makers’ who know We also understand (again!) that we are
what they want and how to get it, or socialanimalsthroughand through.We
to get as close to it as possible given learn through imitation, and gain our
their budget. Individuals care largely happiness through meeting social norms
about themselves and derive pleasure and having a sense of belonging to the
.
mainly through their consumption. The community
19. SupposethatapoorhouseholdatRs.1,000incomerequiresanextraRs.100toraiseitslifesatisfaction(orhappiness)
byonenotch.Arich householdatRs.1,000,000income(onethousandtimesasmuchasthepoorhousehold)would
needonethousandtimesmoremoney,orRs.100,000,toraiseitswell-beingbythesameonenotch.Gainsinincome
havetobeofequalproportionstohouseholdincometohavethesamebenefitin unitsoflifesatisfaction.
20. OnanaverageacrosstheOECDcountries,cashtransfersand incometaxesreduceinequalitybyonethird.Poverty
isaround60percentlowerthan itwould bewithouttaxesand benefits.Evenamongtheworking-agepopulation,
governmentredistributionreducespovertybyabout50percent(OECD,2008).

--- PAGE 72 ---
2.16 I IndianEconomy
(xii) Human beings feel the pain of others, tiny fraction of the $500 billion or so
and react viscerally when others are sad spent on advertising each year to help
or injured.Weeven haveaset of‘mirror individuals and families to understand
neurons’thatenableustofeelthingsfrom better their own motivations, wants and
thepointofviewofothers.Allofthisgives needs as consumers? Should we consider
us a remarkable capacity to cooperate some parts of our society to be “off
evenwithstrangers,andeven when there bounds” to the profit motive, so that
is little chance of reward or reciprocity, we can foster the spirit ofcooperation,
and to punish ‘non-cooperators’, even trust,andcommunity?Arecentanalyst21
when imposing punishment on others is of Finland’s school system, for example,
costlyor puts usat riskourselves. writes that Finland’s excellence (ranking
Of course there are limits to such nearthetopofinternationalcomparisons
cooperation and fellow feeling. We also instudentperformance)hasbeenachieved
cheat, bluff, deceive, break our word, by fostering a spirit of community and
and kill members of an out -group. We equality in the schools. This is in sharp
engageinidentitypolitics,actingascruel contrasttotheeducationreformstrategy
to outsiders as we are loving to our own atworkin theUS, wheretheemphasisis
group.All theselessons of human nature put on testing, measurement, and teacher
matter more than ever, more even than
payaccordingtostudenttestperformance.
whentheBuddhataughthumanityabout
ATTHEEND
theillusionsoftransientpleasures,andthe
Greeks warned us against the tempting TheintrospectingstudiesoftheWHR2012simply
Sirensongsthatcouldpullusoffourlife’s conclude that thereareenough reasons to believe
course. For today we have more choices that we need to re-think the economic sources
than ever before. In the ancient world, of well-being, moreso even in the rich countries
thechoicefacingmost of humanitymost than in the poor ones. High-income countries
—
of the time was little choice indeed to havelargelyendedthescourgesofpoverty,hunger
work hard to secure enough to eat, and anddisease.Poorcountriesrightlyyearn todoso.
even then to face the risk of famine and But after the end of poverty, what comes next?
deathfrom bad weather or bad luck. What are the pathways to well-being when basic
(xiii) Today, we face a set of real choices. economic needs are no longer the main drivers
Should the world pursue GNP to the of social change? What will guide humanity in
point of environmental ruin, even the Anthropocene: advertising, sustainability,
when incrementalgains in GNP are not community or something else? What is the path
increasing much (or at all) the happiness to happiness?
of affluent societies? Should we cravefor Most peopleagreethatsocietiesshouldfoster
for higher personal incomes at the cost the happiness of their citizens. The founding
of the community and social trust? fathers of the US recognised theinalienable right
Should our governments spend even a to the pursuit of happiness. British philosophers
21 . PasiSahlberg,‘EducationPoliciesforRaisingStudentLearning:TheFinnishApproach;Journalof EducationPolicy,
22(2),March2007,WorldBank,WashingtonDC,pp . 147-171 .

--- PAGE 73 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness t 2.17
talked about the greatest good for the greatest to overall satisfaction or frustration with one’s
number. Bhutan has famously adopted the goal place in society. Higher income, better health
of Gross National Happiness (GNH) rather of mind and body, and a high degree of trust in
than Gross National Product. China champions one’scommunity(‘socialcapital’)allcontributeto
a harmonious society. Yet most people probably high lifesatisfaction; poverty, ill health and deep
believethathappinessisintheeyeofthebeholder, divisions in the communityall contribute to low
an individual’s choice, something to be pursued lifesatisfaction.
individually rather than as a matter of national Happiness differs systematically across
policy. Happiness seems far too subjective, too societies and over time, for reasons that are
vague,toserveasatouchstoneforanation’sgoals, identifiable,andevenalterablethroughthewaysin
muchlessitspolicycontent .Thatindeedhasbeen which public policies are designed and delivered.
the traditional view. Yet the evidence is rapidly It makessense, in other words, to pursue policies
changingthisview.
toraisethepublic’shappinessasmuchasitdoesto
A generation of studies by psychologists, raise the public’s national income. Bhutan is on
economists, pollsters,sociologistsandothershave tosomethingpathbreakinganddeeplyinsightful.
shown that happiness, thoughindeed asubjective And the world is increasingly taking notice. A
experience,can beobjectivelymeasured,assessed, household’s income counts for life satisfaction,
—
correlated with observable brain functions, and but only in a limited way other things matter
related to the characteristics of an individual more:
and the society. Asking people whether they (i) communitytrust,
are happy or satisfied with their lives, offers (ii) mentaland physical health,and
important information about the society. It can
(iii) thequalityofgovernanceand ruleoflaw
signalunderlyingcrisesorhiddenstrengths.Itcan
suggesttheneedforchange.Suchistheideaofthe
Raisingincomescanraisehappiness,especially
in poor societies, but fostering cooperation and
emergingscientificstudyofhappiness,whetherof
community can do even more, especially in rich
individualsandthechoicestheymake,orofentire
societiesthathavealowmarginalutilityofincome.
societiesand thereportsofthecitizenryregarding
— Itisnoaccidentthatthehappiestcountriesin the
life satisfaction the WHR2012summarises the
fascinatingandemergingstoryofthesestudieson world tend to be high-income countries that also
two broad measurementsof happiness: have a high degree of social equality, trust and
quality of governance. In recent years, Denmark
(i) the upsanddownsofdailyemotionsand
hasbeentoppingthelist.Andit’snoaccidentthat
(ii) an individual’soverallevaluation oflife
the US has not experienced riseoflifesatisfaction
The former is sometimes called ‘affective for halfa century,aperiodin whichinequality has
happiness,’and thelatter‘evaluativehappiness.’ soared, socialtrust hasdeclined,andthepublic has
This is important to know that both kinds lostfaithinitsgovernment .
of happiness have predictable causes that reflect It is, of course, one thing to identify the
variousfacetsofour human natureand oursocial correlates of happiness, and quite another to use
life.Affectivehappinesscapturestheday- to -dayjoy public policies to bring about a society-wide
of friendship, time with family, and sex, or the rise in happiness (or lifesatisfaction).That is the
downsides of long work commutes and sessions goal of Bhutan’s GNH, and the motivation of
with one’s boss. Evaluative happiness measures an increasing number of governments dedicated
very different dimensions of life, those that lead to measuring happiness and life satisfaction in a

--- PAGE 74 ---
2.18 < IndianEconomy
reliable and systematic way over time. The most threetimeslesslikelywithasimplechange
basic goal is that by measuring happiness across in the periodicity of meetings between
a society and over time, countries can avoid microfinanceclientsand their repayment
1happiness traps' such as in the USA in recent groups to weeklyrather than monthly.
decades, where GNP may rise relentlessly while (cid:127) Researchshowedthatboysfrombackward
lifesatisfactionstagnatesor evendeclines. classeswere justasgoodatsolvingpuzzles
The idea of GNH in Bhutan tells a story of as boys from the upper castes when caste
exploration and progress since its King declared identity was not revealed. However, in
(1972) the goal of happiness over the goal of mixed- caste groups, revealing the boys’
wealth. For Bhutan happiness became much castes before puzzle-solving sessions
more than a guidepost or inspiration; it became created a significant “caste gap” in
an organising principle for governance and achievementwiththeboysfrombackward
policymaking as well. The ‘GNH Index’ is the classes underperforming by 23 per cent
firstofitskindin theworld,aserious,thoughtful (making caste salient to the test takers
andsustained attempt to measure happiness, and invoked identities, whichin turn affected
use those measurements to chart the course of performance,as per thereport).
public policy. It is believed that in coming years The Reporthas recommended that the
many more countries in the world will be taking presence of a stereotype can contribute
cluesfrom Bhutanandtherecentlypublishedtwo to measured abilitydifferences, which in
World Happiness Reports. turn reinforce the stereotype and serve
BEHAvioUR asa basis for exclusion, in a vicious cycle
| INSIGHTS INTOHUMAN — finding ways to break this cycle could
increase the well-being of marginalised
The World Bank in its latest report (World
individualsenormously.
Development Report 2015: Mind, Society, and
Behaviour) said that development policies SOCIALNORMS ,CULTUREAND
become more effective when combined with
DEVELOPMENT
insights into human behaviour. It further adds
that policy decisions informed by behavioural Economic development depends not only on
economics can deliver impressive improvements gettingfiscalpolicy,monetarypolicyand taxation
in promoting development and well-being in right; but it is also rooted in human psychology,
—
society. It sitessome examples from India in the sociology, culture and norms in the economics
areasof healthcareandeducation: profession, there has been a bit of resistance to
(cid:127) Open defecation dropped 11 per cent this because it is sort of giving ground to the
fromveryhighlevelsafteraCommunity- neighbouring disciplines.22 The recent World
LedTotalSanitation (CLTS) programme Development Report (WDR) of 2013 focuses
was combined in some chosen villages on the behavioural and social foundations of
with the standard approach of subsidies development,and has been verywell received.
for toilet construction and information Government documents (generally, hard-
on thetransmission ofdiseases. nosed), usually, make no mention of the role of
(cid:127) Thelikelihoodofdefaultonloansbecame socialnormsandcultureinpromotingdevelopment
22. KaushikBasu,ChiefEconomist,WorldBank,Livemint,N.Delhi,February3,2015.

--- PAGE 75 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness i 2.19
and economic efficiency. However, there is now
by cleaning up the city and removing
a growing body of literature that demonstrates graffitifrom thewalls. NewYork’s police
how certain social norms and cultural practices
department took a decision to deter
are vital ingredients for economic efficiency and
vandalism and graffiti that scar public
growth. Groups and societies that are known to spaces. This act of making the cityscape
be honest and trustworthytend to do better than more aesthetic somehow made potential
societies that do not have this reputation. There criminalsless proneto crime.
have been broad cross-country studies and also
(cid:127) One sees casual evidence of this in the
laboratory experiments that illustrate this. More
behaviour of Delhites using themetro . It
generally, what is being argued is that a nation’s
hasbeenwidelynoted that peoplebehave
successdependsofcourseonitsresources, human
better when theytravelon Delhi’swell-
capital and economic policies, for instance fiscal
maintained metro (postponing their bad
and monetary policies, but also on the cultural
and social norms that permeatesociety.Societies behaviour to when they come up to the
surfaceagain,somewouldadd).
that are endowed with personal integrity and
trustworthiness have the natural advantage that
Allthisisinkeepingwiththeinfluentialbroken
no third party is required to enforce contracts . windows theory in sociology, which maintains
For outsiders the mere knowledge that a
that, ifwecontrollowlevel, anti-social behaviour
particular society is trustworthy is reason to do
and takesmallstepsto improvetheenvironment,
more business and tradewith it.One reason why this will have a natural deterrent effect on larger
these ‘social’ causes of development do not get criminal behaviour and acts of corruption. Also,
enough recognition in theliteratureon economic the sheer recognition and awareness that some
policyis that thescienceof howtheseeconomics-
collectivequalitiesofcitizens,suchashonestyand
friendly social qualities are acquired is not yet trustworthiness, enable the entire society to do
fully understood. Fortunately, the new discipline well prompts individuals to adopt those qualities
ofbehaviouraleconomicsisbeginningtogive us
andovercomethe ubiquitousfree-rider problem.
some insights into the formation of customs and There is a growing literature24 in economics
behaviour:23 arguing that pro-social behaviour, which
(cid:127) It is, for instance, known that buildings includes altruism and trustworthiness, is innate to
and office spaces which are cleaner and human beings and, moreover, forms an essential
ingredient for the efficient functioning of
aesthetically better maintained result
in individuals being more honest and economies. In other words, human beings have a
desisting corrupt activity. It is almost as naturalabilitytoforego personalgainsforthesake
if we have a mental inclination not to
ofother peopleor becausethatiswhatisrequired
defile a good ambience through acts of because of a promise the person had made. This
corruption. trait may well have evolutionary roots but its
existence is now well demonstrated in laboratory
(cid:127) New York city’s notorious high crime
testsbyrecentstudies.
was controlled, among other things,
23. EconomicSurvey2009 - 10 , MinistryofFinance,Gol,NDelhi,p.34 - 35.
24. Overhalfadozencontemporaryworkshavebeencited asreferencesbytheEconomicSurvey2010 - 11 , Ministryof
Finance,Gol,NDelhi,p.40)

--- PAGE 76 ---
2.20 < IndianEconomy
VALUESANDECONOMICS people believe in. That is what electoral politics
Thereisresearch25in psychologyandevolutionary is all about.An important reason whythisgotso
biologywhichshowsthatmorality,altruism,and little attention in the past is because so much of
other-regarding values are an innate part of the traditionaleconomicswaswrittenasif thesenon ¬
human mind, even though the social setting in
economicfacetsoflifedidnotmatter .Butwenow
which a person lives can nurture or stunt these know that a market economy cannot function if
traits.However,therecognitionthatthesehuman people are totallyself serving. While self-interest
and moral qualities can have a large impact is a major driver of economic growth, it is
on economic development came relatively late
importanttorecognisethathonesty,integrity,and
to economics. Hence, the literature on this is trustworthiness constitute the cement that binds
relativelyrecent and brief. In fact, recent research society. At times economists treated these social
shows that having a few ‘good’ human beings in norms, preferences and customs as unalterable. If
society can give rise to dynamics through which that were so, there would not be much point in
weend up with an overall bettersociety.Thereis analysing their effect. But wedo know that these
also evidence thatsocial normsand habits that at qualities in a people can be changed. Honesty
first sight seem ingrained in a societycan change and integrity can be nurtured and aversion to
over short periods of time. By this argument it is corruptioncan beshored up.
possiblefor a countryto nurtureand develop the If these traits are absent or inadequate in a
kinds ofsocial norms that enable a more vibrant nation, it is likely that that nation will stagnate
economy. and remain in a chaotic poverty trap . Take for
Intalkingaboutanation’seconomicprogress, instance, contracts which enable markets to
allattention,includingbothpraiseandcriticism,is develop and form the basis of economic life. If
usuallyfocusedonthegovernment .Itis,however, thecontractualsystem in a nation isso weak that
importanttorecognisethatmuchalsodependson whena bankgivesa 20-year mortgageto a person
civilsociety, the firms, the farmers, and ordinary for buying a house, there is high risk of default,
citizens. The social norms and collective beliefs the implication of this is not that banks in this
that shape the behaviour of these agents play an country will make large losses. The implication
important rolein howa nationdoes. is that banks will not give loans; and the housing
marketwillremainseverelyunderdevelopedandthe
Honesty, punctuality, the propensityto keep
totalnumberofhouseswillbefewandfarbetween.
promises, the attitude towards corruption are
mattersshaped in great part by norms and social Enforcing complicated or large contracts,
beliefs and the behaviour patterns can become especially ones protracted over a long period of
habitual. Moreover, in a democracy like India, time, is the responsibility of the state . The state
whatcanbedonebygovernmentdependsingreat provides the laws and enforcement to enable
measure on how ordinary people think and what people to sign contracts . However, economiclife
25. SeveralrecentliteraturehavebeenquotedbytheEconomicSurvey2011-12,Ministryof Finance,Gol,NDelhi,p.44:
(i) Fukuyama,F.(1996),Trust:TheSocialVirtuesandtheCreationofProsperity,FreePress,NewYork.
(ii) Guha,A.S.andB.Guha,'ThePersistenceofGoodness,'JournalofInstitutionalandTheoreticalEconomics,2012.
(iii) Hauser,M.D.,MoralMinds,HarperCollins,NewYork,2012.
(iv) Hashimoto,T.,'JapaneseClocksandtheHistoryofPunctualityinModernJapan,'EastAsianScience,Technology,
andSociety,vol.2,2008.

--- PAGE 77 ---
Growth,DevelopmentandHappiness > 2.21
isfullofeveryday‘contracts’(forexample, youlet —
the economy like running the stock market or
me ride in your taxi, and I payyou at theend of settingtherulesof marketcompetition.
it; I payyou moneynowandyou paint myhouse
Further, basic literacy and better education
over the next two days; or you paint my house
are helpful since people can then, on their own,
over the next two days and I payyou after that).
reason and reach these conclusions. Literacy has
In theseeverydaysituationsit is too cumbersome
the added value that it implies ordinary people
to bring in the state and the law courts . Here
willdemand policieswhicharetrulybetter, rather
the main guarantor has to be people’s personal
than those that merelylook good on thesurface.
integrityandtrustworthiness.Societiesthathave
And, in a democraticsetting like India, this will
successfully nurtured these qualities have done
incentivise politicians to adopt better policies.
well;societiesthathavedonepoorlyonthese,tend
Finally, if the political leaders and policymakers
to do poorlyin termsofeconomicprogress.
act as role models in terms of these qualities of
It is not known precisely how these values honesty, integrity and trustworthiness, that can
can be inculcated in society. But, hopefully, set the ball rolling. Inclusion of the behavioural
writing about their importance will catalyse
dimension of human existence in policymaking
change, as ordinary people realise that for
has potential to play a huge role in promoting
economicadvancement these socialqualities areas well-being.
important as policies that concern directly with

--- PAGE 79 ---
C H A P T E R
I
-
Sa & C ' r :' \ , v k
ft
It i
. *
1
EVOLUTION
*
i
OF THE INDIAN
M
-
ECONOMY
After 1757,whentheEastIndiaCompany
took over the governance ofBengal, the
<=> TheBackground
British relationship with India, became
^ PrimeMovingForce-Agriculture exploitative, as exports to Britain and
vs.Industry
opium exports to China werefinanced
Planned andMixedEconomy
out of the tax revenue from Bengal .
<=t> Emphasisonthe PublicSector
There is not much evidence ofsignificant
transferofEuropeantechnologytoAsia . To
understandwhy, it is useful to scrutinise
theexperienceofChinaandIndia,asthey
accountedfor three-quarters ofthe Asian
.
population and GDPin 1500AD *
*SeeAngusMaddison,GrowthandInteractionintheWorldEconomy:
TheRootsofModernity,TheAEIPress,WashingtonDC,2005,p.60.

--- PAGE 80 ---
3.2 < IndianEconomy
India remained a continent of illiterate peasants
|
THE BACKGROUND under British rule. At the time of Independence,
itsliteracywasonly17percentwith32.5yearsof
The economic profile of India was in complete
distress at the time of independence. Being a
lifeexpectancyat birth.3
IndustrialisationofIndiawasalsoneglectedby
typical case of colonial economy, India was —
serving a purpose of development not for herself
thecolonisers theinfrastructurewasnotbuiltto
but a foreign land — the United Kingdom. Both industrialiseIndia but toexploititsrawmaterials.
Indian capitalists who did emerge were highly
agriculture and industry were having structural
dependent on British commercial capital and
distortions while the state was playing not even
a marginal role. During the half century before manysectors of the industry were dominated by
British firms, e.g., shipping, banking, insurance,
India becameindependent, theworld was having
coal, plantation cropsand jute.4
accelerated development and expansion in its
agriculture and industry on the shoulders of the The pre-independence period was altogether
active role being played by the states, with the a period of near stagnation showing almost no
samehappeningin theUKitself.1 change in the structure of production or in the
—
There was not only the unilateral transfer of levels of productivity the aggregate real output
investible capital to Britain by the colonial state
duringthefirst halfofthe20thcenturyestimated
(the‘drain of wealth’), but the unequal exchange atless than 2 per cent a yearor less.5
wasdaybydaycripplingIndia’scommerce, trade The overall economic performance of India
and the thriving handloom industry, too . The under the British rule was very low. According
colonialstate practiced policies which were great to economic statistian Angus Maddison, there
impediments in the process of development in was no per capita growth in India from 1600 to
—
the country . Throughout the colonial rule, the 1870 per capita growth was a meagre 0.2 per
economicvision thatthestatehad wastoincrease
centfrom1870to1947,comparedwith1percent
India’s capacity to export primary products, in the UK.6The per capita incomes of Rs.18 for
and increase the purchase/import of the British 1899 and Rs.39.5 for 1895 in current pricessay
manufactured goods and raise revenues to meet thetruestoryof theabject povertyIndian masses
the drain of capital as well as meet the revenue
werefacedwith.7Therepeatedfaminesanddisease
requirementsoftheimperialdefence.2 epidemicsduringthesecondhalfofthenineteenth
Thesocialsector was a neglected area for the
centuryand thefirst halfofthetwentiethcentury
British rulerswhich had a negativeimpact on the
show thegreatest socio-economic irresponsibility
production and productivity of the economy. and neglectof the Britishgovernment in India at
1. BipanChandra,MridulaMukherjeeandAdityaMukherjee,IndiaAfterIndependence , PenguinBooks,N.Delhi,p.341.
2. Bipan Chandra,'TheColonialLegacy’in BimalJalan (Ed.) The Indian Economy:Problemsand Prospects,Penguin
Books,N.Delhi,RevisedEdition,2004,p.5.
3. B.R.Tomlinson,TheEconomyof ModernIndia1860 - 1970 , CambridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge,1993,p.7.
4. AngusMaddison,TheWorldEconomy:AMillennialPerspective , OECD,Paris,2001,p.116.
5. A. Vaidyanathan, 'The Indian Economy Since Independence (1947 - 90)' in Dharma Kumar (ed.), The Cambridge
EconomicHistoryof India , Vol.il,CambridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge,England,ExpandedEdition,2005,p.947.
6. AngusMaddison, TheWorldEconomyp.116.
7. Therespectivedataof DigbyandAtkinson havebeenquoted bySumitSarkar,ModernIndia1885 - 1947 , Macmillan,
N.Delhi,1983,p.42.