--- PAGE 200 ---
Diversity is not only a characteristic of living organisms but
Chapter 11
also of content in biology textbooks. Biology is presented either
Organisms and Populations
as botany, zoology and microbiology or as classical and
modern. The latter is a euphemism for molecular aspects of
Chapter 12
biology. Luckily we have many threads which weave the
Ecosystem
different areas of biological information into a unifying
principle. Ecology is one such thread which gives us a holistic
Chapter 13
perspective to biology. The essence of biological understanding
Biodiversity and Conservation
is to know how organisms, while remaining an individual,
interact with other organisms and physical habitats as a group
and hence behave like organised wholes, i.e., population,
community, ecosystem or even as the whole biosphere.
Ecology explains to us all this. A particular aspect of this is the
study of anthropogenic environmental degradation and the
socio-political issues it has raised. This unit describes as well as
takes a critical view of the above aspects.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 201 ---
Ramdeo Misra is revered as the Father of Ecology in India. Born on 26 August
1908, Ramdeo Misra obtained Ph.D in Ecology (1937) under Prof. W. H. Pearsall,
FRS, from Leeds University in UK. He established teaching and research in
ecology at the Department of Botany of the Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi. His research laid the foundations for understanding of tropical
communities and their succession, environmental responses of plant
populations and productivity and nutrient cycling in tropical forest and
grassland ecosystems. Misra formulated the first postgraduate course in
ecology in India. Over 50 scholars obtained Ph. D degree under his supervision
and moved on to other universities and research institutes to initiate ecology
teaching and research across the country.
He was honoured with the Fellowships of the Indian National Science
RAMDEO MISRA
Academy and World Academy of Arts and Science, and the prestigious Sanjay
(1908-1998)
Gandhi Award in Environment and Ecology. Due to his efforts, the
Government of India established the National Committee for Environmental
Planning and Coordination (1972) which, in later years, paved the way
for the establishment of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (1984).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 202 ---
CHAPTER 11
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
11.1 Populations
Our living world is fascinatingly diverse and amazingly
complex. We can try to understand its complexity by
investigating processes at various levels of biological
organisation–macromolecules, cells, tissues, organs,
individual organisms, population, communities,
ecosystems and biomes. At any level of biological
organisation we can ask two types of questions – for
example, when we hear the bulbul singing early morning
in the garden, we may ask – ‘How does the bird sing?’
Or, ‘Why does the bird sing ?’ The ‘how-type’ questions
seek the mechanism behind the process while the ‘why-
type’ questions seek the significance of the process. For
the first question in our example, the answer might be in
terms of the operation of the voice box and the vibrating
bone in the bird, whereas for the second question the
answer may lie in the bird’s need to communicate with its
mate during breeding season. When you observe nature
around you with a scientific frame of mind you will
certainly come up with many interesting questions of both
types - Why are night-blooming flowers generally white?
How does the bee know which flower has nectar? Why
does cactus have so many thorns? How does the chick
spures recognise her own mother?, and so on.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 203 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
You have already learnt in previous classes that Ecology is a subject
which studies the interactions among organisms and between the
organism and its physical (abiotic) environment.
Ecology is basically concerned with four levels of biological
organisation – organisms, populations, communities and biomes. In this
chapter we explore ecology at population levels.
11.1 P
OPULATIONS
11.1.1 Population Attributes
In nature, we rarely find isolated, single individuals of any species; majority
of them live in groups in a well defined geographical area, share or compete
for similar resources, potentially interbreed and thus constitute a
population. Although the term interbreeding implies sexual reproduction,
a group of individuals resulting from even asexual reproduction is also
generally considered a population for the purpose of ecological studies.
All the cormorants in a wetland, rats in an abandoned dwelling, teakwood
trees in a forest tract, bacteria in a culture plate and lotus plants in a
pond, are some examples of a population. In earlier chapters you have
learnt that although an individual organism is the one that has to cope
with a changed environment, it is at the population level that natural
selection operates to evolve the desired traits. Population ecology is,
therefore, an important area because it links ecology to population genetics
and evolution.
A population has certain attributes whereas, an individual organism
does not. An individual may have births and deaths, but a population has
birth rates and death rates. In a population these rates refer to per capita
births and deaths. The rates, hence, expressed are change in numbers
(increase or decrease) with respect to members of the population. Here is an
example. If in a pond there were 20 lotus plants last year and through
reproduction 8 new plants are added, taking the current population to 28,
we calculate the birth rate as 8/20 = 0.4 offspring per lotus per year. If 4
individuals in a laboratory population of 40 fruitflies died during a specified
time interval, say a week, the death rate in the population during that period
is 4/40 = 0.1 individuals per fruitfly per week.
Another attribute characteristic of a population is sex ratio. An
individual is either a male or a female but a population has a sex ratio
(e.g., 60 per cent of the population are females and 40 per cent males).
A population at any given time is composed of individuals of
191
different ages. If the age distribution (per cent individuals of a given
age or age group) is plotted for the population, the resulting structure
is called an age pyramid (Figure 11.1). For human population, the
age pyramids generally show age distribution of males and females in
a diagram. The shape of the pyramids reflects the growth status of
the population - (a) whether it is growing, (b) stable or (c) declining.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 204 ---
BIOLOGY
Figure 11.1 Representation of age pyramids for human population
The size of the population tells us a lot about its status in the habitat.
Whatever ecological processes we wish to investigate in a population, be
it the outcome of competition with another species, the impact of a
predator or the effect of a pesticide application, we always evaluate them
in terms of any change in the population size. The size, in nature, could
be as low as <10 (Siberian cranes at Bharatpur wetlands in any year) or
go into millions (Chlamydomonas in a pond). Population size, technically
called population density (designated as N), need not necessarily be
measured in numbers only. Although total number is generally the most
appropriate measure of population density, it is in some cases either
meaningless or difficult to determine. In an area, if there are 200 carrot
grass (Parthenium hysterophorus) plants but only a single huge banyan
tree with a large canopy, stating that the population density of banyan is
low relative to that of carrot grass amounts to underestimating the
enormous role of the Banyan in that community. In such cases, the per
cent cover or biomass is a more meaningful measure of the population
size. Total number is again not an easily adoptable measure if the
population is huge and counting is impossible or very time-consuming.
If you have a dense laboratory culture of bacteria in a petri dish what is
the best measure to report its density? Sometimes, for certain ecological
investigations, there is no need to know the absolute population densities;
relative densities serve the purpose equally well. For instance, the number
of fish caught per trap is good enough measure of its total population
density in the lake. We are mostly obliged to estimate population sizes
indirectly, without actually counting them or seeing them. The tiger census
in our national parks and tiger reserves is often based on pug marks and
fecal pellets.
11.1.2 Population Growth
The size of a population for any species is not a static parameter. It keeps
192
changing with time, depending on various factors including food
availability, predation pressure and adverse weather. In fact, it is these
changes in population density that give us some idea of what is happening
to the population – whether it is flourishing or declining. Whatever might
be the ultimate reasons, the density of a population in a given habitat
during a given period, fluctuates due to changes in four basic processes,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 205 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
two of which (natality and immigration) contribute to an increase in
population density and two (mortality and emigration) to a decrease.
(i) Natality refers to the number of births during a given period in the
population that are added to the initial density.
(ii) Mortality is the number of deaths in the population during a given
period.
(iii) Immigration is the number of individuals of the same species that
have come into the habitat from elsewhere during the time period
under consideration.
(iv) Emigration is the number of individuals of the population who
left the habitat and gone elsewhere during the time period under
consideration.
Figure 11.2
So, if N is the population density at time t, then its density at time t +1 is
N = N + [(B + I) – (D + E)]
t+1 t
You can see from the above equation (Fig. 11.2) that population
density will increase if the number of births plus the number of immigrants 193
(B + I) is more than the number of deaths plus the number of emigrants
(D + E). Under normal conditions, births and deaths are the most
important factors influencing population density, the other two factors
assuming importance only under special conditions. For instance, if a
new habitat is just being colonised, immigration may contribute more
significantly to population growth than birth rates.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 206 ---
BIOLOGY
Growth Models : Does the growth of a population with time show any
specific and predictable pattern? We have been concerned about unbridled
human population growth and problems created by it in our country
and it is therefore natural for us to be curious if different animal
populations in nature behave the same way or show some restraints on
growth. Perhaps we can learn a lesson or two from nature on how to
control population growth.
(i) Exponential growth: Resource (food and space) availability is
obviously essential for the unimpeded growth of a population.
Ideally, when resources in the habitat are unlimited, each species
has the ability to realise fully its innate potential to grow in number,
as Darwin observed while developing his theory of natural selection.
Then the population grows in an exponential or geometric fashion.
If in a population of size N, the birth rates (not total number but per
capita births) are represented as b and death rates (again, per capita
death rates) as d, then the increase or decrease in N during a unit
time period t (dN/dt) will be
dN/dt = (b – d) × N
Let (b–d) = r, then
dN/dt = rN
The r in this equation is called the ‘intrinsic rate of
natural increase’ and is a very important parameter
chosen for assessing impacts of any biotic or abiotic
factor on population growth.
To give you some idea about the magnitude of r
values, for the Norway rat the r is 0.015, and for
the flour beetle it is 0.12. In 1981, the r value for
human population in India was 0.0205. Find out
what the current r value is. For calculating it, you
need to know the birth rates and death rates.
The above equation describes the exponential or
geometric growth pattern of a population (Figure
Figure 11.3 Population growth curve
11.3) and results in a J-shaped curve when we plot
a when responses are not
N in relation to time. If you are familiar with basic
limiting the growth, plot is
exponential, calculus, you can derive the integral form of the
b when responses are limiting exponential growth equation as
the growth, plot is logistic,
N = N ert
K is carrying capacity t 0
where
194 N = Population density after time t
t
N = Population density at time zero
0
r = intrinsic rate of natural increase
e = the base of natural logarithms (2.71828)
Any species growing exponentially under unlimited resource
conditions can reach enormous population densities in a short time.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 207 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
Darwin showed how even a slow growing animal like elephant could
reach enormous numbers in the absence of checks. The following is
an anecdote popularly narrated to demonstrate dramatically how
fast a huge population could build up when growing exponentially.
The king and the minister sat for a chess game. The king, confident
of winning the game, was ready to accept any bet proposed by the
minister. The minister humbly said that if he won, he wanted only
some wheat grains, the quantity of which is to be calculated by
placing on the chess board one grain in Square 1, then two in Square
2, then four in Square 3, and eight in Square 4, and so on, doubling
each time the previous quantity of wheat on the next square until all the
64 squares were filled. The king accepted the seemingly silly bet and
started the game, but unluckily for him, the minister won. The king felt that
fulfilling the minister’s bet was so easy. He started with a single
grain on the first square and proceeded to fill the other squares
following minister’s suggested procedure, but by the time he covered
half the chess board, the king realised to his dismay that all the
wheat produced in his entire kingdom pooled together would still be
inadequate to cover all the 64 squares. Now think of a tiny
Paramecium starting with just one individual and through binary
fission, doubling in numbers every day, and imagine what a mind-
boggling population size it would reach in 64 days. (provided food
and space remain unlimited)
(ii) Logistic growth: No population of any species in nature has at its
disposal unlimited resources to permit exponential growth. This
leads to competition between individuals for limited resources.
Eventually, the ‘fittest’ individual will survive and reproduce. The
governments of many countries have also realised this fact and
introduced various restraints with a view to limit human population
growth. In nature, a given habitat has enough resources to support
a maximum possible number, beyond which no further growth is
possible. Let us call this limit as nature’s carrying capacity (K) for
that species in that habitat.
A population growing in a habitat with limited resources show
initially a lag phase, followed by phases of acceleration and
deceleration and finally an asymptote, when the population density
reaches the carrying capacity. A plot of N in relation to time (t)
results in a sigmoid curve. This type of population growth is called 195
Verhulst-Pearl Logistic Growth (Figure 11.3) and is described by
the following equation:
K −N
dN/dt = rN 
 K 
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 208 ---
BIOLOGY
Where N = Population density at time t
r = Intrinsic rate of natural increase
K = Carrying capacity
Since resources for growth for most animal populations are finite
and become limiting sooner or later, the logistic growth model is
considered a more realistic one.
Gather from Government Census data the population figures
for India for the last 100 years, plot them and check which growth
pattern is evident.
11.1.3 Life History Variation
Populations evolve to maximise their reproductive fitness, also called
Darwinian fitness (high r value), in the habitat in which they live. Under
a particular set of selection pressures, organisms evolve towards the most
efficient reproductive strategy. Some organisms breed only once in their
lifetime (Pacific salmon fish, bamboo) while others breed many times
during their lifetime (most birds and mammals). Some produce a large
number of small-sized offspring (Oysters, pelagic fishes) while others
produce a small number of large-sized offspring (birds, mammals). So,
which is desirable for maximising fitness? Ecologists suggest that life
history traits of organisms have evolved in relation to the constraints
imposed by the abiotic and biotic components of the habitat in which
they live. Evolution of life history traits in different species is currently an
important area of research being conducted by ecologists.
11.1.4 Population Interactions
Can you think of any natural habitat on earth that is inhabited just by a
single species? There is no such habitat and such a situation is even
inconceivable. For any species, the minimal requirement is one more
species on which it can feed. Even a plant species, which makes its own
food, cannot survive alone; it needs soil microbes to break down the organic
matter in soil and return the inorganic nutrients for absorption. And then,
how will the plant manage pollination without an animal agent? It is
obvious that in nature, animals, plants and microbes do not and cannot
live in isolation but interact in various ways to form a biological
community. Even in minimal communities, many interactive linkages
exist, although all may not be readily apparent.
196
Interspecific interactions arise from the interaction of populations of
two different species. They could be beneficial, detrimental or neutral
(neither harm nor benefit) to one of the species or both. Assigning a ‘+’
sign for beneficial interaction, ‘-’ sign for detrimental and 0 for neutral
interaction, let us look at all the possible outcomes of interspecific
interactions (Table11.1).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 209 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
Table 11.1 : Population Interactions
Species A Species B Name of Interaction
+ + Mutualism
– – Competition
+ – Predation
+ – Parasitism
+ 0 Commensalism
– 0 Amensalism
Both the species benefit in mutualism and both lose in competition in
their interactions with each other. In both parasitism and predation only
one species benefits (parasite and predator, respectively) and the interaction
is detrimental to the other species (host and prey, respectively).
The interaction where one species is benefitted and the other is neither
benefitted nor harmed is called commensalism. In amensalism on
the other hand one species is harmed whereas the other is
unaffected. Predation, parasitism and commensalism share a common
characteristic– the interacting species live closely together.
(i) Predation: What would happen to all the energy fixed by
autotrophic organisms if the community has no animals to eat the
plants? You can think of predation as nature’s way of transferring
to higher trophic levels the energy fixed by plants. When we think
of predator and prey, most probably it is the tiger and the deer that
readily come to our mind, but a sparrow eating any seed is no less
a predator. Although animals eating plants are categorised
separately as herbivores, they are, in a broad ecological context,
not very different from predators.
Besides acting as ‘conduits’ for energy transfer across trophic
levels, predators play other important roles. They keep prey
populations under control. But for predators, prey species could
achieve very high population densities and cause ecosystem
instability. When certain exotic species are introduced into a
geographical area, they become invasive and start spreading fast
because the invaded land does not have its natural predators. The
197
prickly pear cactus introduced into Australia in the early 1920’s
caused havoc by spreading rapidly into millions of hectares of
rangeland. Finally, the invasive cactus was brought under control
only after a cactus-feeding predator (a moth) from its natural habitat
was introduced into the country. Biological control methods adopted
in agricultural pest control are based on the ability of the predator
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 210 ---
BIOLOGY
to regulate prey population. Predators also help in maintaining
species diversity in a community, by reducing the intensity of
competition among competing prey species. In the rocky intertidal
communities of the American Pacific Coast the starfish Pisaster is
an important predator. In a field experiment, when all the starfish
were removed from an enclosed intertidal area, more than 10 species
of invertebrates became extinct within a year, because of inter-
specific competition.
If a predator is too efficient and overexploits its prey, then the
prey might become extinct and following it, the predator will also
become extinct for lack of food. This is the reason why predators in
nature are ‘prudent’. Prey species have evolved various defenses to
lessen the impact of predation. Some species of insects and frogs
are cryptically-coloured (camouflaged) to avoid being detected easily
by the predator. Some are poisonous and therefore avoided by the
predators. The Monarch butterfly is highly distasteful to its predator
(bird) because of a special chemical present in its body.
Interestingly, the butterfly acquires this chemical during its
caterpillar stage by feeding on a poisonous weed.
For plants, herbivores are the predators. Nearly 25 per cent of
all insects are known to be phytophagous (feeding on plant sap
and other parts of plants). The problem is particularly severe for
plants because, unlike animals, they cannot run away from their
predators. Plants therefore have evolved an astonishing variety of
morphological and chemical defences against herbivores. Thorns
(Acacia, Cactus) are the most common morphological means of
defence. Many plants produce and store chemicals that make the
herbivore sick when they are eaten, inhibit feeding or digestion,
disrupt its reproduction or even kill it. You must have seen the
weed Calotropis growing in abandoned fields. The plant produces
highly poisonous cardiac glycosides and that is why you never see
any cattle or goats browsing on this plant. A wide variety of chemical
substances that we extract from plants on a commercial scale
(nicotine, caffeine, quinine, strychnine, opium, etc.,) are produced
by them actually as defences against grazers and browsers.
(ii) Competition: When Darwin spoke of the struggle for existence and
survival of the fittest in nature, he was convinced that interspecific
competition is a potent force in organic evolution. It is generally
198
believed that competition occurs when closely related species
compete for the same resources that are limiting, but this is not
entirely true. Firstly, totally unrelated species could also compete
for the same resource. For instance, in some shallow South
American lakes, visiting flamingoes and resident fishes compete for
their common food, the zooplankton in the lake. Secondly,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 211 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
resources need not be limiting for competition to occur; in
interference competition, the feeding efficiency of one species might
be reduced due to the interfering and inhibitory presence of the
other species, even if resources (food and space) are abundant.
Therefore, competition is best defined as a process in which the
fitness of one species (measured in terms of its ‘r’ the intrinsic rate
of increase) is significantly lower in the presence of another species.
It is relatively easy to demonstrate in laboratory experiments, as
Gause and other experimental ecologists did, when resources are
limited the competitively superior species will eventually eliminate
the other species, but evidence for such competitive exclusion
occurring in nature is not always conclusive. Strong and persuasive
circumstantial evidence does exist however in some cases. The
Abingdon tortoise in Galapagos Islands became extinct within a
decade after goats were introduced on the island, apparently due
to the greater browsing efficiency of the goats. Another evidence for
the occurrence of competition in nature comes from what is called
‘competitive release’. A species whose distribution is restricted to a
small geographical area because of the presence of a competitively
superior species, is found to expand its distributional range
dramatically when the competing species is experimentally removed.
Connell’s elegant field experiments showed that on the rocky sea
coasts of Scotland, the larger and competitively superior barnacle
Balanus dominates the intertidal area, and excludes the smaller
barnacle Chathamalus from that zone. In general, herbivores and
plants appear to be more adversely affected by competition than
carnivores.
Gause’s ‘Competitive Exclusion Principle’ states that two closely
related species competing for the same resources cannot co-exist
indefinitely and the competitively inferior one will be eliminated
eventually. This may be true if resources are limiting, but not
otherwise. More recent studies do not support such gross
generalisations about competition. While they do not rule out the
occurrence of interspecific competition in nature, they point out
that species facing competition might evolve mechanisms that
promote co-existence rather than exclusion. One such mechanism
is ‘resource partitioning’. If two species compete for the same
resource, they could avoid competition by choosing, for instance,
199
different times for feeding or different foraging patterns. MacArthur
showed that five closely related species of warblers living on the
same tree were able to avoid competition and co-exist due to
behavioural differences in their foraging activities.
(iii) Parasitism: Considering that the parasitic mode of life ensures
free lodging and meals, it is not surprising that parasitism has
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 212 ---
BIOLOGY
evolved in so many taxonomic groups from plants to higher
vertebrates. Many parasites have evolved to be host-specific (they
can parasitise only a single species of host) in such a way that
both host and the parasite tend to co-evolve; that is, if the host
evolves special mechanisms for rejecting or resisting the parasite,
the parasite has to evolve mechanisms to counteract and neutralise
them, in order to be successful with the same host species. In
accordance with their life styles, parasites evolved special
adaptations such as the loss of unnecessary sense organs, presence
of adhesive organs or suckers to cling on to the host, loss of
digestive system and high reproductive capacity. The life cycles of
parasites are often complex, involving one or two intermediate hosts
or vectors to facilitate parasitisation of its primary host. The human
liver fluke (a trematode parasite) depends on two intermediate
hosts (a snail and a fish) to complete its life cycle. The malarial
parasite needs a vector (mosquito) to spread to other hosts.
Majority of the parasites harm the host; they may reduce the
survival, growth and reproduction of the host and reduce its
population density. They might render the host more vulnerable
to predation by making it physically weak. Do you believe that
an ideal parasite should be able to thrive within the host without
harming it? Then why didn’t natural selection lead to the
evolution of such totally harmless parasites?
Parasites that feed on the external surface of the host organism
are called ectoparasites. The most familiar examples of this group
are the lice on humans and ticks on dogs. Many marine fish are
infested with ectoparasitic copepods. Cuscuta, a parasitic plant
that is commonly found growing on hedge plants, has lost its
chlorophyll and leaves in the course of evolution. It derives its
nutrition from the host plant which it parasitises. The female
mosquito is not considered a parasite, although it needs our blood
for reproduction. Can you explain why?
In contrast, endoparasites are those that live inside the host
body at different sites (liver, kidney, lungs, red blood cells, etc.).
The life cycles of endoparasites are more complex because of their
extreme specialisation. Their morphological and anatomical
features are greatly simplified while emphasising their reproductive
200
potential.
Brood parasitism in birds is a fascinating example of
parasitism in which the parasitic bird lays its eggs in the nest of
its host and lets the host incubate them. During the course of
evolution, the eggs of the parasitic bird have evolved to resemble
the host’s egg in size and colour to reduce the chances of the host
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 213 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
bird detecting the foreign eggs and ejecting them from the nest. Try
to follow the movements of the cuckoo (koel) and the crow in your
neighborhood park during the breeding season (spring to summer)
and watch brood parasitism in action.
(iv) Commensalism: This is the interaction in which one species benefits
and the other is neither harmed nor benefited. An orchid growing
as an epiphyte on a mango branch, and barnacles growing on the
back of a whale benefit while neither the mango tree nor the whale
derives any apparent benefit. The cattle egret and grazing cattle in
close association, a sight you are most likely to catch if you live in
farmed rural areas, is a classic example of commensalism. The
egrets always forage close to where the cattle are grazing because
the cattle, as they move, stir up and flush out insects from the
vegetation that otherwise might be difficult for the egrets to find
and catch. Another example of commensalism is the interaction
between sea anemone that has stinging tentacles and the clown
fish that lives among them. The fish gets protection from predators
which stay away from the stinging tentacles. The anemone does not
appear to derive any benefit by hosting the clown fish.
(a) (b)
Figure 11.4 Mutual relationship between fig tree and wasp: (a) Fig flower is pollinated
by wasp; (b) Wasp laying eggs in a fig fruit
(v) Mutualism: This interaction confers benefits on both the interacting
201
species. Lichens represent an intimate mutualistic relationship
between a fungus and photosynthesising algae or cyanobacteria.
Similarly, the mycorrhizae are associations between fungi and the
roots of higher plants. The fungi help the plant in the absorption of
essential nutrients from the soil while the plant in turn provides the
fungi with energy-yielding carbohydrates.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 214 ---
BIOLOGY
The most spectacular and evolutionarily fascinating examples
of mutualism are found in plant-animal relationships. Plants need
the help of animals for pollinating their flowers and dispersing their
seeds. Animals obviously have to be paid ‘fees’ for the services that
plants expect from them. Plants offer rewards or fees in the form of
pollen and nectar for pollinators and juicy and nutritious fruits for
seed dispersers. But the mutually beneficial system should also
be safeguarded against ‘cheaters’, for example, animals that try to
steal nectar without aiding in pollination. Now you can see why
plant-animal interactions often involve co-evolution of the
mutualists, that is, the evolutions of the flower and its pollinator
species are tightly linked with one another. In many species of fig
trees, there is a tight one-to-one relationship with the pollinator
species of wasp (Figure 11.4). It means that a given fig species can
be pollinated only by its ‘partner’ wasp species and no other species.
The female wasp uses the fruit not only as an oviposition (egg-laying)
site but uses the developing seeds within the fruit for nourishing
its larvae. The wasp pollinates the fig inflorescence while
searching for suitable egg-laying sites. In return for the
favour of pollination the fig offers the wasp some of its
developing seeds, as food for the developing wasp larvae.
Orchids show a bewildering diversity of floral
patterns many of which have evolved to attract the right
pollinator insect (bees and bumblebees) and ensure
guaranteed pollination by it (Figure 11.5). Not all
orchids offer rewards. The Mediterranean orchid Ophrys
employs ‘sexual deceit’ to get pollination done by a
species of bee. One petal of its flower bears an uncanny
resemblance to the female of the bee in size, colour and
markings. The male bee is attracted to what it perceives
as a female, ‘pseudocopulates’ with the flower, and
during that process is dusted with pollen from the
flower. When this same bee ‘pseudocopulates’ with
Figure 11.5 Showing bee-a pollinator
another flower, it transfers pollen to it and thus,
on orchid flower
pollinates the flower. Here you can see how co-evolution
operates. If the female bee’s colour patterns change even slightly for any
reason during evolution, pollination success will be reduced unless the
orchid flower co-evolves to maintain the resemblance of its petal to the
202
female bee.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 215 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
SUMMARY
As a branch of biology, Ecology is the study of the relationships of
living organisms with the abiotic (physico-chemical factors) and biotic
components (other species) of their environment. It is concerned
with four levels of biological organisation-organisms, populations,
communities and biomes.
Evolutionary changes through natural selection take place at
the population level and hence, population ecology is an important
area of ecology. A population is a group of individuals of a given
species sharing or competing for similar resources in a defined
geographical area. Populations have attributes that individual
organisms do not- birth rates and death rates, sex ratio and age
distribution. The proportion of different age groups of males and
females in a population is often presented graphically as age
pyramid; its shape indicates whether a population is stationary,
growing or declining.
Ecological effects of any factors on a population are generally
reflected in its size (population density), which may be expressed in
different ways (numbers, biomass, per cent cover, etc.,) depending
on the species.
Populations grow through births and immigration and decline
through deaths and emigration. When resources are unlimited,
the growth is usually exponential but when resources become
progressively limiting, the growth pattern turns logistic. In either
case, growth is ultimately limited by the carrying capacity of the
environment. The intrinsic rate of natural increase (r) is a measure
of the inherent potential of a population to grow.
In nature populations of different species in a habitat do not live
in isolation but interact in many ways. Depending on the outcome,
these interactions between two species are classified as competition
(both species suffer), predation and parasitism (one benefits and
the other suffers), commensalism (one benefits and the other is
unaffected), amensalism (one is harmed, other unaffected) and
mutualism (both species benefit). Predation is a very important
process through which trophic energy transfer is facilitated and
some predators help in controlling their prey populations. Plants
have evolved diverse morphological and chemical defenses against
herbivory. In competition, it is presumed that the superior
competitor eliminates the inferior one (the Competitive Exclusion
Principle), but many closely related species have evolved various
mechanisms which facilitate their co-existence. Some of the most 203
fascinating cases of mutualism in nature are seen in plant-pollinator
interactions.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 216 ---
BIOLOGY
EXERCISES
1. List the attributes that populations possess but not individuals.
2. If a population growing exponentially double in size in 3 years, what is
the intrinsic rate of increase (r) of the population?
3. Name important defence mechanisms in plants against herbivory.
4. An orchid plant is growing on the branch of mango tree. How do you
describe this interaction between the orchid and the mango tree?
5. What is the ecological principle behind the biological control method of
managing with pest insects?
6. Define population and community.
7. Define the following terms and give one example for each:
(a) Commensalism
(b) Parasitism
(c) Camouflage
(d) Mutualism
(e) Interspecific competition
8. With the help of suitable diagram describe the logistic population
growth curve.
9. Select the statement which explains best parasitism.
(a) One organism is benefited.
(b) Both the organisms are benefited.
(c) One organism is benefited, other is not affected.
(d) One organism is benefited, other is affected.
10. List any three important characteristics of a population and explain.
204
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 217 ---
CHAPTER 12
ECOSYSTEM
12.1 Ecosystem–Structure
and Function
An ecosystem can be visualised as a functional unit of
12.2.Productivity nature, where living organisms interact among themselves
and also with the surrounding physical environment.
12.3 Decomposition Ecosystem varies greatly in size from a small pond to a
large forest or a sea. Many ecologists regard the entire
12.4 Energy Flow
biosphere as a global ecosystem, as a composite of all
local ecosystems on Earth. Since this system is too much
12.5 Ecological Pyramids
big and complex to be studied at one time, it is convenient
to divide it into two basic categories, namely the
terrestrial and the aquatic. Forest, grassland and desert
are some examples of terrestrial ecosystems; pond, lake,
wetland, river and estuary are some examples of aquatic
ecosystems. Crop fields and an aquarium may also be
considered as man-made ecosystems.
We will first look at the structure of the ecosystem, in
order to appreciate the input (productivity), transfer of
energy (food chain/web, nutrient cycling) and the output
(degradation and energy loss). We will also look at the
relationships – cycles, chains, webs – that are created as
a result of these energy flows within the system and their
inter- relationship.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 218 ---
BIOLOGY
12.1 E – S F
COSYSTEM TRUCTURE AND UNCTION
In earlier classes, you have looked at the various components of the
environment- abiotic and biotic. You studied how the individual biotic
and abiotic factors affected each other and their surrounding. Let us look
at these components in a more integrated manner and see how the flow of
energy takes place within these components of the ecosystem.
Interaction of biotic and abiotic components result in a physical
structure that is characteristic for each type of ecosystem. Identification
and enumeration of plant and animal species of an ecosystem gives its
species composition. Vertical distribution of different species occupying
different levels is called stratification. For example, trees occupy top
vertical strata or layer of a forest, shrubs the second and herbs and grasses
occupy the bottom layers.
The components of the ecosystem are seen to function as a unit when
you consider the following aspects:
(i) Productivity;
(ii) Decomposition;
(iii) Energy flow; and
(iv) Nutrient cycling.
To understand the ethos of an aquatic ecosystem let us take a small
pond as an example. This is fairly a self-sustainable unit and rather simple
example that explain even the complex interactions that exist in an aquatic
ecosystem. A pond is a shallow water body in which all the above
mentioned four basic components of an ecosystem are well exhibited.
The abiotic component is the water with all the dissolved inorganic and
organic substances and the rich soil deposit at the bottom of the pond.
The solar input, the cycle of temperature, day-length and other climatic
conditions regulate the rate of function of the entire pond. The autotrophic
components include the phytoplankton, some algae and the floating,
submerged and marginal plants found at the edges. The consumers are
represented by the zooplankton, the free swimming and bottom dwelling
forms. The decomposers are the fungi, bacteria and flagellates especially
abundant in the bottom of the pond. This system performs all the functions
of any ecosystem and of the biosphere as a whole, i.e., conversion of
inorganic into organic material with the help of the radiant energy of the
sun by the autotrophs; consumption of the autotrophs by heterotrophs;
decomposition and mineralisation of the dead matter to release them back
for reuse by the autotrophs, these event are repeated over and over again.
206
There is unidirectional movement of energy towards the higher trophic
levels and its dissipation and loss as heat to the environment.
12.2 P
RODUCTIVITY
A constant input of solar energy is the basic requirement for any ecosystem
to function and sustain. Primary production is defined as the amount of
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 219 ---
ECOSYSTEM
biomass or organic matter produced per unit area over a time period by
plants during photosynthesis. It is expressed in terms of weight (gm–2) or
energy (kcal m–2). The rate of biomass production is called productivity.
It is expressed in terms of gm–2 yr–1 or (kcal m–2) yr–1 to compare the
productivity of different ecosystems. It can be divided into gross primary
productivity (GPP) and net primary productivity (NPP). Gross primary
productivity of an ecosystem is the rate of production of organic matter
during photosynthesis. A considerable amount of GPP is utilised by plants
in respiration. Gross primary productivity minus respiration losses (R),
is the net primary productivity (NPP).
GPP – R = NPP
Net primary productivity is the available biomass for the consumption
to heterotrophs (herbiviores and decomposers). Secondary productivity
is defined as the rate of formation of new organic matter by
consumers.
Primary productivity depends on the plant species inhabiting a
particular area. It also depends on a variety of environmental factors,
availability of nutrients and photosynthetic capacity of plants. Therefore,
it varies in different types of ecosystems. The annual net primary
productivity of the whole biosphere is approximately 170 billion tons
(dry weight) of organic matter. Of this, despite occupying about 70 per
cent of the surface, the productivity of the oceans are only 55 billion tons.
Rest of course, is on land. Discuss the main reason for the low
productivity of ocean with your teacher.
12.3 D
ECOMPOSITION
You may have heard of the earthworm being referred to as the farmer’s
‘friend’. This is so because they help in the breakdown of complex organic
matter as well as in loosening of the soil. Similarly, decomposers break
down complex organic matter into inorganic substances like carbon
dioxide, water and nutrients and the process is called decomposition.
Dead plant remains such as leaves, bark, flowers and dead remains of
animals, including fecal matter, constitute detritus, which is the raw
material for decomposition. The important steps in the process of
decomposition are fragmentation, leaching, catabolism, humification and
mineralisation.
Detritivores (e.g., earthworm) break down detritus into smaller particles.
This process is called fragmentation. By the process of leaching, water-
207
soluble inorganic nutrients go down into the soil horizon and get precipitated
as unavailable salts. Bacterial and fungal enzymes degrade detritus into
simpler inorganic substances. This process is called as catabolism.
It is important to note that all the above steps in decomposition operate
simultaneously on the detritus (Figure 12.1). Humification and
mineralisation occur during decomposition in the soil. Humification leads
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 220 ---
BIOLOGY
Figure 12.1 Diagrammatic representation of decomposition cycle in a terrestrial ecosystem
to accumulation of a dark coloured amorphous substance called humus
that is highly resistant to microbial action and undergoes decomposition
at an extremely slow rate. Being colloidal in nature it serves as a reservoir
of nutrients. The humus is further degraded by some microbes and release
of inorganic nutrients occur by the process known as mineralisation.
Decomposition is largely an oxygen-requiring process. The rate of
decomposition is controlled by chemical composition of detritus and
climatic factors. In a particular climatic condition, decomposition rate
is slower if detritus is rich in lignin and chitin, and quicker, if detritus is
208
rich in nitrogen and water-soluble substances like sugars. Temperature
and soil moisture are the most important climatic factors that regulate
decomposition through their effects on the activities of soil microbes.
Warm and moist environment favour decomposition whereas low
temperature and anaerobiosis inhibit decomposition resulting in build
up of organic materials.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 221 ---
ECOSYSTEM
12.4 E F
NERGY LOW
Except for the deep sea hydro-thermal ecosystem, sun is the only source
of energy for all ecosystems on Earth. Of the incident solar radiation less
than 50 per cent of it is photosynthetically active radiation (PAR). We
know that plants and photosynthetic bacteria (autotrophs), fix Sun’s
radiant energy to make food from simple inorganic materials. Plants
capture only 2-10 per cent of the PAR and this small amount of energy
sustains the entire living world. So, it is very important to know how the
solar energy captured by plants flows through different organisms of an
ecosystem. All organisms are dependent for their food on producers, either
directly or indirectly. So you find unidirectional flow of energy from the
sun to producers and then to consumers. Is this in keeping with the first
law of thermodynamics?
Further, ecosystems are not exempt from the Second Law of
thermodynamics. They need a constant supply of energy to synthesise
the molecules they require, to counteract the universal tendency toward
increasing disorderliness.
The green plant in the ecosystem are called producers. In a terrestrial
ecosystem, major producers are herbaceous and woody plants. Likewise,
producers in an aquatic ecosystem are various species like phytoplankton,
algae and higher plants.
You have read about the food chains and webs that exist in nature.
Starting from the plants (or producers) food chains or rather webs are
formed such that an animal feeds on a plant or on another animal and in
turn is food for another. The chain or web is formed because of this
interdependency. No energy that is trapped into an organism remains in
it for ever. The energy trapped by the producer, hence, is either passed on
to a consumer or the organism dies. Death of organism is the beginning
of the detritus food chain/web.
All animals depend on plants (directly or indirectly) for their food needs.
They are hence called consumers and also heterotrophs. If they feed on
the producers, the plants, they are called primary consumers, and if the
animals eat other animals which in turn eat the plants (or their produce)
they are called secondary consumers. Likewise, you could have tertiary
consumers too. Obviously the primary consumers will be herbivores.
Some common herbivores are insects, birds and mammals in terrestrial
ecosystem and molluscs in aquatic ecosystem.
The consumers that feed on these herbivores are carnivores, or more
correctly primary carnivores (though secondary consumers). Those 209
animals that depend on the primary carnivores for food are labelled
secondary carnivores. A simple grazing food chain (GFC) is depicted
below:
Grass Goat Man
(Producer) (Primary Consumer) (Secondary consumer)
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 222 ---
BIOLOGY
The detritus food chain (DFC) begins with dead organic matter. It is
made up of decomposers which are heterotrophic organisms, mainly
fungi and bacteria. They meet their energy and nutrient requirements by
degrading dead organic matter or detritus. These are also known as
saprotrophs (sapro: to decompose). Decomposers secrete digestive
enzymes that breakdown dead and waste materials into simple, inorganic
materials, which are subsequently absorbed by them.
In an aquatic ecosystem, GFC is the major conduit for energy flow.
As against this, in a terrestrial ecosystem, a much larger fraction of energy
flows through the detritus food chain than through the GFC. Detritus
food chain may be connected with the grazing food chain at some levels:
some of the organisms of DFC are prey to the GFC animals, and in a natural
ecosystem, some animals like cockroaches, crows, etc., are omnivores.
These natural interconnection of food chains make it a food web. How
would you classify human beings!
Organisms occupy a place in the natural surroundings or in a
community according to their feeding relationship with other organisms.
Based on the source of their nutrition or food, organisms occupy a specific
place in the food chain that is known as their trophic level. Producers
belong to the first trophic level, herbivores (primary consumer) to the
second and carnivores (secondary consumer) to the third (Figure 12.2).
221100
Figure 12.2 Diagrammatic representation of trophic levels in an ecosystem
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 223 ---
ECOSYSTEM
The important point to note is that the amount of energy decreases at
successive trophic levels. When any organism dies it is converted to
detritus or dead biomass that serves as an energy source for decomposers.
Organisms at each trophic level depend on those at the lower trophic level
for their energy demands.
Each trophic level has a certain mass of living material at a particular
time called as the standing crop. The standing crop is measured as the
mass of living organisms (biomass) or the number in a unit area. The
biomass of a species is expressed in terms of fresh or dry weight.
Measurement of biomass in terms of dry weight is more accurate. Why?
The number of trophic levels in the grazing food chain is restricted as
the transfer of energy follows 10 per cent law – only 10 per cent of the
energy is transferred to each trophic level from the lower trophic level. In
nature, it is possible to have so many levels – producer, herbivore, primary
carnivore, secondary carnivore in the grazing food chain (Figure 12.3) .
Do you think there is any such limitation in a detritus food chain?
Figure 12.3 Energy flow through different trophic levels
221111
12.5 E P
COLOGICAL YRAMIDS
You must be familiar with the shape of a pyramid. The base of a pyramid
is broad and it narrows towards the apex. One gets a similar shape,
whether you express the food or energy relationship between organisms
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 224 ---
BIOLOGY
at different trophic levels. This, relationship is expressed in terms of
number, biomass or energy. The base of each pyramid represents the
producers or the first trophic level while the apex represents tertiary or
top level consumer. The three types of ecological pyramids that are usually
studied are (a) pyramid of number; (b) pyramid of biomass and (c) pyramid
of energy. For detail (see Figure 12.4 a, b, c and d).
Figure 12.4 (a) Pyramid of numbers in a grassland ecosystem. Only three top-carnivores are
supported in an ecosystem based on production of nearly 6 millions plants
Figure 12.4 (b) Pyramid of biomass shows a sharp decrease in biomass at higher trophic levels
212
Figure 12.4 (c) Inverted pyramid of biomass-small standing crop of phytoplankton supports large
standing crop of zooplankton
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 225 ---
ECOSYSTEM
Figure 12.4 (d) An ideal pyramid of energy. Observe that primary producers convert only 1% of
the energy in the sunlight available to them into NPP
Any calculations of energy content, biomass or numbers, has to include
all organisms at that trophic level. No generalisations we make will be
true if we take only a few individuals at any trophic level into account.
Also a given organism may occupy more than one trophic level
simultaneously. One must remember that the trophic level represents a
functional level, not a species as such. A given species may occupy more
than one trophic level in the same ecosystem at the same time; for example,
a sparrow is a primary consumer when it eats seeds, fruits, peas, and a
secondary consumer when it eats insects and worms. Can you work out
how many trophic levels human beings function at in a food chain?
In most ecosystems, all the pyramids, of number, of energy and
biomass are upright, i.e., producers are more in number and biomass
than the herbivores, and herbivores are more in number and biomass
than the carnivores. Also energy at a lower trophic level is always more
than at a higher level.
There are exceptions to this generalisation: If you were to count the
number of insects feeding on a big tree what kind of pyramid would you
get? Now add an estimate of the number of small birds depending on the
insects, as also the number of larger birds eating the smaller. Draw the
shape you would get.
The pyramid of biomass in sea is generally inverted because the
biomass of fishes far exceeds that of phytoplankton. Isn’t that a paradox?
213
How would you explain this?
Pyramid of energy is always upright, can never be inverted, because
when energy flows from a particular trophic level to the next trophic level,
some energy is always lost as heat at each step. Each bar in the energy
pyramid indicates the amount of energy present at each trophic level in a
given time or annually per unit area.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 226 ---
BIOLOGY
However, there are certain limitations of ecological pyramids such as
it does not take into account the same species belonging to two or more
trophic levels. It assumes a simple food chain, something that almost
never exists in nature; it does not accommodate a food web. Moreover,
saprophytes are not given any place in ecological pyramids even though
they play a vital role in the ecosystem.
SUMMARY
An ecosystem is a structural and functional unit of nature and it
comprises abiotic and biotic components. Abiotic components are
inorganic materials- air, water and soil, whereas biotic components
are producers, consumers and decomposers. Each ecosystem has
characteristic physical structure resulting from interaction amongst
abiotic and biotic components. Species composition and stratification
are the two main structural features of an ecosystem. Based on source
of nutrition every organism occupies a place in an ecosystem.
Productivity, decomposition, energy flow, and nutrient cycling are
the four important components of an ecosystem. Primary productivity
is the rate of capture of solar energy or biomass production of the
producers. It is divided into two types: gross primary productivity (GPP)
and net primary productivity (NPP). Rate of capture of solar energy or
total production of organic matter is called as GPP. NPP is the remaining
biomass or the energy left after utilisation of producers. Secondary
productivity is the rate of assimilation of food energy by the consumers.
In decomposition, complex organic compounds of detritus are converted
to carbon dioxide, water and inorganic nutrients by the decomposers.
Decomposition involves three processes, namely fragmentation of
detritus, leaching and catabolism.
Energy flow is unidirectional. First, plants capture solar energy
and then, food is transferred from the producers to decomposers.
Organisms of different trophic levels in nature are connected to each
other for food or energy relationship forming a food chain. The storage
and movement of nutrient elements through the various components
of the ecosystem is called nutrient cycling; nutrients are repeatedly
used through this process. Nutrient cycling is of two types—gaseous
and sedimentary. Atmosphere or hydrosphere is the reservoir for the
gaseous type of cycle (carbon), whereas Earth’s crust is the reservoir
for sedimentary type (phosphorus). Products of ecosystem processes
are named as ecosystem services, e.g., purification of air and water by
forests.
EXERCISES
214
1. Fill in the blanks.
(a) Plants are called as_________because they fix carbon dioxide.
(b) In an ecosystem dominated by trees, the pyramid (of numbers)
is_________type.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 227 ---
ECOSYSTEM
(c) In aquatic ecosystems, the limiting factor for the productivity
is_________.
(d) Common detritivores in our ecosystem are_________.
(e) The major reservoir of carbon on earth is_________.
2. Which one of the following has the largest population in a food chain?
(a) Producers
(b) Primary consumers
(c) Secondary consumers
(d) Decomposers
3. The second trophic level in a lake is
(a) Phytoplankton
(b) Zooplankton
(c) Benthos
(d) Fishes
4. Secondary producers are
(a) Herbivores
(b) Producers
(c) Carnivores
(d) None of the above
5. What is the percentage of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) in
the incident solar radiation?
(a) 100%
(b) 50 %
(c) 1-5%
(d) 2-10%
6. Distinguish between
(a) Grazing food chain and detritus food chain
(b) Production and decomposition
(c) Upright and inverted pyramid
(d) Food chain and Food web
(e) Litter and detritus
(f) Primary and secondary productivity
7. Describe the components of an ecosystem.
8. Define ecological pyramids and describe with examples, pyramids of
number and biomass.
9. What is primary productivity? Give brief description of factors that affect
primary productivity.
215
10. Define decomposition and describe the processes and products of
decomposition.
11. Give an account of energy flow in an ecosystem.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 228 ---
CHAPTER 13
BIODIVERSITY AND
CONSERVATION
13.1 Biodiversity
13.2 Biodiversity Conservation If an alien from a distant galaxy were to visit our planet
Earth, the first thing that would amaze and baffle him
would most probably be the enormous diversity of life
that he would encounter. Even for humans, the rich variety
of living organisms with which they share this planet never
ceases to astonish and fascinate us. The common man
would find it hard to believe that there are more than
20,000 species of ants, 3,00,000 species of beetles, 28,000
species of fishes and nearly 20,000 species of orchids.
Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have been trying
to understand the significance of such diversity by asking
important questions– Why are there so many species?
Did such great diversity exist throughout earth’s history?
How did this diversification come about? How and why
is this diversity important to the biosphere? Would it
function any differently if the diversity was much less?
How do humans benefit from the diversity of life?
13.1 B
IODIVERSITY
In our biosphere immense diversity (or heterogeneity)
exists not only at the species level but at all levels of
biological organisation ranging from macromolecules
within cells to biomes. Biodiversity is the term popularised
by the sociobiologist Edward Wilson to describe the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 229 ---
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
combined diversity at all the levels of biological organisation.
The most important of them are–
(i) Genetic diversity: A single species might show high diversity at
the genetic level over its distributional range. The genetic variation
shown by the medicinal plant Rauwolfia vomitoria growing in
different Himalayan ranges might be in terms of the potency and
concentration of the active chemical (reserpine) that the plant
produces. India has more than 50,000 genetically different strains
of rice, and 1,000 varieties of mango.
(ii) Species diversity: The diversity at the species level, for example,
the Western Ghats have a greater amphibian species diversity than
the Eastern Ghats.
(iii) Ecological diversity: At the ecosystem level, India, for instance,
with its deserts, rain forests, mangroves, coral reefs, wetlands,
estuaries, and alpine meadows has a greater ecosystem diversity
than a Scandinavian country like Norway.
It has taken millions of years of evolution, to accumulate this rich
diversity in nature, but we could lose all that wealth in less than two
centuries if the present rates of species losses continue. Biodiversity and
its conservation are now vital environmental issues of international concern
as more and more people around the world begin to realise the critical
importance of biodiversity for our survival and well- being on this planet.
13.1.1 How Many Species are there on Earth and How Many
in India?
Since there are published records of all the species discovered and named,
we know how many species in all have been recorded so far, but it is not
easy to answer the question of how many species there are on earth.
According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources (IUCN) (2004), the total number of plant and animal
species described so far is slightly more than 1.5 million, but we have no
clear idea of how many species are yet to be discovered and described.
Estimates vary widely and many of them are only educated guesses. For
many taxonomic groups, species inventories are more complete in
temperate than in tropical countries. Considering that an overwhelmingly
large proportion of the species waiting to be discovered are in the tropics,
biologists make a statistical comparison of the temperate-tropical species 217
richness of an exhaustively studied group of insects and extrapolate this
ratio to other groups of animals and plants to come up with a gross
estimate of the total number of species on earth. Some extreme estimates
range from 20 to 50 million, but a more conservative and scientifically
sound estimate made by Robert May places the global species diversity
at about 7 million.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 230 ---
BIOLOGY
Let us look at some interesting aspects about earth’s biodiversity based
on the currently available species inventories. More than 70 per cent of
all the species recorded are animals, while plants (including algae, fungi,
bryophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms) comprise no more than 22
per cent of the total. Among animals, insects are the most species-rich
taxonomic group, making up more than 70 per cent of the total. That
means, out of every 10 animals on this planet, 7 are insects. Again, how
do we explain this enormous diversification of insects? The number of
fungi species in the world is more than the combined total of the species
of fishes, amphibians, reptiles and mammals. In Figure 13.1, biodiversity
is depicted showing species number of major taxa.
Figure 13.1 Representing global biodiversity: proportionate number of
species of major taxa of plants, invertebrates and vertebrates
218 It should be noted that these estimates do not give any figures for
prokaryotes. Biologists are not sure about how many prokaryotic species
there might be. The problem is that conventional taxonomic methods are
not suitable for identifying microbial species and many species are simply
not culturable under laboratory conditions. If we accept biochemical or
molecular criteria for delineating species for this group, then their diversity
alone might run into millions.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 231 ---
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
Although India has only 2.4 per cent of the world’s land area, its share
of the global species diversity is an impressive 8.1 per cent. That is what
makes our country one of the 12 mega diversity countries of the world.
Nearly 45,000 species of plants and twice as many of animals have been
recorded from India. How many living species are actually there waiting
to be discovered and named? If we accept May’s global estimates, only
22 per cent of the total species have been recorded so far. Applying this
proportion to India’s diversity figures, we estimate that there are probably
more than 1,00,000 plant species and more than 3,00,000 animal species
yet to be discovered and described. Would we ever be able to complete
the inventory of the biological wealth of our country? Consider the immense
trained manpower (taxonomists) and the time required to complete the
job. The situation appears more hopeless when we realise that a large
fraction of these species faces the threat of becoming extinct even before
we discover them. Nature’s biological library is burning even before we
catalogued the titles of all the books stocked there.
13.1.2 Patterns of Biodiversity
(i) Latitudinal gradients: The diversity of plants and animals is
not uniform throughout the world but shows a rather uneven
distribution. For many group of animals or plants, there are
interesting patterns in diversity, the most well- known being the
latitudinal gradient in diversity. In general, species diversity
decreases as we move away from the equator towards the poles.
With very few exceptions, tropics (latitudinal range of 23.5° N to
23.5° S) harbour more species than temperate or polar areas.
Colombia located near the equator has nearly 1,400 species of birds
while New York at 41° N has 105 species and Greenland at 71° N
only 56 species. India, with much of its land area in the tropical
latitudes, has more than 1,200 species of birds. A forest in a tropical
region like Equador has up to 10 times as many species of vascular
plants as a forest of equal area in a temperate region like the Midwest
of the USA. The largely tropical Amazonian rain forest in South
America has the greatest biodiversity on earth- it is home to more
than 40,000 species of plants, 3,000 of fishes, 1,300 of birds, 427
of mammals, 427 of amphibians, 378 of reptiles and of more than
1,25,000 invertebrates. Scientists estimate that in these rain forests
there might be at least two million insect species waiting to be
discovered and named.
219
What is so special about tropics that might account for their greater
biological diversity? Ecologists and evolutionary biologists have
proposed various hypotheses; some important ones are (a) Speciation
is generally a function of time, unlike temperate regions subjected
to frequent glaciations in the past, tropical latitudes have remained
relatively undisturbed for millions of years and thus, had a long
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 232 ---
BIOLOGY
evolutionary time for species diversification, (b) Tropical environments,
unlike temperate ones, are less seasonal, relatively more constant
and predictable. Such constant environments promote niche
specialisation and lead to a greater species diversity and (c) There
is more solar energy available in the tropics, which contributes to
higher productivity; this in turn might contribute indirectly to greater
diversity.
(ii) Species-Area relationships: During his pioneering and extensive
explorations in the wilderness of South American jungles, the great
German naturalist and geographer Alexander von Humboldt
observed that within a region species
richness increased with increasing
explored area, but only up to a limit. In
fact, the relation between species richness
and area for a wide variety of taxa
(angiosperm plants, birds, bats,
freshwater fishes) turns out to be a
rectangular hyperbola (Figure13.2). On
a logarithmic scale, the relationship is a
straight line described by the equation
log S = log C + Z log A
where
S= Species richness A= Area
Z = slope of the line (regression
coefficient)
C = Y-intercept
Ecologists have discovered that the
Figure 13.2 Showing species area relationship.
value of Z lies in the range of 0.1 to 0.2,
Note that on log scale the relationship
regardless of the taxonomic group or the
becomes linear
region (whether it is the plants in Britain,
birds in California or molluscs in New York state, the slopes of the regression
line are amazingly similar). But, if you analyse the species-area
relationships among very large areas like the entire continents, you will
find that the slope of the line to be much steeper (Z values in the range
of 0.6 to 1.2). For example, for frugivorous (fruit-eating) birds and
mammals in the tropical forests of different continents, the slope is found
to be 1.15. What do steeper slopes mean in this context?
220
13.1.3 The importance of Species Diversity to the Ecosystem
Does the number of species in a community really matter to the functioning
of the ecosystem?This is a question for which ecologists have not been
able to give a definitive answer. For many decades, ecologists believed
that communities with more species, generally, tend to be more stable
than those with less species. What exactly is stability for a biological
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 233 ---
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
community? A stable community should not show too much variation
in productivity from year to year; it must be either resistant or resilient to
occasional disturbances (natural or man-made), and it must also be
resistant to invasions by alien species. We don’t know how these attributes
are linked to species richness in a community, but David Tilman’s
long-term ecosystem experiments using outdoor plots provide some
tentative answers. Tilman found that plots with more species showed
less year-to-year variation in total biomass. He also showed that in his
experiments, increased diversity contributed to higher productivity.
Although, we may not understand completely how species richness
contributes to the well-being of an ecosystem, we know enough to realise
that rich biodiversity is not only essential for ecosystem health but
imperative for the very survival of the human race on this planet. At a
time when we are losing species at an alarming pace, one might ask–
Does it really matter to us if a few species become extinct? Would Western
Ghats ecosystems be less functional if one of its tree frog species is lost
forever? How is our quality of life affected if, say, instead of 20,000 we
have only 15,000 species of ants on earth?
There are no direct answers to such näive questions but we can develop
a proper perspective through an analogy (the ‘rivet popper hypothesis’)
used by Stanford ecologist Paul Ehrlich. In an airplane (ecosystem) all
parts are joined together using thousands of rivets (species). If every
passenger travelling in it starts popping a rivet to take home (causing a
species to become extinct), it may not affect flight safety (proper functioning
of the ecosystem) initially, but as more and more rivets are removed, the
plane becomes dangerously weak over a period of time. Furthermore,
which rivet is removed may also be critical. Loss of rivets on the wings
(key species that drive major ecosystem functions) is obviously a more
serious threat to flight safety than loss of a few rivets on the seats or
windows inside the plane.
13.1.4 Loss of Biodiversity
While it is doubtful if any new species are being added (through speciation)
into the earth’s treasury of species, there is no doubt about their continuing
losses. The biological wealth of our planet has been declining rapidly
and the accusing finger is clearly pointing to human activities. The
colonisation of tropical Pacific Islands by humans is said to have led to
the extinction of more than 2,000 species of native birds. The IUCN Red
221
List (2004) documents the extinction of 784 species (including 338
vertebrates, 359 invertebrates and 87 plants) in the last 500 years. Some
examples of recent extinctions include the dodo (Mauritius), quagga
(Africa), thylacine (Australia), Steller’s Sea Cow (Russia) and three
subspecies (Bali, Javan, Caspian) of tiger. The last twenty years alone
have witnessed the disappearance of 27 species. Careful analysis of records
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 234 ---
BIOLOGY
shows that extinctions across taxa are not random; some groups like
amphibians appear to be more vulnerable to extinction. Adding to the
grim scenario of extinctions is the fact that more than 15,500 species
world-wide are facing the threat of extinction. Presently, 12 per cent of
all bird species, 23 per cent of all mammal species, 32 per cent of all
amphibian species and 31per cent of all gymnosperm species in the world
face the threat of extinction.
From a study of the history of life on earth through fossil records, we
learn that large-scale loss of species like the one we are currently
witnessing have also happened earlier, even before humans appeared on
the scene. During the long period (> 3 billion years) since the origin and
diversification of life on earth there were five episodes of mass extinction
of species. How is the ‘Sixth Extinction’ presently in progress different
from the previous episodes? The difference is in the rates; the current
species extinction rates are estimated to be 100 to 1,000 times faster
than in the pre-human times and our activities are responsible for the
faster rates. Ecologists warn that if the present trends continue,
nearly half of all the species on earth might be wiped out within the next
100 years.
In general, loss of biodiversity in a region may lead to (a) decline in
plant production, (b) lowered resistance to environmental perturbations
such as drought and (c) increased variability in certain ecosystem processes
such as plant productivity, water use, and pest and disease cycles.
Causes of biodiversity losses: The accelerated rates of species
extinctions that the world is facing now are largely due to human
activities. There are four major causes (‘ The Evil Quartet ’ is the sobriquet
used to describe them).
(i) Habitat loss and fragmentation: This is the most important
cause driving animals and plants to extinction. The most dramatic
examples of habitat loss come from tropical rain forests. Once
covering more than 14 per cent of the earth’s land surface, these
rain forests now cover no more than 6 per cent. They are being
destroyed fast. By the time you finish reading this chapter, 1000
more hectares of rain forest would have been lost. The Amazon
rain forest (it is so huge that it is called the ‘lungs of the planet’)
harbouring probably millions of species is being cut and cleared
for cultivating soya beans or for conversion to grasslands for raising
beef cattle. Besides total loss, the degradation of many habitats by
222 pollution also threatens the survival of many species. When large
habitats are broken up into small fragments due to various human
activities, mammals and birds requiring large territories and certain
animals with migratory habits are badly affected, leading to
population declines.
(ii) Over-exploitation: Humans have always depended on nature for
food and shelter, but when ‘need’ turns to ‘greed’, it leads to
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 235 ---
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
over-exploitation of natural resources. Many species extinctions
in the last 500 years (Steller’s sea cow, passenger pigeon) were due
to overexploitation by humans. Presently many marine fish
populations around the world are over harvested, endangering the
continued existence of some commercially important species.
(iii) Alien species invasions: When alien species are introduced
unintentionally or deliberately for whatever purpose, some of them
turn invasive, and cause decline or extinction of indigenous species.
The Nile perch introduced into Lake Victoria in east Africa led
eventually to the extinction of an ecologically unique assemblage of
more than 200 species of cichlid fish in the lake. You must be
familiar with the environmental damage caused and threat posed
to our native species by invasive weed species like carrot grass
(Parthenium), Lantana and water hyacinth (Eicchornia). The recent
illegal introduction of the African catfish Clarias gariepinus for
aquaculture purposes is posing a threat to the indigenous catfishes
in our rivers.
(iv) Co-extinctions: When a species becomes extinct, the plant and
animal species associated with it in an obligatory way also become
extinct. When a host fish species becomes extinct, its unique
assemblage of parasites also meets the same fate. Another example
is the case of a coevolved plant-pollinator mutualism where
extinction of one invariably leads to the extinction of the other.
13.2 B C
IODIVERSITY ONSERVATION
13.2.1 Why Should We Conserve Biodiversity?
There are many reasons, some obvious and others not so obvious, but all
equally important. They can be grouped into three categories: narrowly
utilitarian, broadly utilitarian, and ethical.
The narrowly utilitarian arguments for conserving biodiversity are
obvious; humans derive countless direct economic benefits from nature-
food (cereals, pulses, fruits), firewood, fibre, construction material,
industrial products (tannins, lubricants, dyes, resins, perfumes ) and
products of medicinal importance. More than 25 per cent of the drugs
currently sold in the market worldwide are derived from plants and 25,000
species of plants contribute to the traditional medicines used by native
peoples around the world. Nobody knows how many more medicinally
useful plants there are in tropical rain forests waiting to be explored. 223
With increasing resources put into ‘bioprospecting’ (exploring molecular,
genetic and species-level diversity for products of economic importance),
nations endowed with rich biodiversity can expect to reap enormous
benefits.
The broadly utilitarian argument says that biodiversity plays a
major role in many ecosystem services that nature provides. The fast-
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 236 ---
BIOLOGY
dwindling Amazon forest is estimated to produce, through
photosynthesis, 20 per cent of the total oxygen in the earth’s atmosphere.
Can we put an economic value on this service by nature? You can get
some idea by finding out how much your neighborhood hospital spends
on a cylinder of oxygen. Pollination (without which plants cannot give
us fruits or seeds) is another service, ecosystems provide through
pollinators layer – bees, bumblebees, birds and bats. What will be the
costs of accomplishing pollination without help from natural
pollinators? There are other intangible benefits – that we derive from
nature–the aesthetic pleasures of walking through thick woods, watching
spring flowers in full bloom or waking up to a bulbul’s song in the
morning. Can we put a price tag on such things?
The ethical argument for conserving biodiversity relates to what we
owe to millions of plant, animal and microbe species with whom we share
this planet. Philosophically or spiritually, we need to realise that every
species has an intrinsic value, even if it may not be of current or any
economic value to us. We have a moral duty to care for their well-being
and pass on our biological legacy in good order to future generations.
13.2.2 How do we conserve Biodiversity?
When we conserve and protect the whole ecosystem, its biodiversity at all
levels is protected - we save the entire forest to save the tiger. This approach
is called in situ (on site) conservation. However, when there are situations
where an animal or plant is endangered or threatened (organisms facing
a very high risk of extinction in the wild in the near future) and needs
urgent measures to save it from extinction, ex situ (off site) conservation
is the desirable approach.
In situ conservation– Faced with the conflict between development and
conservation, many nations find it unrealistic and economically not feasible
to conserve all their biological wealth. Invariably, the number of species
waiting to be saved from extinction far exceeds the conservation resources
available. On a global basis, this problem has been addressed by eminent
conservationists. They identified for maximum protection certain
‘biodiversity hotspots’ regions with very high levels of species richness
and high degree of endemism (that is, species confined to that region
and not found anywhere else). Initially 25 biodiversity hotspots were
identified but subsequently nine more have been added to the list,
bringing the total number of biodiversity hotspots in the world to 34.
224
These hotspots are also regions of accelerated habitat loss. Three of
these hotspots – Western Ghats and Sri Lanka, Indo-Burma and
Himalaya – cover our country’s exceptionally high biodiversity regions.
Although all the biodiversity hotspots put together cover less than
2 per cent of the earth’s land area, the number of species they collectively
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 237 ---
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
harbour is extremely high and strict protection of these hotspots could
reduce the ongoing mass extinctions by almost 30 per cent.
In India, ecologically unique and biodiversity-rich regions are legally
protected as biosphere reserves, national parks and sanctuaries. India
now has 14 biosphere reserves, 90 national parks and 448 wildlife
sanctuaries. India has also a history of religious and cultural traditions
that emphasised protection of nature. In many cultures, tracts of forest
were set aside, and all the trees and wildlife within were venerated and
given total protection. Such sacred groves are found in Khasi and Jaintia
Hills in Meghalaya, Aravalli Hills of Rajasthan, Western Ghat regions of
Karnataka and Maharashtra and the Sarguja, Chanda and Bastar areas
of Madhya Pradesh. In Meghalaya, the sacred groves are the last refuges
for a large number of rare and threatened plants.
Ex situ Conservation– In this approach, threatened animals and plants
are taken out from their natural habitat and placed in special setting
where they can be protected and given special care. Zoological parks,
botanical gardens and wildlife safari parks serve this purpose. There are
many animals that have become extinct in the wild but continue to be
maintained in zoological parks. In recent years ex situ conservation has
advanced beyond keeping threatened species in enclosures. Now gametes
of threatened species can be preserved in viable and fertile condition for
long periods using cryopreservation techniques, eggs can be fertilised in
vitro, and plants can be propagated using tissue culture methods. Seeds
of different genetic strains of commercially important plants can be kept
for long periods in seed banks.
Biodiversity knows no political boundaries and its conservation is
therefore a collective responsibility of all nations. The historic Convention
on Biological Diversity (‘The Earth Summit’) held in Rio de Janeiro in
1992, called upon all nations to take appropriate measures for
conservation of biodiversity and sustainable utilisation of its benefits. In
a follow-up, the World Summit on Sustainable Development held in 2002
in Johannesburg, South Africa, 190 countries pledged their commitment
to achieve by 2010, a significant reduction in the current rate of biodiversity
loss at global, regional and local levels.
SUMMARY
Since life originated on earth nearly 3.8 billion years ago, there had
been enormous diversification of life forms on earth. Biodiversity refers
225
to the sum total of diversity that exists at all levels of biological
organisation. Of particular importance is the diversity at genetic, species
and ecosystem levels and conservation efforts are aimed at protecting
diversity at all these levels.
More than 1.5 million species have been recorded in the world, but
there might still be nearly 6 million species on earth waiting to be
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 238 ---
BIOLOGY
discovered and named. Of the named species, > 70 per cent are animals,
of which 70 per cent are insects. The group Fungi has more species
than all the vertebrate species combined. India, with about 45,000
species of plants and twice as many species of animals, is one of the 12
mega diversity countries of the world.
Species diversity on earth is not uniformly distributed but shows
interesting patterns. It is generally highest in the tropics and decreases
towards the poles. Important explanations for the species richness of
the tropics are: Tropics had more evolutionary time; they provide a
relatively constant environment and, they receive more solar energy
which contributes to greater productivity. Species richness is also
function of the area of a region; the species-area relationship is generally
a rectangular hyperbolic function.
It is believed that communities with high diversity tend to be less
variable, more productive and more resistant to biological invasions.
Earth’s fossil history reveals incidence of mass extinctions in the past,
but the present rates of extinction, largely attributed to human activities,
are 100 to 1000 times higher. Nearly 700 species have become extinct
in recent times and more than 15,500 species (of which > 650 are from
India) currently face the threat of extinction. The causes of high
extinction rates at present include habitat (particularly forests) loss
and fragmentation, over-exploitation, biological invasions and
co-extinctions.
Earth’s rich biodiversity is vital for the very survival of mankind.
The reasons for conserving biodiversity are narrowly utilitarian, broadly
utilitarian and ethical. Besides the direct benefits (food, fibre, firewood,
pharmaceuticals, etc.), there are many indirect benefits we receive
through ecosystem services such as pollination, pest control, climate
moderation and flood control. We also have a moral responsibility to
take good care of earth’s biodiversity and pass it on in good order to our
next generation.
Biodiversity conservation may be in situ as well as ex situ. In in situ
conservation, the endangered species are protected in their natural
habitat so that the entire ecosystem is protected. Recently, 34
‘biodiversity hotspots’ in the world have been proposed for intensive
conservation efforts. Of these, three (Western Ghats-Sri Lanka,
Himalaya and Indo-Burma) cover India’s rich biodiversity regions. Our
country’s in situ conservation efforts are reflected in its 14 biosphere
reserves, 90 national parks, > 450 wildlife sanctuaries and many sacred
groves. Ex situ conservation methods include protective maintenance
of threatened species in zoological parks and botanical gardens, in vitro
fertilisation, tissue culture propagation and cryopreservation of
gametes.
226 EXERCISES
1. Name the three important components of biodiversity.
2. How do ecologists estimate the total number of species present in the
world?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 239 ---
BIODIVERSITY AND CONSERVATION
3. Give three hypotheses for explaining why tropics show greatest levels
of species richness.
4. What is the significance of the slope of regression in a species – area
relationship?
5. What are the major causes of species losses in a geographical region?
6. How is biodiversity important for ecosystem functioning?
7. What are sacred groves? What is their role in conservation?
8. Among the ecosystem services are control of floods and soil erosion.
How is this achieved by the biotic components of the ecosystem?
9. The species diversity of plants (22 per cent) is much less than that of
animals (72 per cent). What could be the explanations to how animals
achieved greater diversification?
10. Can you think of a situation where we deliberately want to make a
species extinct? How would you justify it?
227
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 240 ---
NOTES
Rationalised 2023-24