--- PAGE 200 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

60

61.

62.(a)

62.(b)

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

S. No.

Common Name

Urial

Indian Buffalo

Terrapin

Tricarinate Hill
Turtle

Gharial

India Softshell
Turtle

Green Turtle

Hawsbill Turtle

Leather Back
Turtle

Category

Vulnerable

Endangered

Critically
Endangered

Vulnerable

Critically
endangered

Vulnerable

Endangered

Critically
endangered

Vulnerable

Range Description

India - Only (laddak),
Central and South
West Asia.

S. Nepal, Southern
Bhutan, Western
Thailand, Northern
Myanmar, India
(Bastar region - M.P.,
Assam, AP, Meghalaya,
Orissa, Maharastra)

Bangladesh, India,
Cambodia, India,
Indonesia, Malaysia.

Bangladesh, India

India - Chambal River,
Girwa river. Pop - Son
River

Bihar, U.P.

Bangladesh, India
(Ganges River),
Pakistan

Throughout tropical
water, lesser -
subtropical. Indian
ocean - east, west,
mediterranean Sea,
Pacific ocean

Throughout tropical
water, larger extent
subtropical, Atlantic,
Indian, Pacific Ocean

Leather back are
distributed, with
nesting site on
tropical sandy beaches
& foraging range

that extent into temp /
sup polar.

Habitat & Ecology

Moderate to arid
habitat grassland.

Low - lying
Alluvial grassland,
deciduous forest

- with marshes &
rivers.

Terrestrial nest
sites, tidal area of
largest river
estuaries

Fully terrestrial

Terrestrial, Fresh
Water

Terrestrial, Fresh
Water

Highly migratory,
broad habitat
during their
lifetime.

Highly migratory,
broad habitat -
during life time.

Turtle inhabiting
tropical,
subtropical & sub
polar extensive
migration, different
feeding area at
different season.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Major threat

Poaching,
Competition with
livestock.

Interbreeding with
feral & domestic
buffalo, hunting &
habitat loss.

Trade

Alternation of
habitat, Fishing,
Agriculture, grazing,
utilization

Trade in East Asian
Market

Harvest of egg &
Adult from nesting
beaches, retting,
trawling.

Tortoises shell trade
Egg collection, meat,

Destruction of
Nesting habitat,
Foraging habitat, oil
pollution,
hybridisation

Habitat destruction,
pollution, climate
change, Fisheries by
Catch.


--- PAGE 201 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

S. No.

68.

69.

70.

71.

72.

73:

Common Name

Olive Ridly

Bengal Florican

Black Necked-
Crane

Cheer Pheasant

Forest Owlet

Barking Deer
(or) Muntjac

Category

Vulnerable

Critically
endangered

Vulnerable

Vulnerable

Critically
endangered

Least
Concern

Range Description

Throughout tropical

water (Except Mexico).

Two population

1. Indian Sub
Continent - (U.P.,
Nepal, Assam, A.P.)

2. South - East Asia -
Cambodia, Vietnam.

China, Ladakh (A.P.)
- India, Bhutan

India - Kashmir, H.P.,
Uttarkhand, Pakistan,
Nepal

Endemic - Central
India, (North -
Western Maharashtra,
South-east M.P.

Till 1997 only
specimen, 2000
rediscovered.

Thai - Malay
Peninsula, Greater
Sundas (Borneo, Java,
Bali, Sumatra)

Habitat & Ecology

Multiple habitat,
Migration less
compared to other
- usually carred by
major currents

lowland dry,
natural & semi-
natural grassland,
open forest.

Alpine bog
meadows &
riverine marshes,
lacustrine
marshes.

Rocky terrain
dominated by
scrub, tall grass &
scattered clumb

tree (1445 -
3050m)

Open dry
deciduous forest
dominated by
Teak, ground
with grasses -
typical owlet site.

1. In forest & areas
adjacent to forest

2. In plantations
of coffee

rubber, sugarcane,
teak

Major threat

Targeted
Exploitation,
capturing, by
catch in fisheries,
Habitat

impact, disease &
predation

Modification of
grassland,
overgrazing,
inappropriate
cutting, burning
& ploughing
regimes, flooding,
dam construction,
illegal
development.

Intensive grazing &
pesticide use - result
in degradation of
grassland.

Hunted, egg
consumption,
construction project
(dam, electricity).

Forest destruction,
human settlement &
grazing.

Habitat
encroachment &
Hunting for
freshmeat.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 202 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

74:

75:

76.

77-

78.

S. No.

Common Name

Chital

Goral (or)
Wodgsoni

Hogdeer

Hyena

Nilgai

Category

Least
Concern

Near
threatened

Endangered

Near
threatened

Least concern

Range Description

8 - 30° N in India
(Including SIKKIM),
Nepal, Bhutan,
Bangladesh, Srilanka

WB - Eastern
Rajasthan

NB - Foothills &
Himalayas

EB - Western Assam

SB - Throughout
Peninsular India

Bhutan, China
(Southern Tibet)
Northern India (Incl
SIKKIM) Northern
Pakistan Possibly
Western Myanmar

Pakistan, North &
North Eastern India

east across non-
sundalic region

Marginally - Southern
China

Africa, Arab peninsula
Turkey. Indian
Sub-continent recently
to Nepal

Widely distributed in
India. lowland of
Nepal & border areas
of Pakistan extinct in
Bangladesh

Habitat & Ecology

1. Avoids - Dense
Moist forest

Open semi arid &
arid desert

2. Moist, dry
deciduous

day thorny scrub
(or) grasslands
- Habitat

1. Steep Mountains
& will use
evergreen forest
near cliff

2. feed in grassy
rights & steep
rocky slopes

1. Wet (or) Moist
tall grassland

2. Floodplain
grassland

1. Open habitat (or)
light thorn

2. Avoids & open
Desert

1. Arid areas,
scrub, dry
deciduous,
agricultural areas

2. Avoid - Dense
Forest, deserts

3. Browsers &
grazers

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Major threat

Hunting &
Competition with
domestic livestock

No Major threat

Habitat destruction
Hunting competition
of livestock

Hunting habitat cons
degradation

Persecution
(poisoning)

decrease in source

1. Constructed as
agricultural pest

2. Permit hunting if
damage occurs.


--- PAGE 203 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

S. No.

79-

80.

81.

Common Name

Sambar

Wild Pig

India’s Procupine

Category

Vulnerable

Least
Concern

Least
Concern

Range Description

India, East along
Southern Himalayas
India, Nepal, Bhutan,
Srilanka

Occur in modified
form in all continents
except in Antarctica &
on many oceanic
Islands

Turkey to Pakistan,
India, China, Nepal &
Srilanka

Habitat & Ecology

1. India - Thorn,
arid forests of
Gujarat &
Rajasthan

2. Moist decidiuous
forest throughout
Peninsular

3. Pine & Oak trees
at himalayan
forest

1. Temperate &
tropical habitats

2. Semi desert to
tropical rainforest

1. Rocky hill side

2. Tropical &
temperate scrub
land

Major threat

1. Habitat
encroachment

2. Hunting

1. Global lenes & No
major threats

2. local lenes &
Hunting & habitat
destruction.

Considered as
Agricultural Pest

- locals trap & use
them for food.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

%, 9% of o% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e



--- PAGE 204 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

QF 6° g Go

| CHAPTER - 12 |

ENVIRONMENT

QW

ANIMAL DIVERSITY OF INDIA

Do you know?

e India has been ranked as seventh most environ-
mentally hazardous country in the world. The
study is based on evaluation of “absolute” environ-
ment impact of 179 countries, done by researchers
in Harvard, Princeton, Adelaide University and
University of Singapore on January, 2011. Brazil
was found to be worst on environmental indicators
followed by united states and china whereas Sin-
gapore was the best.

12.1. MAMMALS - CRITICALLY

ENDANGERED

12.1.1. Pygmy Hog (Porcula salvania)

Is the world’s smallest wild pig, with adults weighing
only 8 kgs. This species constructs a nest throughout
the year.

It is one of the most useful indicators of the manage-
ment status of grassland habitats. The grasslands where
the pygmy hog resides are crucial for the survival of
other endangered species such as Indian Rhinoceros,
Swamp Deer, Wild Buffalo, Hispid Hare, Bengal Florican
and Swamp Francolin.

In 1996, a captive-breeding programme of the species
was initiated in Assam, and some hogs were reintro-
duced in Sonai Rupai area in 2009.

Habitat: Relatively undisturbed, tall ‘terai’ grasslands.
Distribution: Formerly, the species was more widely
distributed along the southern Himalayan foothills but
now is restricted to only a single remnant population in
Manas Wildlife Sanctuary and its buffer reserves.

Pygmy hog-sucking Louse (Haematopinus oliveri), a
parasite that feeds only on Pygmy Hogs will also fall in

the same risk category of critically endangered as its
survival is linked to that of the host species.

Threats: The main threats are loss and degradation of
grasslands, dry-season burning, livestock grazing and
afforestation of grasslands. Hunting is also a threat to
the remnant populations.

12.1.2. Andaman White-toothed Shrew
(Crocidura andamanensis), Jenkin’s Andaman
Spiny Shrew

(Crocidura jenkinsi) and the Nicobar White-tailed
Shrew (Crocidura nicobarica) Endemic to India.

They are usually active by twilight or in the night and
have specialized habitat requirements.

Habitat: Leaf litter and rock crevices.
Distribution:

e The Andaman White-toothed Shrew is found on
Mount Harriet in the South Andaman Islands.

e The Jenkin’s Andaman Spiny Shrew is found on
Wright Myo and Mount Harriet in the South Anda-
man Islands.

The Nicobar White-tailed Shrew (Crocidura nicobarica)
is found in the southern tip of Greater Nicobar Island
and is also recorded in the area extending from the
Campbell Bay National Park to the Galathea River in the
Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

Threats: Habitat loss due to selective logging, natural
disasters such as the tsunami and drastic weather
changes.

12.1.3. Kondana Rat (Millardia kondana)

It is a nocturnal burrowing rodent that is found only in
India. It is sometimes known to build nests.

Habitat: Tropical and subtropical dry deciduous forests
and tropical scrub.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 205 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Distribution: Known only from the small Sinhagarh
Plateau (about one km”), near Pune in Maharashtra.
Reported from an elevation of about 1,270 m above
mean sea level.

e Threats: Major threats are habitat loss, overgrazing of
vegetation and disturbance from tourism and recrea-
tional activities.

12.1.4. The Large Rock Rat or Elvira Rat

(Cremnomys elvira)

e Itis a medium sized, nocturnal and burrowing rodent.
endemic to India.

e Habitat: Tropical dry deciduous shrubland forest, seen
in rocky areas.

e Habitat / distribution: Known only from Eastern Ghats
of Tamil Nadu. Recorded from an elevation of about 600
m above mean sea level.

e Threats: Major threats are habitat loss, conversion of
forests and fuel wood collection.

Do you know?

India is endowed with vast inland and marine bio-
resources. It is the third largest producer of fish in
the world and the second largest producer of inland
fish. The Western Ghats (the aquatic hotspot) has 192
endemic species of fishes

12.1.5. The Namdapha Flying Squirrel
(Biswamoyopterus biswasi)

e It is a unique (the only one in its genus) flying squirrel
that is restricted to a single valley in the Namdapha N_P.
(or) W.L.S. in Arunachal Pradesh.

e Habitat: Tropical forest.

e Habitat / distribution: Found only in Namdapha Tiger
Reserve in Arunachal Pradesh.

e Threats: Hunted for food.

12.1.6. The Malabar Civet (Viverra civettina)
e Itis considered to be one of the world’s rarest mammals.

e It is endemic to India and was first reported from Tra-
vancore, Kerala.

e It is nocturnal in nature and found exclusively in the
Western Ghats.

e Habitat: Wooded plains and hill slopes of evergreen
rainforests.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Habitat / distribution: Western Ghats.

e Threats: Deforestation and commercial plantations are
major threats.

Do you know?

The Spitting Cobra spits venom which can spray more
than 1.8 meters, or 6 feet. It has near perfect aim, and will
fire straight into the eyes of it’s prey.

12.1.7. The Sumatran Rhinoceros (Dicerorhinus
sumatrensis)

e It is the smallest and most endangered of the five rhi-
noceros species.

e It is now thought to be regionally extinct in India,
though it once occurred in the foothills of the Himala-
yas and north-east India.

e The Javan Rhinoceros (Rhinoceros sondaicus) is also
believed to be extinct in India and only a small number
survive in Java and Vietnam.

12.1.8. Kashmir stag/ hangul (Cervus elaphus
hanglu)

e It subspecies of Red Deer which is native to India.

e Habitat / distribution - in dense riverine forests, high
valleys, and mountains of the Kashmir valley and
northern Chamba in Himachal Pradesh.

e State animal of J&k.

e Threat - habitat destruction, over-grazing by domestic
livestock, and poaching.

Do you know?

Penguins don’t live near freshwater. they drink salt
water. They have a special gland in their bodies that
takes the salt out of the water they drink and pushes
it out of grooves in their bill. A handy in-house filtra-
tion system!

Do you know?

Frog’s tongues are attached to the front of their mouths
rather than at the back like humans. When a frog
catches an insect it throws its sticky tongue out of it’s
mouth and wraps it around its prey. The frog’s tongue
then snaps back and throws the food down its throat.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 206 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Do you know?

Cobras are cannibals, which mean that they will eat
other snakes along birds, bird eggs and small mammals

Do you know?

Sharks have the most powerful jaws on the planet.
Both the upper and lower jaws move. It tosses its head
back and forth to tear loose a piece of meat which it
swallows whole.

Do you know?

e When male frogs are ready to mate they will ‘call’
out to the female frogs. Each different species of
frog has their own special sound and that is the
sound that the same species of female frog will
answer to. Some frogs are so loud they can be
heard a mile away!

Frogs and toads are carnivores

Some frogs are very good at camouflaging them-
selves so that they blend in with their environment,
making it harder for their enemies to find them. A
frog can change the colour of its skin depending on
its surroundings.

12.2. MARINE MAMMALS

12.2.1. Freshwater / river dolphin

e Habitat / distribution - India, Bangladesh, Nepal and
Pakistan which is split into two subspecies, the Ganges
river dolphin and Indus river dolphin.

12.2.2. Ganges river dolphin

e Habitat / distribution - Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers
and their tributaries in Bangladesh, India and Nepal.

e The Ganges river dolphin has been recognized by the
government of India as its National Aquatic Animal.

12.2.3. Indus river dolphin

e Habitat / distribution - Indus River in Pakistan and its
Beas and Sutlej tributaries.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

12.2.4. Herbivorous Marine Mammals

e include dugong and manatees and they inhabit swamps,
rivers, estuaries, marine wetlands, and coastal marine
waters.

12.2.5. Dugong
e (Dugong dugon) also called as sea cow.

e Status - vulnerable. Threat - hunting (meat and oil),
habitat degradation, and fishing-related fatalities.

12.2.6. Manatees

e Habitat / distribution - Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico,
the Amazon Basin, and West Africa

e Threat - coastal development, red tide, hunting.

12.3. FEW EXCEPTIONS
12.3.1. Egg Laying Mammals

The unique feature of monotremes, a sub division of mam-
mal, is that monotremes lay eggs rather than giving birth
to their young. There are only five living Monotreme/ egg
laying Mammals species: they are - the duck-billed platy-
pus and four species of spiny anteaters (also known as
echidna). All of them are found only in Australia and New
Guinea.

Echidnas are also known as spiny ant eaters.
e Habitat / distribution - Australia and New Guinea

e Inechidnas, the egg is carried in a pouch on the female’s
belly until the young hatches, at which point the barely-
developed young must find a mammary gland and latch
onto it for nourishment.

Platypus is a semi-aquatic mammal.

e Habitat / distribution - endemic to eastern Australia,
including Tasmania.

e In the platypus, the female retires to a burrow in the
bank of a river or pond. The burrow is lined with dry
vegetation, and there the eggs are laid.

e The male platypus has venom strong enough to can kill
a small dog, or cause excruciating pain among humans.

12.3.2. Marsupials

e Marsupials are the group of mammals commonly
thought of as pouched mammals (like the wallaby and
kangaroo).

e Marsupial mammals have placenta but it is very short-
lived and does not make as much of a contribution to
fetal nourishment.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 207 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

They give birth very early and the young animal, es-
sentially a helpless embryo, climbs from the mother’s
birth canal to the nipples.

There it grabs on with its mouth and continues to de-
velop, often for weeks or months depending on the
species.

They do not have long gestation times like placental
mammals. The short gestation time is due to having a
yolk-type placenta in the mother marsupial.

Extinct - Marsupial - quagga, the marsupial wolf .

Placental mammals all bear live young, which are nour-
ished before birth in the mother’s uterus through a
specialized embryonic organ attached to the uterus
wall, the placenta.

Placental mammals nourish the developing embryo
using the mother’s blood supply, allowing longer gesta-
tion times.

List of Marsupials

Phalangers
Kola

Opossum
Tasmanian devils
Kangaroo
Wallaby
Wombats

Mursupial Mole (4 foot)
Bandi coot
Tasmanian Wolf /Tiger

Dasyure

Do you know?

Not all sharks are fierce carnivores. Some are quite
harmless. Oddly enough, the most harmless sharks
tend to be the largest! The basking shark, the whale
shark and the Mega mouth sharks all fit this descrip-
tion. These huge sharks eat plankton.

12.4. BIRDS - CRITICALLY

ENDANGERED

12.4.1. The Jerdon’s Courser

It is a nocturnal bird found only in the northern part of
the state of Andhra Pradesh in peninsular India.

It is a flagship species for the extremely threatened
scrub jungle.

The species was considered to be extinct until it was
rediscovered in 1986 and the area of rediscovery was

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

subsequently declared as the Sri Lankamaleswara Wild-
life Sanctuary.

Habitat: Undisturbed scrub jungle with open areas.
Distribution: Jerdon’s Courser is endemic to Andhra
Pradesh.

Threats: Clearing of scrub jungle, creation of new pas-
tures, growing of dry land crops, Illegal trapping of

birds, plantations of exotic trees, quarrying and the
construction of the River Canals.

12.4.2. The Forest Owlet

Had been lost for more than a century. After 113 long
years, the owlet was rediscovered in 1997 and reap-
peared on the list of Indian birds.

Habitat: Dry deciduous forest.

Habitat / distribution: South Madhya Pradesh, in north-
west Maharashtra and north-central Maharashtra.

Threats: Logging operations, burning and cutting of

trees damage roosting and nesting trees of the Forest
Owlet.

12.4.3. The White-bellied Heron

extremely rare bird found in five or six sites in Assam
and Arunachal Pradesh, one or two sites in Bhutan, and
a few in Myanmar.

Habitat: Rivers with sand or gravel bars or inland lakes.

Distribution: Bhutan and north-east India to the hills
of Bangladesh and north Myanmar.

Threats: Loss and degradation of lowland forests and
wetlands through direct exploitation and disturbance
by humans.

12.4.4. The Bengal Florican

A rare bustard species that is very well known for its
mating dance. Among the tall grasslands, secretive
males advertise their territories by springing from the
ground and flitting to and fro in the air.

Habitat: Grasslands occasionally interspersed with
scrublands.

Distribution: Native to only 3 countries in the world -
Cambodia, India and Nepal. In India, it occurs in 3
states, namely Uttar Pradesh, Assam and Arunachal
Pradesh.

Threats: Ongoing conversion of the bird’s grassland
habitat for various purposes including agriculture is
mainly responsible for its population decline.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 208 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

12.4.5. The Himalayan Quail

e It is presumed to be extinct since no reliable records of
sightings of this species exist after 1876. Intensive sur-
veys are required as this species is hard to detect due
to its reluctance to fly and its preference for dense grass
habitats. Possible sighting of this species was reported
in Nainital in 2003.

e Habitat: Tall grass and scrub on steep hillsides.
e Distribution: Western Himalayas.

e Threats: Indiscriminate hunting during the colonial
period along with habitat modification.

12.4.6. Pink- headed Duck

e It has not been conclusively recorded in India since 1949.
Males have a deep pink head and neck from which the
bird derives its name.

e Habitat: Overgrown still-water pools, marshes and
swamps in lowland forests and tall grasslands.

e Distribution: Recorded in India, Bangladesh and Myan-
mar. Maximum records are from north-east India.

e Threats: Wetland degradation and loss of habitat, along
with hunting are the main causes of its decline.

12.4.7. Sociable Lapwing (Vanellus gregarious)

e Itis a winter migrant to India. This species has suffered
a sudden and rapid population decline due to which it
has been listed as critically endangered.

e Habitat: Fallow fields and scrub desert.

e Distribution: central Asia, Asia Minor, Russia, Egypt,
India, Pakistan. In India, habitat / distribution is re-
stricted to the north and north-west of the country.

e Threats: Conversion of habitat to arable land, illegal
hunting and proximity to human settlements.

Do you know?

Some trees can “talk” to each other. When willows are
attacked by webworms and caterpillars, they emit a
chemical that alerts nearby willow of the danger. The
neighboring trees then respond by pumping more tan-
nin into their leaves making it difficult for the insects
to digest the leaves.

12.4.8. Spoon Billed Sandpiper

e It requires highly specialized breeding habitat, a con-
straint that has always kept its population scarce. India

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

is home to some of the last existing wintering grounds
of this species.

e Habitat: Coastal areas with sparse vegetation. No breed-
ing records further inland than 7 km from the seashore.

e Distribution: Has been recorded in West Bengal, Orissa,
Kerala and Tamil Nadu.

e Threats: Habitat degradation and land reclamation.
Human disturbance also leads to high incidence of nest
desertion.

12.8.9. Siberian Crane

e It is a large, strikingly majestic migratory bird that
breeds and winters in wetlands. They are known to
winter at Keoladeo National Park, Rajasthan. However
the last documented sighting of the bird was in 2002.

e Habitat: Wetland areas.

e Located distribution: Keoladeo National Park in Ra-
jasthan.

e Threats: Pesticide pollution, wetland drainage, develop-
ment of prime habitat into agricultural fields, and to
some extent, hunting.

Do you know?

The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’ Rights Act,
2001 while seeking to protect the rights of plant bree-
ders, as mandated under TRIPS, has in an innovative
fashion, managed to provide ‘rights’ to the Indian farmer.

Do you know?

. Roots store more starch than the trunk.

. Roots do not have a central pith (soft central tissue)
while the trunk does.

. The majority of tree roots are non-woody. These non-
woody roots only live for a few weeks.

. The root hairs grow within days, when water, tem-
perature, and nutrients are available to promote
growth.

Do you know?

Pugmark Census Technique’. In this method the im-
prints of the pugmark (foot print) of the tiger were
recorded and used as a basis for identification of indi-
viduals. Now it is largely used as one of the indices of
tiger occurrence and relative abundance.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 209 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

12.5. CORALS

12.5.1. Fire corals

They are more closely related to jellyfish than corals.
On contact, one usually feels a burning sensation simi-
lar to a sting from a jellyfish.

Habitat: Generally found in murky inshore waters and
display a tolerance for siltation. They often are found in
clear offshore sites.

Distribution: Indonesia, Gulf of Chiriqui, Panama Pacific
Province. Possibly extinct from Australia, India, Indo-
nesia, Malaysia, Panama, Singapore and Thailand.

Threats: Collected for decoration and jewellery trade.
This group is also sensitive to temperature rise, and is
thought to have completely disappeared from the major-
ity of marine areas possibly because of growing global
warming related bleaching effects.

12.6. BIRD’S MIGRATION

Migration refers to the regular, recurrent and cyclical
seasonal movement of birds from one place to other.
The distance of migration ranged from short distance
to thousands of kilometers. But at the end of period,
birds will eventually return to the original place.

12.6.1. Reasons for migration

BR

oP WN

To avoid adverse factors (extreme climatic condition)
To manage food shortage

To manage shortage of water

To have a better breeding conditions

Less competition for safe nesting places

12.6.2. Migratory birds of India

Siberian Cranes, Greater
Flamingo, Common
Teal, Yellow Wagtail,
White Wagtail, Northern
Shoveler, Rosy Pelican,

Wood Sandpiper, Spotted
Sandpiper, Eurasian

Asian Koel, Black
Crowned Night Heron,
Eurasian Golden Oriole,
Comb Duck, Blue
Cheeked Bee Eater,
Blue-Tailed Bee-Eater,
Cuckoos.

Pigeon, Black Tailed
Godwit, Spotted Redshank
Starling Bluethroat, Long
Billed Pipit.

QF 6° go

12.7, WILDLIFE DISEASES

ENVIRONMENT

Diseases

Tuberculosis

Anthrax

Rabies

Foot and mouth
disease

Rinder pest

Trypanosomia

Taxoplasmosis

Casual organism

Mycobacterium
spp

Bacillus anthraxis

Rabies virus

FMD virus

Microbilli virus

Trypanosomia
virus

Taxoplasma
gondii

Animal
susceptible
Deer, cat,
primates,
elephant

Gaur, chetal,
wild pig,
barking deer

Tiger, lion, bear,
mongoose,
squirrel

Gaur, nilgai,
chetal, sambar,
yak, mithun

Deer, wild pig,
wild buffalo
Tiger, elephant,
sambar,
macaque

Rhesus macaque,
civet cat

12.8. SPECIES EXTINCTION

e Extinction is caused through various processes:

e Deterministic processes that have a cause and effect.
E.g. glaciations, human interference such as defor-

estation.

e Stochastic processes (chance and random events)
that effect the survival and reproduction of indi-
viduals. E.g. unexpected changes of weather pat-
terns, decreased food supply, disease, increase of
competitors, predators or parasites, etc. that may act
independently or add to deterministic effects.

e The impact of these processes will of course depend on
the size and degree of genetic diversity and resilience of

populations.

e Traits that adversely affect or increase a species vulner-
ability to extinction due to habitat fragmentation have
been identified. These are:

e rarity or low abundance

e poor dispersal ability

e ecological specialization

e unstable populations

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.



--- PAGE 210 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY Q@, 0° A Do ENVIRONMENT

e high trophic status - as animals occupying ahigher Causes
trophic level (i.e. the position of a species in a food e Human population growth
chain) usually have smaller populations than those
at lower levels (e.g. carnivores are fewer in number
than herbivores)

e Land use transformation
e Species habitat loss, degradation and fragmentation

e Increasing livestock populations and competitive exclu-

e low adult survival rates . : .
sion of wild herbivores

e i i i i i : : : . . .
low intrinsic rate population increase e Growing interest in ecotourism and increasing access

e Body size, fecundity, dietary specialization. to nature reserves
e Abundance and distribution of wild prey

12.8.1. Natural extinctions

e Increasing wildlife population as a result of conserva-
e Have been caused due to several factors: tion programmes

e continent drifting, e Climatic factors

e climate change, e Stochastic events (e.g. fire)

e tectonic activit
° y Impacts

e increased volcanic activity © Crop damage

e The late Ordovician global glaciations (439 Mya). © Livestock depredation

e The late Cretaceous extinction assumed to be associ-

. La. e Injuries to people
ated with an extra-terrestrial impact.

e Loss of human life
e Extinction in vascular plants has been more gradual
compared with the loss of animals. It is believed that
extinction among this group was due more to com-
petitive displacement by more advanced plant forms, or e Animal deaths
due to a gradual climate change, than due to any sudden e Destruction of habitat
catastrophic event.

e Damage to property

e Injuries to wildlife

Preventive strategies
12.8.2. Artificial Extinction e Artificial and natural barriers (physical and biological)

e Even though species extinction is a natural process which ¢ Guarding
can happen without the intervention of humans, extinc- — e Alternative high-cost livestock husbandry practices
tions caused by humans is now happening over and

: O° e Relocation: voluntary human population resettlement
above the reasonable estimate of natural extinction rates.

e Waste management systems that restrict wildlife access

e Species are threatened with extinction by the interven-
to refuse

tion of humans due to:

e direct causes - such as hunting, collection or capture Mitigative strategies

and persecution ¢ Compensation systems
e Indirect causes - such as habitat loss, modification e Insurance programmes
and fragmentation and the introduction of invasive e Incentive programmes

Species. ¢ Community based natural resource management

schemes (CBNRMS)
12.9. MAN - ANIMAL CONFLICT

e Regulated harvest

e It refers to the interaction between wild animals and
people and the resultant negative impact on people or
their resources, or wild animals or their habitat. It oc-
curs when wildlife needs overlap with those of human
populations, creating costs to residents and wild animals. | ° Better sharing of information.

e Increase alternate crops, preys or water points
e Wildlife translocation

e Conservation education for local populations

QBRSELESA RAL}
~e ~o “~e ~o “~ ~o

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 211 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 212 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

QF 6° g Go

| CHAPTER - 13 |

ENVIRONMENT

QW

PLANT DIVERSITY OF INDIA

13.1. PLANT CLASSIFICATION

1.

Herb is defined as a plant whose stem is always green
and tender with height of not more than 1 meter.

Shrub is defined as a woody perennial plant differing
from a perennial herb in its persistent and woody
stem. It differs from a tree in its low stature and its
habit of branching from the base. Not more than 6
meters in height.

Tree is defined as a large woody perennial plant having
a single well defined stem with more or less definite
crown.

Parasites - An organism that draws a part or whole of
its nourishment from another living organism. These
plants do not draw moisture and mineral nutrients
from the soil. They grow on some living plant called
host and penetrate their sucking roots, called hausto-
ria, into the host plants.
e Total parasite - draws whole of its nourishment
e Partial parasite - draws a part of its nourishment
Epiphytes - plant growing on the host plant but not
nourished by the host plant. They do not draw food
from the host plant. They only take the help of the host
plant in getting access to light. Their roots perform
two functions. While changing roots establish the
plant on the branches of the host plant, aerial roots
draw moisture from the air. Eg. Vanda
Climbers - herbaceous or woody plant that climbs up
trees or other support by twining round them or by
holding on to them by trendrills, hooks, aerial roots or
other attachments.

Do you know?
Bats are MAMMALS. They are warm blooded, nurse

their babies with milk and have fur. Bats are only
mammals that can fly (without an airplane!)

13.2. EFFECT OF ABIOTIC COMPONENTS

ON PLANTS

13.2.1. Intensity of light on growth of plants

Extremely high intensity favours root growth than
shoot growth which results in increased transpiration,
short stem, smaller thicker leaves. On the other hand
low intensity of light retards growth, flowering and
fruiting.

When the Intensity of light is less than the minimum,
the plants ceases to grow due to accumulation of CO2
and finally dies.

Out of 7 colours in the visible part of spectrum, only red
and blue are effective in photosynthesis.

Plant grown in blue light are small, red light results in
elongation of cells results in etiolated plants. Plants
grown in ultraviolet and violet light are dwarf.

13.2.2. Effect of frost on plants

Killing of young plants - Even a light radiation frost
chills the soil resulting in freezing the soil moisture. The
plants growing in such soil, get exposed to direct sun
light in the morning, they are killed due to increased
transpiration when their roots are unable to supply
moisture. This is the main reason for innumerable death
of sal seedlings.

Death of plants due to damage to cells - As a result of
frost, water in the intercellular spaces of the plant gets
frozen into ice which withdraws water from the inte-
rior of the cells. This results in increasing concentra-
tion of salts and dehydration of cells. Thus coagulation
and precipitation of the cell colloid results in death of
plant.

Leads to Formation of canker.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 213 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Do you know?

The male frog will hug the female from behind and
as she lays eggs, usually in the water, the male will
fertilize them. After that the eggs are on their own,
to survive and become tadpoles. There are a few spe-
cies of frogs that will look after their babies, but not
many.

13.2.3. Effects of Snow on plants

e Snow influences the distribution of deodar, fir and
spruce.

e Snow acts as blanket, prevents further drop in tem-
perature and protects seedlings from excessive cold and
frost.

e It results in mechanical bending of tree stem.

e Shortens the period of vegetative growth also uproots
the trees.

13.2.4. Effect of temperature on plants

e Excessive high temperature results in death of plant due
to coagulation of protoplasmic proteins. It disturbs the
balance between respiration and photo synthesis
thereby causes depletion of food resulting in greater
susceptibility to fungal and bacterial attack.

e It also results in desiccation of plant tissues and deple-
tion of moisture.

13.2.5. Die back

Refers the progressive dying usually backwards from the
tip of any portion of plant. This is one of the adaptive
mechanisms to avoid adverse conditions. In this mecha-
nism, the root remains alive for years together but the
shoots dies. Eg. Sal, Red sanders, Terminalia tomentosa,
Silk cotton tree, Boswellia serrata.

Causes for die back

1. Dense over head canopy and inadequate light

2. Dense week growth

3. Un-decomposed leaf litter on surface
4. Frost

5. Drip

6. Drought

7. Grazing

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Do you know?

Elephants have remarkable memories. In the wild, they
appear to remember for years the relationships with
dozens, perhaps hundreds of other elephants, some of
whom they may see only occasionally. They also have
an impressive memory for places to drink and to find
food. This information gets passed on from generation
to generation.

Males elephants do not maintain long-term social
bonds, remaining in the unit only into their teens.
They then live out their lives in loose bachelor groups
or wandering on their own.

13.3. INSECTIVOROUS PLANTS

These plants are specialised in trapping insects and are
popularly known as insectivorous plants.

They are very different from normal plants in their mode
of nutrition. They, however, never prey upon humans or
large animals as often depicted in fiction.

Insectivorous plants can broadly be divided into active

and passive types based on their method of trapping their

prey.

e The active ones can close their leaf traps the moment
insects land on them.

e The passive plants have a ‘pitfall’ mechanism, having
some kind of jar or pitcher-like structure into which the
insect slips and falls, to eventually be digested.

The insectivorous plants often have several attractions
such as brilliant colours, sweet secretions and other curios
to lure their innocent victims.

Why do they hunt despite having normal roots and
photosynthetic leaves?

These plants are usually associated with rain-washed,
nutrient-poor soils, or wet and acidic areas that are ill-
drained. Such wetlands are acidic due to anaerobic condi-
tions, which cause partial decomposition of organic matter
releasing acidic compounds into the surroundings. As a
result, most microorganisms necessary for complete de-
composition of organic matter cannot survive in such
poorly oxygenated conditions.

Normal plants find it difficult to survive in such nutrient
poor habitats. The hunter plants are successful in such
places because they supplement their photosynthetic food
production by trapping insects and digesting their nitrogen
rich bodies.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 214 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

13.3.1. The Indian Hunters

Insectivorous plants of India

1.

Drosera or Sundew inhabiting wet infertile soils or
marshy places

Insect trapping mechanism: The tentacles on the leaves
secrete a sticky fluid that shines in the sun like dew-
drops. Therefore the Drosera. are commonly known as
‘sundews’. When an insect lured by these glistening
drops alights on the leaf surface it gets stuck in this fluid
and are absorbed and digested.

. Aldrovanda is a freefloating, rootless aquatic plant, the

only species found in India, occurs in the salt marshes
of Sunderbans, south of Calcutta. It also grows in fresh
water bodies like ponds, tanks and lakes.

Insect trapping mechanism: On the leaf midrib are
found some sensitive trigger hairs. The two halves of
the leaf blade of Aldrovanda close along the midrib the
moment an insect comes into contact with the leaf, trap-
ping the victim inside.

Nepenthes: The members of the family are com-
monly known as ‘pitcher plants’ because their
leaves bear jar-like structures.

Distribution - It is confined to the high rainfall hills and
plateaus of north-eastern region, at altitudes ranging
from 100 - 1500 m, particularly in Garo, Khasi and
Jaintia hills of Meghalaya.

Insect trapping mechanism: Nepenthes conforms to the
pitfall type of trap. A honey like substance is secreted
from glands at the entrance of the pitcher. Once the
insect enters into the pitcher, it falls down because of
the slipperiness.

The inner wall, towards its lower half, bears numerous
glands, which secrete a proteolytic enzyme. This en-
zyme digests the body of the trapped insects and nutri-
ents are absorbed.

. Utricularia or Bladderworts: The Bladderworts gen-

erally inhabit freshwater wetlands and waterlogged
areas. Some species are associated with moist moss
covered rock surfaces, and damp soils during rains.

Insect trapping: Utricularia in its bladders mouth, has
sensitive bristles or hairs. When an insect happens to
contact these hairs the door opens, carrying the insect
into the bladder along with a little current of water. The
door is shut when water fills the bladder, The enzymes
produced by the inner wall of the bladder digest the
insect.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

5. Pinguicula or Butterwort: It grows in the alpine
heights of Himalayas, from Kashmir to Sikkim, along
stream-sides in cool boggy places.

e Insect trapping mechanism: In Pinguicula, an entire leaf
works as trap. When an insect lands on the leaf surface,
it gets stuck in the sticky exudate.the leaf margins roll
up thus trapping the victim.

Medicinal properties

Drosera are capable of curdling milk, its bruised leaves are
applied on blisters, used for dyeing silk.

Nepenthes in local medicine to treat cholera patients, the
liquid inside the pitcher is useful for urinary troubles, it is
also used as eye drops.

Utricularia is useful against cough, for dressing of wounds,
as a remedy for urinary disease.

13.3.2. Threat

e Gardening trading for medicinal properties is one of the
main causes for their decline.

e Habitat destruction is also rampant, the wetlands har-
bouring such plants being the main casualties during
the expansion of urban and rural habitation.

e Pollution caused by effluents containing detergents, fer-
tilizers, pesticides, sewage etc into the wetlands is yet
another major cause for their decline (Since insectivo-
rous plants do not tolerate high nutrient levels)

e Moreover, polluted water bodies are dominated by pro-
lific water weeds which cause elimination of the delicate
insectivorous plants.

Do you know?

Tiger, delineates its own territory by urinating on the
trees and rocks along the boundary and lives within
that. Trespass by another male usually ends up in
conflict which turns into a bloody battle sometimes.
The tigresses in a family may have overlapping terri-
tories within the male’s territory.

Even though tiger is a powerful predator with plenty
of tactics, it is observed that only one in twenty at-
tempts of hunting is really successful.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 215 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

13.4. INVASIVE ALIEN SPECIES

Purposely or accidentally, people often bring non-native
species into new areas where the species have few or no
natural predators to keep their populations in check.

Aliens are species that occur outside their natural range.
Alien species that threaten native plants and animals or
other aspects of biodiversity are called alien invasive spe-
cies. They occur in all groups of plants and animals, as
competitors, predators, pathogens and parasites, and they
have invaded almost every type of native ecosystem,

Biological invasion by alien species is recognised as one
of the major threats to native species and ecosystems.
The effects on biodiversity are enormous and often ir-
reversible.

13.4.1. Invasion and Species Richness?

The invasions potentially lead to an increase in species
richness, as invasive species are added to the existing spe-
cies pool. But it also leads to extinction of native species,
resulting in decrease of species richness. The negative in-
teractions are primarily the competition with natives for
food and sustenance, which may not allow coexistence and
also by predation.

13.4.2. Effects

e Loss of Biodiversity

e Decline of Native Species (Endemics).

e Habitat Loss

e Introduced pathogens reduce crop and stock yields
e Degradation of marine and freshwater ecosystems

This biological invasion constitutes the greatest threat to
biodiversity, and it has already had devastating conse-
quences for the planet and challenges for the conservation
managers.

Are black rhinos really black?

No, black rhinos are not black at all. The species prob-
ably derives its name as a distinction from the white
rhino (which is not white at all either) or from the
dark-colored local soil that often covers its skin after
wallowing in mud.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

13.4.3. Some Invasive fauna in India are:

1. Anew invasive gall forming insect of Eucalyptus
in Southern India.

e Leptocybe invasa - a new insect pest detected
from few pockets of coastal Tamil Nadu and it
has spread to peninsular India.

e It is a tiny wasp that forms leaf and stem galls
in Eucalyptus.

Crazy ant

Giant African snail
Myna

Gold Fish

Pigeon

Donkey

House Gecko

ow ON agp Y Dd

Tilapia

13.5. SOME INVASIVE ALIEN FLORA
OF INDIA

13.5.1. Needle Bush

e Nativity: Trop. South America

e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Occasional in thorny scrub and dry degraded
forests and often creates close thickets.

13.5.2. Black Wattle
e Nativity: South East Australia
e Distribution in India: Western Ghats

e Remarks: Introduced for afforestation in Western Ghats.
Regenerates rapidly after fire and forms dense thickets.
It is distributed in forests and grazing lands in high
altitude areas.

13.5.3. Goat weed
e Nativity: Trop. America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Troublesome weed in
gardens, cultivated fields and forests.

13.5.4. Alternanthera paronychioides
e Nativity: Trop. America

e Distribution in India: Throughout

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 216 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Remarks: Occasional weed along edges of tanks, ditches
and in marshy lands.

13.5.5. Prickly Poppy
e Nativity: Trop. Central & South America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Common winter season
weed in cultivated fields, scrub lands and fringes of
forests.

13.5.6. Blumea eriantha
e Nativity: Trop. America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Abundant along railway
tracks, road sides and degraded forest lands.

13.5.7. Palmyra, Toddy Palm

e Nativity: Trop. Africa

e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Cultivated and self
sown, occasionally found to be gregarious near by cul-
tivated fields, scrub lands and waste lands.

13.5.8. Calotropis / Madar, Swallo Wort

e Nativity: Trop. Africa

e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Common in cultivated
fields, scrub lands and waste lands.

13.5.9. Datura, Mad Plant, Thorn Apple
e Nativity: Trop. America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Occasional weed on dis-
turbed ground.

13.5.10. Water Hyacinth
e Nativity: Trop. America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Abundant in still or slow
floating waters. Nuisance for aquatic ecosystems.

13.5.11. Impatiens, Balsam
e Nativity: Trop. America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Common along streams
of moist forests and occasionally along railway tracks;
also runs wild in gardens.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

Do you know?

Sea cow, Dugong dugon occurs in near shore waters
of Gulf of Mannar, Gulf of Kachchh and Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.

13.5.13. Ipomoea / the pink morning glory
e Nativity: Trop. America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Common weed of
marhsy lands and along the edges of tanks and ditches.

13.5.13. Lantana camara / Lantana, Wild Sage
e Nativity: Trop. America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Common weed of for-
ests, plantations, habitation, waste lands and scrub
lands.

13.5.14. Black Mimosa
e Nativity: Trop. North America
e Distribution in India: Himalaya, Western Ghats

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. It invades water courses
and seasonally flooded wetlands.

13.5.15. Touch-Me-Not, Sleeping Grass
e Nativity: Brazil
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Common weed of culti-
vated fields, scrub lands and degraded forests.

13.5.16. 4 ‘o’ clock plant.
e Nativity: Peru
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Runs wild in gardens
and near habitation.

13.5.17. Parthenium / Congress grass,
Parthenium

e Nativity: Trop. North America
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Common weed of culti-
vated fields, forests, overgrazed pastures, waste lands
and gardens.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 217 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

13.5.18. Prosopis juliflora / Mesquite
e Nativity: Mexico
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Aggressive colonizer. Common weed of waste
lands, scrub lands and degraded forests.

13.5.19. Townsend grass
e Nativity: Trop. W. Asia
e Distribution in India: Throughout

e Remarks: Very common along streams and banks of
rivers.

Do you know?

Four years after the Maharashtra government
launched a project to monitor and protect wild buf-
faloes at the Kolamarka Conservation Reserve at
Sironcha in Gadchiroli, the numbers have shown a
gradual rise. Now, the state government is consider-
ing a proposal tiger reserve for a higher degree of
protection.

13.6. MEDICINAL PLANTS
13.6.1. Beddomes Cycad / Perita / Kondaitha
e Eastern Peninsular India.

e Uses: The male cones of the plant are used by local
herbalists as a cure for rheumatoid arthritis and muscle
pains. Fire resistant property is also there.

13.6.2. Blue vanda / Autumn Ladies Tresses
Orchid

e Distribution: Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Nagaland.

e Vanda is one of the few botanical orchids with blue
flowers a property much appreciated for producing in-
terspecific and intergeneric hybrids.

13.6.3. Kuth / Kustha / Pooshkarmoola / Uplet
e Distribution: Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh

e Uses: It is used as an anti-inflammatory drug, and a
component of the traditional Tibetan medicine. The
roots of the plant are used in perfumery. Dry roots
(Kuth, Costus) are strongly scented and yields an aro-
matic oil, which is also used in making insecticides. The
roots contain an alkaloid, ‘saussurine’, which is me-
dicinally important.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

13.6.4. Ladies Slipper Orchid

e Uses: These types of orchids are mainly used as collec-
tor’s items but lady’s slipper is some times used today
either alone or as a component of formulas intended to
produce treat anxiety / insomnia (scientific evidence is
not present). This is also sometimes used topically as a
poultice or plaster for relief of muscular pain.

13.6.5. Red vanda
e Distribution: Manipur, Assam, Andhrapradesh

e Uses: As a whole orchids are collected to satisfy an ever
demanding market of orchid fanciers, especially in Eu-
rope, North America and Asia.

13.6.6. Sarpagandha

e Distribution: Sub Himalayan tract from Punjab east-
wards to Nepal, Sikkim, Assam, Eastern & Western
Ghats, parts of Central India & in the Andamans.

e Uses: Rauvolfia roots are of immense medicinal value
and has steady demand. It is used for treating various
central nervous system disorders. The pharmacological
activity of rauvolfia is due to the presence of several
alkaloids of which reserpine is the most important,
which is used for its sedative action in mild anxiety
states and chronic psychoses. It has a depressant action
on central nervous system produces sedation and lower
blood pressure. The root extracts are used for treating
intestinal disorders, particularly diarrhoea and dysen-
tery and also anthelmintic. It is used for the treatment
of cholera, colic and fever. The juice of the leaves are
used as a remedy for opacity of the cornea. The total
root extracts exhibits a variety of effects, viz., sedation,
hypertension, brodyeardia, myosis, ptosis, tremors,
which are typical of reserpine.

13.6.7. Ceropegia species.
e Lantern Flower, Parasol Flower, Parachute Flower,
Bushman’s Pipe.

e Uses: These plants are used as ornamental plants.

13.6.8. Emodi / Indian Podophyllum

e Himalayan May Apple, India May Apple etc.,

e Distribution: Lower elevations in and around surround-
ing the Himalayas.

e Uses: Rhizomes and roots constitute the drug. The dried
rhizome form the source of medicinal resin. Podophyl-
lin is toxic and strongly irritant to skin and mucous
membranes.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 218 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

13.6.9. Tree Ferns

e Distribution: Lower elevations in and surrounding the
Himalaya.

e Uses: The Soft Tree Fern can be used as a food source,
with the pith of the plant being eaten either cooked or
raw. It is a good source of starch.

13.6.10. Cycads
e A Gymnosperm tree.
e All known as living fossil.

e Distribution: Western ghats, Eastern ghats, North East
India and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

e Cycads have been used as a source of starch and also
during socio-cultural rituals.

e There is some indication that the regular consumption
of starch derived from cycads is a factor in the develop-
ment of Lytico-Bodig disease, a neurological disease
with symptoms similar to those of Parkinson’s disease
and ALS.

e Threats: Over harvesting, Deforestation and forest fire.

13.6.11. Elephant’s foot
e Distribution: Throughout the North Western Himalayas.

e Uses: Commercial source of Diosgenin (a steroid sapo-
genin, is the product of sapogenin, is the product of
hydrolysis by acids, strong bases, or enzymes of sapo-
nins, extracted from the tubers of Dioscorea wild yam.
The sugar-free (aglycone), diosgenin is used for the
commercial synthesis of cortisone, pregnenolone, pro-
gesterone, and other steroid products).

Do you know?

Sharks give birth to pups in three ways

I. eggs are laid (like birds)
II. eggs hatch inside the mother and then are born

III. pups (sharks) grow inside the mother.

13.7. TREE CHARACTERS
13.7.1. Types of Trees:

There are two main types of trees: deciduous and evergreen.
(i) Deciduous trees
e lose all their leaves for part of the year.

e In cold climates, this happens during the autumn so
that the trees are bare throughout the winter.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

e In hot and dry climates, deciduous trees usually lose
their leaves during the dry season.

(ii) Evergreen trees

e don’t lose all their leaves at the any time (they always
have some foliage).

e They do lose their old leaves a little at a time with new
ones growing in to replace the old. An evergreen tree is
never completely without leaves.

Do you know?

The world’s oldest trees are 4,600 year old Bristlecone
pines in U.S.A.

13.7.2. Parts of a Tree:

Roots:

e The roots are the part of the tree that grows under-
ground.

e Besides keeping the tree from tipping over, the main job
of the roots is to collect water and nutrients from the
soil and to store them for times when there isn’t as
much available.

Crown:

e The crown is made up of the leaves and branches at the
top of a tree.

e The crown shades the roots, collects energy from the
sun (photosynthesis) and allows the tree to remove
extra water to keep it cool (transpiration -- similar to
sweating in animals).

Leaves:

e They are the part of the tree that converts energy into
food (sugar).

e Leaves are the food factories of a tree.

e They contain a very special substance called chlorophyll.
It is chlorophyll that gives leaves their green colour.

e Chlorophyll is an extremely important biomolecule,
used in photosynthesis. leaves use the sun’s energy to
convert carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and water
from the soil into sugar and oxygen.

e The sugar, which is the tree’s food, is either used or
stored in the branches, trunk and roots. The oxygen is
released back into the atmosphere.

Branches:

e The branches provide the support to distribute the leaves
efficiently for the type of tree and the environment.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 219 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e They also serve as conduits for water and nutrients and
as storage for extra sugar.

Do you know?

1. Trees are the largest and oldest living organism on
earth:

. It can take 10 minutes to walk around the crown
of a giant banyan tree in Calcutta.

. Trees trap more of the sun’s energy than any other
group of organisms on earth

. Trees do not restore and repair wood that is in-
jured and infected, instead they compartmentalize
off the damaged tissue.

Trunk:
e The trunk of the tree provides its shape and support
and holds up the crown.

e The trunk transports water and nutrients from the soil
and sugar from the leaves.

13.7.3. Parts of the Trunk:

Annual rings

e Inside the trunk of a tree there are a number of growth
rings.

e Each year of the tree’s life, a new ring is added so it is
referred as the annual rings.

e It is used to calculate Dendro-Chronology (Age of a tree)
and Paleo-Climatology.

e The age of a tree can be determined by the number of
growth rings. The size of the growth ring is determined
in part by environmental conditions - temperature,
water availability.

Bark:

e The outside layer of the trunk, branches and twigs of
trees.

e The bark serves as a protective layer of the tree.

e Trees actually have inner bark and outer bark. The
inner layer of bark is made up of living cells and the
outer layer is made of dead cells, sort of like our finger-
nails.

e The scientific name for the inner layer of bark is Phloem.
The main job of this inner layer is to carry sap full of
sugar from the leaves to the rest of the tree.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e A number of handy things are made from bark includ-
ing latex, cinnamon and some kinds of poisons. It isn’t
surprising the strong flavours, scents and toxins can
often be found in the bark of different types of trees.

Cambium:

e The thin layer of living cells just inside the bark is called
cambium.

e It is the part of the tree that makes new cells allowing
the tree to grow wider each year.

Sapwood (Xylem):
e The scientific name for sapwood is xylem.

e It is made up of a network of living cells that bring
water and nutrients up from the roots to the branches,
twigs and leaves.

e tis the youngest wood of the tree -- over the years, the
inner layers of sapwood die and become heartwood.

Heartwood:

e The heartwood is dead sapwood in the center of the
trunk.

e It is the hardest wood of the tree giving it support and
strength.

e It is usually darker in colour than the sapwood.

Pith:

e Pith is the tiny dark spot of spongy living cells right in
the center of the tree trunk.

e Essential nutrients are carried up through the pith.

e It’s placement right in the center means it is the most
protected from damage by insects, the wind or animals.

13.7.4. Root types
e Taproot - Primary descending root formed by the direct
prolongation of the radicle of the embryo.

e Lateral Root - Roots that arise from the tap root and
spread laterally to support the tree.

e Adventitious Roots - Roots that are produced from the
parts of the plant other than the radicle or its subdivi-
sion. The following kinds of Adventitious Roots are
commonly found in trees.

e Buttresses - They are out - growths formed usually ver-
tically above the lateral roots and thus connect the base
of the stem with roots. They are formed in the basal
portion of the stem.

e Ex: Silk cotton tree.

e Prop - Roots - Adventitious Roots - produced from the
branches of the tree which remain suspended in the air

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 220 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

till they reach the ground. On reaching the ground they
enter into the soil and get fixed.

e Ex: Banyan Tree

e Stilt - Roots - Adventitious Roots which emerged from
the butt of a tree above ground level. So that the tree
appears as if supported on flying buttresses.

e Ex: Rhizphora species of mangroves.

e Pneumatophore: It is a spike like projection of the roots
of swamp / mangrove tree above the ground. It helps
the submerged roots to obtain oxygen.

e Ex: Heretiera spp, Bruguiera spp.

e Haustorial roots are the roots of parasitic plants that
can absorb water and nutrients from another plant.
e Eg: mistletoe (Viscum alubum) and dodder.

e Storage roots are modified roots for storage of food or
water, such as carrots and beets. They include some
taproots and tuberous roots.

e Mycorrhiza - structure produced from the combination
of the modified rootlet with fungal tissue.

Do you know?

1. Atree can absorb as much as 48 pounds of carbon
dioxide per year and can sequester 1 ton of carbon
dioxide by the time it reaches 40 years old.

2. Tree wood is a highly organized arrangement of
living, dying, and dead cells.

13.7.5. Canopy classification-

e Relative completeness of canopy. Classified into 4 types.
e Closed - the density is 1.0
e Dense - the density is 0.75 to 1.0
e Thin - the density is 0.50 to 0.75

e Open - the density is under 0.50

13.7.6. Other characters

e Phenology - Science that deals with the time of appear-
ance of characteristic periodic events such as leaf shed-
ding etc.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Etiolation - With the absence of adequate light, plants
become pale yellow and have long thin internodes.

Autumn tints - in some trees, leaves undergo a striking
change in colour before falling from the tree.

e Ex: Mango, Cassia fistula, Quercus incana

Taper - the decrease in diametre of the stem of a tree
from the base upwards. ie., the stem is thicker at the
base and thinner in the upper portion of the tree.

Tapering occurs due to the pressure of the wind which
is centred in the lower one third of the crown and is
conveyed to the lower parts of the stem, increasing with
increasing length. To counteract this pressure, which
may snap the tree at the base, the tree reinforces itself
towards the base.

They are generally associated with the absence of long
taproot system due to either shallow soil are badly aer-
ated and infertile subsoil.

Bamboo gregarious flowering - general flowering over
the considerable area of all (or) most of the individuals
of certain species, that do not flower annually. Generally
followed by death of a plant.

Sal Tree grows in variety of geological formations but
completely absent in Deccan trap where its place is
taken by teak.

Sandal tree is a partial-root parasite. The seedlings of
this species grow independently in the beginning but in
few months develop haustorial connections with the
roots of some shrub and later with some tree species
growing in the vicinity. Sandle tree manufactures its
own food but depends upon the host like other partial
parasites for water and mineral nutrients.

Aerial seeding is the process of dispersing the seed
aerially. In India, aerial seeding has been done on ex-
periment basis in Chambal ravines in UP, Rajasthan,
West Bengal and Western Ghats of Maharashtra. The
research carried out during 1982 shows that the sur-
vival percentage was 97.3 and 2.7 for Prosopis juliflora
and Acacia nilotica respectively. The survey indicated
that 25% of the area has not responded for aerial seed-
ing at all.

%. 2% o% 0% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 221 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 222 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

Q@ 6° a Bo

| CHAPTER - 14 |

ENVIRONMENT

QW

MARINE ORGANISMS

14.1 PLANKTON

The term ‘plankton’ refers to the group of organisms
which float in the surface waters of the rivers, lakes and
oceans.

Includes both microscopic plants like algae (phytoplank-
ton) and animals like crustaceans and protozoans (zoo0-
plankton) found in all aquatic ecosystems, except
certain swift moving waters.

The locomotory power of the planktons is limited so
that their distribution is controlled, largely, by currents
in the aquatic ecosystems.

e The growth rate, productivity and species diversity
of plankton in tropical waters especially in mangrove
waters are high.

14.2 PHYTOPLANKTON

Derived from the Greek words phyto (plant) and plank-
ton (made to wander or drift), phytoplankton are mi-
croscopic plant organisms that live in aquatic
environments, both salty and fresh.

Some phytoplankton are bacteria, some are protists, and
most are single-celled plants. Among the common kinds
are cyanobacteria, silica-encased diatoms, dinoflagel-
lates, green algae, and chalk-coated coccolithophores.

Phytoplankton produce more than 60% of oxygen pro-
duced from all plants.

Like land plants, all phytoplankton have chlorophyll to
capture sunlight, and they use photosynthesis to turn
it into chemical energy. They consume carbon dioxide,
and release oxygen. All phytoplankton photosynthesize,
but some get additional energy by consuming other
organisms.

These micro-algae are present throughout the lighted
regions of all the seas and oceans including the Polar
Regions.

Their total biomass is many times greater than that of
the total plants on land and they serve as the “pasture
grounds” in the aquatic environment.

Do you know?

Sea Kraits are one of the few sea snakes that go to land
to lay their eggs while most others, like the Olive sea
snake will give birth in the water.

14.2.1. Factors Affecting Phytoplanktons
Biodiversity

Light

Phytoplanktons are limited to the uppermost layers of
the ocean where light intensity is sufficient for photo-
synthesis to take place.

The photosynthetic rate varies with light intensity.

Nutrients

The major inorganic nutrients required by phytoplank-
ton for growth and reproduction are nitrogen and
phosphorus.

Diatoms and silicoflagellates also require silicate (SiO2)
in significant amounts.

Some phytoplankton can fix nitrogen and can grow in
areas where nitrate concentrations are low.

They also require trace amounts of iron which limits
phytoplankton growth in large areas of the ocean be-
cause iron concentrations are very low.

Temperature

Temperature acts along with other factors in influenc-
ing the variation of photosynthetic production.

Generally, the rate of photosynthesis increases with an
increase in temperature, but diminishes sharply after
a point is reached.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 223 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Temperature, together with illumination, influences the
seasonal variation of phytoplankton production in the
temperate latitudes.

Salinity

e Besides light and temperature, salinity also is known to
influence primary production.

Grazing by Zooplankton

e The grazing rate of zooplankton is one of the major
factors influencing the size of the standing crop of phy-
toplankton, and thereby the rate of production.

Distribution

e Marine phytoplankton are not uniformly distributed
throughout the oceans of the world. The highest con-
centrations are found at high latitudes, with the excep-
tion of upwelling areas on the continental shelves, while
the tropics and subtropics have 10 to 100 times lower
concentrations.

e In addition to nutrients, temperature, salinity and light
availability; the high levels of exposure to solar UV-B
radiation that normally occur within the tropics and sub-
tropics may play a role in phytoplankton distributions.

e Phytoplankton productivity is limited to the euphotic
zone, the upper layer of the water column in which
there is sufficient sunlight to support net productivity.

e The position of the organisms in the euphotic zone is
influenced by the action of wind and waves.

14.2.2. Importance of phytoplankton
The food web

e Phytoplanktons are the foundation of the aquatic food
web, the primary producers, it feeds everything from
microscopic animal-like zooplankton to whales. Small
fish and invertebrates graze on the phytoplanktons, and
then those smaller animals are eaten by bigger ones.

Do you know?

sea snakes are usually found in shallow waters of the
Indian Ocean, and warmer areas of the Pacific Ocean.
They eat fish, fish eggs and eels.

14.2.3. Phytoplankton - the Carbon Cycle and
climate change

e Phytoplankton are responsible for most of the transfer
of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to the ocean.
Carbon dioxide is consumed during photosynthesis, and
the carbon is incorporated in the phytoplankton, just as

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

carbon is stored in the wood and leaves of a tree. Most
of the carbon is returned to near-surface waters when
phytoplankton are eaten or decompose, but some falls
into the ocean depths.

e Worldwide, this “biological carbon pump” transfers
about 10 gigatonnes of carbon from the atmosphere to
the deep ocean each year. Even small changes in the
growth of phytoplankton may affect atmospheric car-
bon dioxide concentrations, which would feed back to
global surface temperatures.

Do you know?

1. Sharks have a sensory organ called the “ampullae
of Lorenzini” which they use to “feel” the electrical
field coming from its prey.

2. Silverfish is an insect that can be found in old un-
used books

14.3. ZOOPLANKTON

e Zooplankton play vital role in food web of the food
chain, nutrient recycling, and in transfer of organic
matter from primary producers to secondary consum-
ers like fishes.

e They are more abundant within mangrove water-ways
than in adjacent coastal waters, and a large proportion
of the juvenile fish of mangrove habitat are zooplank-
tivorous.

e The zooplankton determine the quantum of fish stock.
Hence, zooplankton communities, based on their qual-
ity and species diversity, are used for assessing the pro-
ductivity vis-a- vis fishery resource, fertility and health
status of the ecosystem.

e Tiny flagellates, giant jellyfish (>50 pm).
14.4. SEA-GRASS

e Sea grasses are (angiosperms) marine flowering plants
that resemble grass in appearance.

e They produce flowers; have strap-like or oval leaves and
a root system.

e They grow in shallow coastal waters with sandy or
muddy bottoms & require comparatively calm areas.

e They are the only group of higher plants adapted to life
in the salt water.

e Major Sea grass meadows in India occur along the south
east coast of Tamil Nadu and in the lagoons of a few
Lakshadweep Islands. There are few grass beds around
Andaman and Nicobar islands also.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 224 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e The rich growth of seagrasses along the Tamil Nadu
coast and Lakshadweep islands is mainly due to high
salinity, clarity of the water and sandy substratum.

14.4.1. Functions

1. Sea grass beds physically help
e to reduce wave and current energy,
e to filter suspended sediments from the water and
e stabilise bottom sediments to control erosion.

2. Provides habitat for marine invertebrates and fishes.

3. Seagrass beds are widespread in lagoon & in such
areas, the population of fish and migratory birds are
also higher due to the availability of food and shelter.

4. Sea grasses on reef flats and near estuaries are also
nutrient sinks, buffering or filtering nutrient and chem-
ical inputs to the marine environment.

Do you know?

The five species of turtle that nest on Indian coast are
Leatherback sea turtle, Green turtle, the Olive Ridley, the
Hawksbill, and the Loggerhead turtle.

IUCN has accorded high priority for the conserva-
tion of sea grass.

Out of 58 species found in the world, Fourteen spe-
cies of seagrasses have been recorded from Indian
coast.

They are commonly distributed from inter-tidal to
sub-tidal region down to 8 m depth.

Dugong, a mammal dependent on sea grass for
food, is also on the verge of extinction.

14.4.2. Threats to sea grass beds

e Eutrophication, siltation, trawling, coastal engineering
constructions and over exploitation for commercial pur-
poses are the major threats for sea grass beds.

14.4.4. Management

e The major seagrass beds should be mapped and areas
has to be identified for preservation.

e Dredging should be carried out far away from seagrass
beds as siltation /turbidity destroys seagrass beds.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

14.5. SEAWEEDS

¢ Seaweeds are (thalloid plants) macroscopic algae, which
mean they have no differentiation of true tissues such as
roots, stems and leaves. They have leaf-like appendages.

e Seaweeds, the larger and visible marine plants are found
attached to rocks, corals and other submerged strata in
the intertidal and shallow sub tidal zones of the sea.

e Seaweeds grow in shallow coastal waters wherever siz-
able substata is available.

e Based on the colour of their pigmentation, sea weeds
are broadly classified into different classes such as
e blue- green,
e green,
e brown,

e red etc.

14.5.1. Functions of seaweeds
e Food for marine organism,
e habitat for fish breeding grounds,
e Source of sediment.

14.5.2. Uses of seaweeds

e Seaweeds are important as food for humans, feed for
animals, and fertilizer for plants.

e Seaweeds are used as a drug for goiter treatment, in-
testinal and stomach disorders.

e Products like agar-agar and alginates, iodine which are
of commercial value, are extracted from seaweeds.

e By the biodegradation of seaweeds methane like eco-
nomically important gases can be produced in large
quantities.

e Extracts of some seaweed species show antibacterial
activity.

e Seaweeds are also used as the potential indicators of
pollution in coastal ecosystem, particularly heavy metal
pollution due to their ability to bind and accumulate
metals strongly.

14.5.3. Harmful effects of seaweeds

e Rotting seaweed is a potent source of hydrogen sulfide,
a highly toxic gas, and has been implicated in some
incidents of apparent hydrogen-sulphide poisoning. It
can cause vomiting and diarrhoea.

14.5.4. Threats to seaweeds

e Threats are similar to that of sea grass.

QIBKEALSA Bh SAY
~e ~o “~e ~o “~ ~o

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 225 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 226 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

QF 6° g Go

| CHAPTER - 15 |

ENVIRONMENT

QW

PROTECTED AREA NETWORK

NATIONAL INITIATIVE

15.1. PROTECTED AREAS (PA)

e The adoption of a National Policy for Wildlife Conserva-
tion in 1970 and the enactment of the Wildlife (Protec-
tion) Act in 1972 lead to a significant growth in the
protected areas network, from 5 national parks and 60
sanctuaries to a network of 669 Protected Areas with
geographical area of the country, 4.92%.

e The network was further strengthened by a number of
national conservation projects, notably Project Tiger,
project elephant, crocodile Breeding and Management
Project, etc.

15.2. WILD LIFE SANCTUARY (WLS)

e The Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972 provided for the
declaration of certain areas by the State Government as
wildlife sanctuaries if the area was thought to be of
adequate ecological, geomorphological and natural sig-
nificance.

National Park (NP)

e The Wild Life (Protection) Act (WPA) of 1972 provided
for the declaration of National Parks by the State Gov-
ernment in addition to the declaration of wildlife sanc-
tuaries.

e National Parks are declared in areas that are considered
to be of adequate ecological, geomorphological and
natural significance although within the law, the differ-
ence in conservation value of a National Park from that
of a sanctuary is not specified in the WPA 1972.

Difference between the two

e National Parks enjoy a greater degree of protection than
sanctuaries.

e Certain activities which are regulated in sanctuaries,
such as grazing of livestock, are prohibited in National
Parks.

e Wildlife sanctuary can be created for a particular spe-
cies (for e.g. grizzled giant squirrel w.l.s in srivallipu-
thur) whereas the national park is not primarily focused
on a particular species.

e The Central Government may also declare, Wild Life
Sanctuary and National Park under certain conditions

15.2.1. General Provision for Sanctuary and
National Park

Declaration of the Protected Area by the State
Government:

e Initial Notification: The State Government may, by
notification, declare its intention to constitute any area
within or outside any reserve forest as a sanctuary/
National Park if it considers that such area is of adequate
ecological, faunal, floral, geomorphological, natural or
zoological significance, for the purpose of protecting,
propagating or developing wild life or its environment.

e Final notification: After the initial notification has
been issued and the period for preferring claims has
elapsed, the State Government may issue a notification
specifying the limits of the area which shall be com-
prised within the sanctuary and declare that the said
area shall be a sanctuary/ National park from such date
as may be specified in the notification.

Do you know?

Spiders can’t chew or swallow inject their prey with
poison using their fangs. The poison turns the insides
of insect to a watery goop and the spider just sucks
it up.

Declared by the Central Government:

e The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that an
area is of adequate ecological, faunal, floral, geomor-

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 227 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

phological, natural or zoological significance, for the
purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wild
life or its environment, declare it a sanctuary/ National
Park by notification.

Boundaries

The notification shall specify, as nearly as possible, the
situation and limits of such area.

In cases where territorial waters is included, the limits
shall be determined in consultation with the Chief Naval
Hydrographer of the Central Government, after taking
adequate measures to protect the occupational interests
of the local fishermen.

No alteration of boundaries of a sanctuary/National
Park shall be made except on recommendation of the
National Board for Wild Life.

(The Amendment Act of 1991 provided for the inclusion
of territorial waters in areas to be declared as sanctu-
aries for the protection of off-shore marine flora and
fauna).

Settlement of rights

The State Government shall make alternative arrange-
ments required for making available fuel, fodder and
other forest produce to the persons affected, in terms
of their rights as per the Government records.

The State Government appoints an officer as a ‘Collec-
tor’ under the Act to inquire into and determine the
existence, nature and extent of rights of any person in
or over the land comprised within the sanctuary/ Na-
tional Park which is to be notified.

After the issue of a notification for declaration of the
Protected Area, no right shall be acquired in, on or over
the land comprised within the limits of the area speci-
fied in such notification, except by succession, testamen-
tary or intestate.

Do you know?

The term “crocodilians” refers to members of three
families: the Family Crocodylidae (crocodiles), Family
Alligatoridae (alligators and caimans) and Family Ga-
vialidae (gharial). The term “crocodiles” refers only to
crocodiles.

Claim of rights:

In the case of a claim to a right in or over any land re-
ferred to, the Collector shall pass an order admitting or
rejecting the same in whole or in part

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

If such claim is admitted in whole or in part, the Col-
lector may either

(a) exclude such land from the limits of the proposed
sanctuary or

(b) proceed to acquire such land or rights, except where
by an agreement between the owner of such land or
holder of rights and the Government, the owner or
holder of such rights has agreed to surrender his
rights to the Government, in or over such land, and
on payment of such compensation, as is provided in
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894

(©) allow, in consultation with the Chief Wild Life War-
den, the continuation of any right of any person in
or over any land within the limits of the sanctuary

Entry into the Protected Area

No person other than:-
1. A public servant on duty
2. A person who has been permitted by the Chief Wild

Life Warden or the authorized officer to reside within
the limits of the sanctuary/National Park

3. A person who has any right over immovable prop-
erty within the limits of the sanctuary/National Park

4. A person passing through the sanctuary/National
Park along a public highway

5. The dependents of the person referred to in clause
(a), (b) or © above,

Shall enter or reside in the sanctuary/National Park,
except under and in accordance with the conditions of
a permit granted.

Grant of permit for entry:

The Chief Wild Life Warden may, on application, grant
to any person a permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary/
National Park for all or any of the following purposes:

e investigation or study of wildlife and purposes ancil-
lary or incidental thereto

e photography
e scientific research
e tourism

e transaction of lawful business with any person resid-
ing in the sanctuary

The Chief Wild Life Warden shall be the authority who
shall control, manage and maintain all Protected Areas.

The National Board for Wild Life may make recommen-
dations on the setting up of and management of Na-
tional Parks, Sanctuaries and other protected areas and

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 228 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

on matters relating to restriction of activities in those
areas.

The State Board for Wild Life shall advise the State
Government on the selection and management of areas
to be declared as protected areas.

Do you know?

The extinct rhinos were also more widespread, occur-
ring in North America and Europe in addition to Af-
rica and Asia. In the past, rhinos were not confined to
the tropics but extended into temperate and even arc-
tic regions.

15.3. CONSERVATION RESERVE AND

COMMUNITY RESERVES

Conservation Reserve and Community Reserves are the
outcome of Amendments to the Wild life protection act
in 2003.

It provided for a mechanism to provide recognition and
legal backing to the community initiated efforts in wild-
life protection.

It provides for a flexible system wherein the wildlife
conservation is achieved without compromising the
community needs.

15.3.1. Conservation Reserves

The Amendment Act of 2003 provided for the creation
of a new type of protected area called a Conservation
Reserve.

It is an area owned by the State Government adjacent
to National Parks and sanctuaries for protecting the
landscape, seascape and habitat of fauna and flora. It is
managed through a Conservation Reserve Management
Committee

The State Government may, after having consultations
with the local communities, declare any area owned by
the Government as conservation reserve.

Tiruppadaimarathur conservation reserve in
Tirunelveli, tamil nadu is the first conservation reserve
established in the Country. It is an effort of the village
community to protect the birds nesting in their village
and acted for declaration of conservation reserve.

15.3.2. Community Reserve

The Amendment Act of 2003 provided for the creation
of a new type of protected area called a Community
Reserve.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

The State Government may notify any community land
or private land as a Community Reserve, provided that
the members of that community or individuals con-
cerned are agreeable to offer such areas for protecting
the fauna and flora, as well as their traditions, cultures
and practices.

The declaration of such an area is aimed at improving
the socio-economic conditions of the people living in
such areas as well as conserving wildlife. The Reserve
is managed through a Community Reserve Manage-
ment Committee

The State Government may, where the community or
an individual has volunteered to conserve wildlife and
its habitat, declare the area by notification as commu-
nity reserve.

No change in land use pattern shall be made within the
Community Reserve, except in accordance with a reso-
lution passed by the Management Committee and ap-
proval of the same by the State Government

15.4. COASTAL PROTECTED AREAS

It aims to protect and conserve the natural marine eco-
systems in their pristine condition.

Marine Protected Area (MPA) as “any area of intertidal
or sub tidal terrain, together with its overlaying water
and associated flora, fauna, historical and cultural fea-
tures, which has been reserved by law or other effective
means to protect part or all of the enclosed environ-
ment” - IUCN.

Marine productivity in India is concentrated in small
areas of coral reefs, lagoons, mangroves, estuaries and
seagrass beds around the coast, which provides rich feed-
ing and breeding ground for fish and other marine life.

MPA protects the vital life support processes of the sea
and also ensures sustainable productivity and fish pro-
duction.

The MPAs in marine environment in India are primar-
ily classified into following three categories:

Category-I: This covers National Parks and Sanctuaries
and having entire areas in intertidal/sub-tidal or man-
groves, coral reefs, creeks, seagrass beds, algal beds,
estuaries, lagoons.

Category-II: This includes Islands, which have major
parts in marine ecosystem and some part in terrestrial
ecosystem.

Category-IIIA: This includes sandy beaches beyond in-
tertidal line but occasionally interacting with the sea-
water.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 229 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Category-IIIB: This includes ever green or semi ever
green forests of Islands.

e The Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) in India com-
prise of a 33 national parks and wildlife sanctuaries
designated under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972,
encompassing a few of the country’s richest coastal
habitats.

e Marine National Park and Marine Sanctuary in the Gulf
of Kutch form one unit (one MPA). Similarly Bhitar-
kanika National Park and Bhitarkanika Sanctuary are
an integral part of one MPA. Thus, there a total of 31
MPAs in India.

e MPAs cover less than 4.01 % of the total area of all Pro-
tected Areas of India.

Do you know?

The United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) de-
clared 2010-2020 as the United Nations Decade for

Deserts and the Fight against Desertification, to raise
awareness about desertification, land degradation and
drought.

15.5. SACRED GROVES OF INDIA

e Sacred groves comprise of patches of forests or natural
vegetation - from a few trees to forests of several acres
- that are usually dedicated to local folk deities.

e These spaces are protected by local communities be-
cause of their religious beliefs and traditional rituals
that run through several generations.

e The degree of sanctity of the sacred forests varies from
one grove to another. In some forests even the dry foli-
age and fallen fruits are not touched.

e People believe that any kind of disturbance will offend
the local deity, causing diseases, natural calamities or
failure of crops. For example, the Garo and the Khasi
tribes of northeastern India completely prohibit any
human interference in the sacred groves. In other
groves, deadwood or dried leaves may be picked up, but
the live tree or its branches are never cut. For example,
the Gonds of central India prohibit the cutting of a tree
but allow fallen parts to be used.

15.5.1. Classification of Sacred Groves

e Traditional Sacred Groves - It is the place where the
village deity resides, who is represented by an elemen-
tary symbol

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Temple Groves - Here a grove is created around a tem-
ple and conserved.

e Groves around the burial or cremation grounds.

15.5.2. Ecological Significance

¢ Conservation of Biodiversity - The sacred groves are
important repositories of floral and faunal diversity that
have been conserved by local communities in a sustain-
able manner. They are often the last refuge of endemic
species in the geographical region.

e Recharge of aquifers - The groves are often associated
with ponds, streams or springs, which help meet the
water requirements of the local people. The vegetative
cover also helps in the recharging the aquifers.

e Soil conservation - The vegetation cover of the sacred
groves improves the soil stability of the area and also
prevents soil erosion.

15.5.3. Distribution of Sacred Groves in India

e In India, sacred groves are found all over the country
and abundantly along the western ghats in the states of
Kerala and Karnataka.

15.5.4. Threats to the Sacred Groves

e The threats vary from one region to the other and even
from one grove to the other. But the common threats
identified are:

e Disappearance of the traditional belief systems, which
were fundamental to the concept of sacred groves.
These systems and their rituals are now considered
mere superstition.

e Sacred groves in many parts of our country have been
destroyed due to rapid urbanization and developmen-
tal interventions such as roads, railways tracks, dams
including commercial forestry. Encroachment has led
to the shrinkage of some of the largest groves in the
country.

e Many groves are suffering due to ‘Sanskritisation’ or
the transformation of the primitive forms of nature
worship into formal temple worship.

e Invasion by exotic weeds such as Eupatorium odoratum,
Lantana camara and Prosopis juliflora is a serious
threat to some groves.

e Pressures due to increasing livestock and fuelwood col-
lection.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 230 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa B72 6 ENVIRONMENT

GLOBAL INITIATIVE

15.6. EXPORT - PROHIBITED GOODS

e The prohibited items are not permitted to be exported.

An export licence will not be given in the normal course
for goods in the prohibited category.

The following are the items probited in the flora and
fauna category:

e All wild animals, animal articles including their
products and derivatives (excluding those for which
ownership certificates have been granted and also
those required for transactions for education, scien-
tific research and management under Wild Life (Pro-
tection) Act, 1972 including their parts and products).

e Beef of cows, oxen and calf. Beef in the form of offal
of cows, oxen and calf

e Meat of buffalo (both male and female) fresh and
chilled and frozen

e Peacock Tail Feathers & its Handicrafts and articles

e Shavings & Manufactured Articles of shavings of
Shed Antlers of Chital and Sambhar

e Sea shells

¢ Wood and wood products
e Fuel wood

e Wood charcoal

e Sandalwood in any form,( but excluding finished
handicraft products of sandalwood, machine fin-
ished sandalwood products, sandalwood oil):

e Red Sanders wood, Value added products of Red
Sanders

e Mechanical, chemical and semi chemical wood pulp

Do you know?

e The Marble Palace Zoo in Calcutta city which was
established in the year 1854 is the oldest existing
zoo in the country.

Delhi has the largest fleet of busses operating on com-
pressed natural gas, which is a successful example of
low-carbon sustainable transport

India maintains and reports ozone depleting sub-
stance (ODS) data on year to year basis.

Nesting sites of an amphibious snake is reported from
the shores of North Andaman Islands.

Traditional Wetland agriculture (locally known as
pokkali in Kerala and Gazhani in Karnataka)

15.7. THE MAN AND BIOSPHERE (MAB)

The Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme is an
Intergovernmental Scientific Programme aiming to set
a scientific basis for the improvement of the relation-
ships between people and their environment globally.

Launched in the early 1970s, it proposes an interdisci-
plinary research agenda and capacity building that tar-
get the ecological, social and economic dimensions of
biodiversity loss and the reduction of this loss.

Concerned with problems at the interface of scientific,
environmental, societal and development issues, MAB
combines natural and social sciences, economics and
education to improve human livelihoods and safe-
guard natural ecosystems, thus promoting innovative
approaches to economic development that is socially
and culturally appropriate and environmentally sus-
tainable.

The agenda of the MAB Prorgamme is defined by its
main governing body, the International Coordinating
Council in concertation with the broader MAB Com-
munity.

For implementation of its interdisciplinary work on-
ground, MAB relies on the World Network of Biosphere
Reserves, and on thematic networks and partnerships
for knowledge-sharing, research and monitoring, edu-
cation and training, and participatory decision-
making.

It predicts the consequences of today’s actions on tomor-
row’s world and thereby increases people’s ability to
efficiently manage natural resources for the well-being
of both human populations and the environment.

Do you know?

e Paints and dressings do not help to cure the tree
wound, some actually speed up the decay.
The death of one 70-year old tree would return over
three tons of carbon to the atmosphere. Do cut!!
The cottonwood tree seed is the seed that stays in
flight the longest.
Aloe vera is also called as fountain of youth
During periods of increased or decreased tempera-
ture, cracks may develop in the tree trunk -- re-
ferred to as frost cracks and sun cracks. Both can
lead to decay.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 231 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

15.8. BBOSPHERE RESERVE (BR)

The International Co-ordinating Council (ICC) of UN-
ESCO, November, 1971, introduced the designation ‘Bio-
sphere Reserve’ for natural areas. The concept of
Biosphere Reserves was refined by a Task Force of UN-
ESCO’s MAB Programme in 1974, and BR network was
formally launched in 1976.

15.8.1. Definition

Biosphere Reserve (BR) is an international designation
by UNESCO for representative parts of natural and cul-
tural landscapes extending over large area of terrestrial
or coastal/marine ecosystems or a combination thereof.

BRs are special environments for both people and the
nature and are living examples of how human beings
and nature can co-exist while respecting each others’
needs.

Biosphere reserves are sites established by countries
and recognized under UNESCO’s Man and the Bio-
sphere (MAB) Programme to promote sustainable de-
velopment based on local community efforts and sound
science.

As places that seek to reconcile conservation of biologi-
cal and cultural diversity and economic and social de-
velopment through partnerships between people and
nature, they are ideal to test and demonstrate innova-
tive approaches to sustainable development from local
to international scales.

Do you know?

e The forests in the country have been classified into
16 major types and 251 subtypes on the basis of
climatic and edaphic features.

Slender loris (primate) found only in the tropical rain-
forests of Southern India and Sri Lanka.

The Indian star tortoise found in scrub forests of
India and Sri Lanka

15.8.3. Characteristics of Biosphere reserve

The characteristic features of Biosphere Reserves are:

(a) Each Biosphere Reserves are protected areas of land

and/or coastal environments wherein people are an
integral component of the system.

e Together, they constitute a worldwide network linked
by International understanding for exchange of sci-
entific information.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

(2) The network of BRs includes significant examples of

biomes throughout the world.

(3) Each BR includes one or more of the following cate-

gories:-
(i) BRs are representative examples of natural biomes.

(ii) BRs conserve unique communities of biodiversity
or areas with unusual natural features of excep-
tional interest.

(iii) BRs have examples of harmonious landscapes re-
sulting from traditional patterns of land-use.

(iv) BRs have examples of modified or degraded ecosys-
tems capable of being restored to more natural con-

ditions.

(v) BRs generally have a non-manipulative core area,
in combination with areas in which baseline meas-
urements, experimental and manipulative research,
education and training is carried out. Where these
areas are not contiguous, they can be associated in
a cluster.

15.8.4. Functions of Biosphere Reserves

Conservation

To ensure the conservation of landscapes, ecosystems,
species and genetic variations.

To encourage the traditional resource use systems;

To understand the patterns and processes of function-
ing of ecosystems;

To monitor the natural and human-caused changes on
spatial and temporal scales;

Development

To promote, at the local level, economic development
which is culturally, socially and ecologically sustainable.

To develop the strategies leading to improvement and
management of natural resources;

Logistics support

To provide support for research, monitoring, education
and information exchange related to local, national and
global issues of conservation and development

Sharing of knowledge generated by research through
site specific training and education; and

Development of community spirit in the management
of natural resources.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 232 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Beneficiaries

e Direct Beneficiaries - local people and the ecological
resources of the Biosphere Reserves

e indirect beneficiaries - world community.

Biosphere Reserves: an Indian approach

e Itis this ecological diversity that makes India as one of
the mega-diversity regions on the globe. Efforts are on
to designate at least one Biosphere Reserve in each of
the Biogeographic Provinces.

15.8.5. National Biosphere Reserve Programme.

e The national Biosphere Reserve Programme was initi-
ated in 1986.

e To ensure participation of local inhabitants for effective
management and devise means of improving livelihood
of the local inhabitants through sustainable use.

Objectives

e Jt may be noted that BRs are not a substitute or alterna-
tive, but a re-enforcement to the existing protected
areas. The objectives of the Biosphere Reserve pro-
gramme, as envisaged by the Core Group of Experts,
are as follows:

e To conserve the diversity and integrity of plants and
animals within natural ecosystems;

e To safeguard genetic diversity of species on which their
continuing evolution depends;

e To provide areas for multi-faceted research and moni-
toring;
e To provide facilities for education and training; and

e To ensure sustainable use of natural resources through
most appropriate technology for improvement of eco-
nomic well-being of the local people.

e These objectives should be oriented in such a way that
the BRs are the Units wherein the Biological, socio-eco-
nomic and cultural dimension of conservation are inte-
grated together into a realistic conservation strategy.

15.8.6. Criteria for selection of BRs

e The criteria for selection of sites for BRs as laid down
by the Core Group of Experts in 1979 are listed below:

Primary criteria

e A site that must contain an effectively protected and
minimally disturbed core area of value of nature con-
servation and should include additional land and water
suitable for research and demonstration of sustainable
methods of research and management.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e The core area should be typical of a biogeographical unit
and large enough to sustain viable populations repre-
senting all tropic levels in the ecosystem.

Do you know?

Frogs are found all over the world, and in every cli-
mate, except Antarctica. Frogs cannot live in the sea
or any salt water.

Secondary criteria
e Areas having rare and endangered species

e Areas having diversity of soil and micro-climatic condi-
tions and indigenous varieties of biota.

e Areas potential for preservation of traditional tribal or
rural modes of living for harmonious use of environ-
ment.

15.8.7. Structure and Design of Biosphere
Reserves

e In order to undertake complementary activities of bio-
diversity conservation and development of sustainable
management aspects, Biosphere Reserves are demar-
cated into three inter-related zones.

1. The Core Zone:

Core Zone

Buffer Zone

Transition Zone

e The core zone should be kept absolutely undisturbed. It
must contain suitable habitat for numerous plant and
animal species, including higher order predators and
may contain centres of endemism. A core zone secures
legal protection and management and research activi-
ties that do not affect natural processes and wildlife are
allowed. Strict nature reserves and wilderness portions
of the area are designated as core areas of BR. The core
zone is to be kept free from all human pressures exter-
nal to the system.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 233 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

2. The Buffer Zone:

e Buffer Zone adjoins or surrounds core zone. Its uses and
activities are managed in ways that protect the core
zone. These uses and activities include restoration, dem-
onstration sites for enhancing value addition to the re-
sources, limited recreation, tourism, fishing and
grazing, which are permitted to reduce its effect on core
zone. Research and educational activities are to be en-
couraged. Human activities, if natural within BR, are
likely to be permitted to continue if these do not ad-
versely affect the ecological diversity.

3. The Transition Zone:

e The Transition Zone is the outermost part of a Bio-
sphere Reserve. This is usually not delimited one and is
a zone of cooperation where conservation, knowledge
and management skills are applied and uses are man-
aged in harmony with the purpose of the Biosphere
Reserve. This includes settlements, crop lands, managed
forests and area for intensive recreation, and other eco-
nomic uses characteristic of the region.

e (in Buffer Zone and the Transition Zones, manipulative
macro-management practices are used. Experimental
research areas are used for understanding the patterns
and processes in the ecosystem. Modified or degraded
landscapes are included as rehabilitation areas to re-
store the ecology in a way that it returns to sustainable
productivity).

15.8.8. How Biosphere Reserves are different
from protected areas?

e BR is not intended to replace existing protected areas
but it widens the scope of conventional approach of
protection and further strengthens the Protected Area
Network.

e Existing legally protected areas (National Parks, Wild-
life Sanctuary, Tiger Reserve and reserve/protected
forests) may become part of the BR without any change
in their legal status.

e On the other hand, inclusion of such areas in a BR will
enhance their national value.

Do you know?

Dead and decaying trees on the ground replenish soils
by returning important nutrients, and provide food
resources for many types of wildlife.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

However, the Biosphere Reserves differ from
protected areas due to their emphasis on:

(i) Conservation of overall biodiversity and landscape,
rather than some specific flagship species, to allow
natural and evolutionary processes to continue without
any hindrance.

(ii) Different components of BRs like landscapes, habitats,
and species and land races.

(iii) Developmental activities, and resolution/mitigation of
conflicts between development and conservation,

(iv) Increase in broad-basing of stakeholders, especially
local people’s participation and their Training, com-
pared to the features of scheme on Wildlife Sanctuar-
ies and National Parks.

(v) Sustainable environment friendly development, and
sustained coordination amongst different development
organizations and agencies.

(vi) Research and Monitoring to understand the structure
and functioning of ecological system and their mode
of reaction when exposed to human intervention.

e The Indian National Man and Biosphere Committee
constituted by the Central Govt. identifies new sites,
advises on policies and programmes, lays down guide-
lines, reviews progress and guidelines in the light of
evaluation studies and feed back.

e The Management of Biosphere Reserves is the respon-
sibility of the concerned State/UT with necessary finan-
cial assistance, guidelines for management and
Technical expertise provided by the Central Govern-
ment.

e BRare internationally recognized within the framework
of UNESCO’s Man and Biosphere (MAB) programme,
after receiving consent of the participating country.

Do you know?
The United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) de-

clared 2011-2020 as the United Nations Decade on
Biodiversity and United Nations Decade for Deserts
and the Fight against Desertification.

15.9. WORLD NETWORK OF BIOSPHERE
RESERVES (WNBR)

15.9.1. The World Network

e In order to facilitate cooperation, BRs are admitted
into International network by International Coordinat-

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 234 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

ing Council (ICC) of the Man and Biosphere (MAB)
Programme of UNESCO on the request of the partici-
pating country subject to their fulfillment of prescribed
criteria.

e The BRs remain under the sole sovereignty of the con-
cerned country/state where it is situated, and participa-
tion in World Network is voluntary.

e Delisting from international Network is done as an ex-
ception on ground of violation of obligation for conser-
vation and sustainable development of Biosphere
Reserves after consulting the concerned Government.

e The MAB programme’s primary achievement is the
creation in 1977 of the World Network of Biosphere Re-
serves.

e Composed of 610 biosphere reserves in 117 countries,
including 12 transboundary sites, the WNBR of the MAB
Programme promotes North-South and South-South
collaboration and represents a unique tool for interna-
tional co-operation through sharing knowledge, ex-
changing experiences, building capacity and promoting
best practices.

15.10. BIODIVERSITY HOT SPOTS

e Biodiversity hot spot concept was put forth by Norman
Myers in 1988

e To qualify as a hot spot, a region must meet two strict
criteria:

a. Species endemism - it must contain at least 1,500
species of vascular plants (> 0.5% of the world’s
total) as endemics, and

b. Degree of threat - it has to have lost at least 70% of
its original habitat.

e Each biodiversity hot spot represents a remarkable
universe of extraordinary floral and faunal endemic-
ity struggling to survive in rapidly shrinking eco-
systems.

e Over 50 percent of the world’s plant species and 42
percent of all terrestrial vertebrate species are endemic
to the 35 biodiversity hot spots.

15.10.1. The hottest hot spots
e Some hot spots are much richer than others in terms of
their numbers of endemics.

e Five key factors have been taken into consideration and
those biodiversity hot spot tops the list with respect to
these five factors are considered as hottest hot spots.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Factors

Pp

Endemic plants
2. Endemic vertebrates
3. Endemic plants/area ratio (species per 100km7”)
4. Endemic vertebrates/area ratio (species per 100km7”)
5

Remaining primary vegetation as % of original extent

The eight hottest hot spots in terms of five factors

Pp

Madagascar

Philippines

Sundaland

Brazil’s Atlantic Forest
Caribbean

Indo-Burma

Western Ghats/Sri Lanka

Eastern Arc and Coastal Forests of Tanzania/Kenya

ent ADT YN

These eight ‘hottest hot spots’, appear at least three times
in the top ten listings for each factor.

Do you know?

All snakes and lizards have two penises

15.10.2. Indian Biodiversity Hot Spots.

e There are 4 biodiversity hot spots present in India. They
are:

R

The Himalayas
Indo- Burma and

The western Ghats & Sri Lanka

Sunderland

Do you know?

e Spider silk, it looks like one thread but it is actually
many thin threads that stick together. As soon as
this liquid silk hits the air it hardens.

All spiders have fangs! their poison is strong
enough to kill their prey. few spiders with poison
strong enough to cause pain or even some nerve
damage in humans.

Spiders have 48 knees. Yup, count them...eight legs
with six joints on each.

Spider’s legs are covered with many hairs. The
hairs pick up vibrations and smells from the air.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 235 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

1. The Eastern Himalayas Hot Spot

About the region:

The Eastern Himalayas is the region encompassing Bhu-
tan, northeastern India, and southern, central, and
eastern Nepal. The region is geologically young and
shows high altitudinal variation.

The abrupt rise of the Himalayan Mountains from less
than 500 meters to more than 8,000 meters results in
a diversity of ecosystems that range from alluvial grass-
lands and subtropical broad leaf forests along the foot-
hills to temperate broad leaf forests in the mid hills,
mixed conifer and conifer forests in the higher hills, and
alpine meadows above the tree line.

2. Indo-Burma

Region:

e The Indo-Burma region encompasses several countries.

e It is spread out from Eastern Bangladesh to Malaysia
and includes North-Eastern India south of Brahmaputra
river, Myanmar, the southern part of China’s Yunnan
province, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Cambodia,
Vietnam and Thailand.

3. Western Ghats and Sri Lanka:

Western Ghats, also known as the “Sahyadri Hills”
encompasses the mountain forests in the southwestern
parts of India and highlands of southwestern Sri
Lanka.

The entire extent of hotspot was originally about
1,82,500 square kms, but due to tremendous population
pressure, now only 12,445 square Km or 6.8% is in
pristine condition.

The wide variation of rainfall patterns in the Western
Ghats, coupled with the region’s complex geography,
produces a great variety of vegetation types.

These include scrub forests in the low-lying rainshadow
areas and the plains, deciduous and tropical rainforests
up to about 1,500 meters, and a unique mosaic of mon-
tane forests and rolling grasslands above 1,500 meters.

In Sri Lanka diversity includes dry evergreen forests to
dipterocarpus dominated rainforests to tropical mon-
tane cloud forest.

15.11. BIODIVERSITY COLDSPOTS

Areas that have relatively low biological diversity but
are also experiencing a high rate of habitat loss. Al-
though a biodiversity coldspot is low in species richness,
it can also be important to conserve, as it may be the
only location where a rare species is found. Extreme

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

physical environments (low or high temperatures or
pressures, or unusual chemical composition) inhabited
by just one or two specially adapted species are colds-
pots that warrant conservation because they represent
unique environments that are biologically and physi-
cally interesting.

15.12. WORLD HERITAGE SITES

World Heritage Sites means “Sites any of various areas
or objects inscribed on the United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) World
Heritage List”.

The sites are designated as having outstanding univer-
sal value under the Convention concerning the Protec-
tion of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage.

This Convention, which was adopted by the UNESCO
in 1972 (and enforced in 1975) provides a framework for
international cooperation in preserving and protecting
cultural treasures and natural areas throughout the
world.

The convention defines the kind of sites which can be
considered for inscription of the World heritage list (an-
cient monuments, museums, biodiversity and geological
heritage etc.,), and sets out the duties of the State Par-
ties in identifying potential sites and their role in pro-
tecting them.

Although many World Heritage sites fall into either the

‘cultural’ or ‘natural’categories, a particularly important

aspect of the convention is its ability to recognise lad-

scapes that combine these values, and where the bio-

logical and physical aspects of landscape have evolved

alongside human activity.

The first list of World Heritage state was published in

1978.

The World Heritage Convention reiterates that the pro-

tection on sites should be dovetailed with regional plan-

ning programmes. This is not happening always. (Agra

city developments do not go well the conversation of Taj

Mahal is a point).

“Natural heritage sites are restricted to those natural

areas that

1. furnish outstanding examples of the Earth’s record
of life or its geologic processes.

2. provide excellent examples of ongoing ecological and
biological evolutionary processes.

3. contain natural phenomena that are rare, unique,
superlative, or of outstanding beauty or

furnish habitats or rare endangered animals or
plants or are sites of exceptional biodiversity”.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 236 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Until the end of 2004, there were six criteria for cultural
heritage and four criteria for natural heritage. In 2005
this was modified so that there is only one set of ten
criteria. Nominated sites must be of “outstanding uni-
versal value” and meet at least one of the ten criteria.
The criteria are given below.

15.11.1 Criteria
I. “to represent a masterpiece of human creative genius”;

II. “to exhibit an important interchange of human values,
over a span of time or within a cultural area of the
world, on developments in architecture or technology,
monumental arts, town-planning or landscape de-
sign?”.

lll. “to bear a unique or atleast exceptional testimony to a
cultural tradition or to a civilization which is living or
which has disappeared?;

IV. “to be an outstanding example of a type of building,
architectural or technological ensemble or landscape
which illustrates a significat stage(s) in human history”;

V. “to be an outstanding example of a traditional human
settlemnet, land-use, or sea-use, which is representa-
tive of a culture (or cultures), or human interaction
with the environment especially when it has become
vulnerable under the impact of irreversible change”;

VI. ”to be directly or tangibly associated with events or
living traditions, with ideas, or with beliefs, with ar-
tistic and literary works of outstanding universal sig-
nificance. (The Committee considers that this criterion
should preferably be used in conjunction with other
criteria).

VIL. ”to contain superlative natural phenomena or areas of
exceptional natural beauty and aesthetic importance”;

VIIL.”to be outstanding examples representing major stages
of Earth’s history, including the record of life, signifi-
cant on-going geological processess in the development
of landforms, or significant geomorphic or psysio-
graphic features’;

IX. “to be outstanding examples representing significant
ongoing ecological and biological processes in the evo-
lution and development of terrestrial, fresh water,
coastal and marine ecosystem and communities of
plants and animals’;

X. ”to contain the most important and significant natural
habitats for insists conservation of biological diversity,
including those containing threatened species of out-
standing universal value from the point of view of
science or conservation.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e The UNESCO funds numerous efforts to preserve and
restore World Heritage Sites in developing nations. It
maintains also a List of World Heritage Sites in develop-
ing nations. It maintains also a List of World Heritage
in danger facing threat of pollution and other natural
hazards. Sites subject to unusual levels of pollution,
natural hazards, or other problems may be placed for
restoration. Such designated sites facilitate promotion
of tourism.

International Year of Biodiversity

e The United Nations declared 2010 to be the Interna-
tional Year of Biodiversity. It is a celebration of life on
earth and of the value of biodiversity for our lives.

Do you know?

There is no parrot in India. They are parakeets.

International Day for Biological Diversity - 22 May

e The United Nations proclaimed May 22 as The Interna-
tional Day for Biological Diversity (IDB) to increase un-
derstanding and awareness of biodiversity issues.

e Initially 29 December (the date of entry into force of the
Convention of Biological Diversity), was designated The
International Day for Biological Diversity by the UN
General Assembly in late 1993.

e In December 2000, the UN General Assembly adopted
22 May as IDB, to commemorate the adoption of the text
of the Convention on 22 May 1992 by the Nairobi Final
Act of the Conference for the Adoption of the Agreed
Text of the Convention on Biological Diversity.

Do you know?

e Gymnosperms produce their seeds on the surface
or tips of an appendage such as a pine cone.

Angiosperms produce their seeds inside a fruit
such as an acorn.

Dendrochronology is the science of calculating a
tree’s age by its rings.
For every five percent of tree cover added to a com-

munity, storm water runoff is reduced by approxi-
mately two percent.

“Heat islands,” created by tree loss, also exponen-
tially increase air pollutants.

Aspirin is derived from the bark of a willow tree.

ON, FON 0,0 NON OG 0,
“~~ ~~ “~e “~% “~e “~

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 237 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 238 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

QF 6° g Go

| CHAPTER - 16 |

ENVIRONMENT

QW

CONSERVATION EFFORTS

16.1. PROJECT TIGER

potential example of conservation of a highly en-

dangered species is the Indian Tiger (Panthera ti-

gris). The fall and rise in the number of Tiger
population in India is an index of the extent and nature of
conservation efforts.

It is estimated that India had about 40 000 tigers in 1900,
and the number declined to a mere about 1800 in 1972.
Hence, Project Tiger centrally sponsored scheme was
launched in 1973 with the following objectives:

e To ensure maintenance of available population of Tigers
in India for scientific, economic, aesthetic, cultural and
ecological value

e To preserve, for all times, the areas of such biological
importance as a national heritage for the benefit, educa-
tion and enjoyment of the people

Aim

(i) Conservation of the endangered species and

(ii) Harmonizing the rights of tribal people living in and

around tiger reserves

Do you know?

The scientific name for the tiger is Panthera tigris
There are eight subspecies of tiger: among the eight,
at present five subspecies are present in the wild. They
are - Bengal, South China, Indochinese, Sumatran,
and Siberian. Three subspecies of tiger—Caspian, Bali,
and Javan—are extinct.

16.1.1. Tiger Reserve

e Tiger reserves are areas that are notified for the protec-
tion of the tiger and its prey, and are governed by Pro-
ject Tiger which was launched in the country in 1973.

e Initially 9 tiger reserves were covered under the project,
and has currently increased to 42, falling in 17 States
(tiger reserve States).

e The State Government shall, on recommendation of the
National Tiger Conservation Authority, notify an area
as a tiger reserve.

e A Tiger reserve includes:

a) Core zone

¢ Critical tiger habitat areas established, on the basis of
scientific and objective criteria.

e These areas are required to be kept as inviolate for the
purposes of tiger conservation, without affecting the
rights of the Scheduled Tribes or such other forest
dwellers.

e These areas are notified by the State Government in
consultation with an Expert Committee (constituted for
that purpose)

b) Buffer zone

e Peripheral area to critical tiger habitat or core area,
where a lesser degree of habitat protection is required
to ensure the integrity of the critical tiger habitat with
adequate dispersal for tiger species.

e It aims at promoting co-existence between wildlife and
human activity with due recognition of the livelihood,
developmental, social and cultural rights of the local
people.

e The limits of such areas are determined on the basis of
scientific and objective criteria in consultation with the
concerned Gram Sabha and an Expert Committee con-
stituted for the purpose.

e No alteration in the boundaries of a tiger reserve shall
be made except on a recommendation of the National
Tiger Conservation Authority and the approval of the
National Board for Wild Life.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 239 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

No State Government shall de-notify a tiger reserve,
except in public interest with the approval of the Na-
tional Tiger Conservation Authority and the approval
of the National Board for Wild Life.

16.1.1 National Tiger Conservation Authority
(NTCA):

The Amendment Act of 2006 provides for the constitu-
tion of a statutory authority known as the National
Tiger Conservation Authority to aid in the implementa-
tion of measures for the conservation of the tiger.

Do you know?

No two tigers have exactly the same pattern of stripes.
Tigers live alone, except for mothers and their young.
A male and female tiger come together to mate, and
then go their separate ways.

Powers and functions:

1.

To approve the Tiger Conservation Plan prepared by
the State Government

To evaluate and assess various aspects of sustainable
ecology and disallow any ecologically unsustainable
land use such as mining, industry and other projects
within tiger reserves

To lay down normative standards for tourism activities
and guidelines for project tiger from time to time for
tiger conservation in the buffer and core area of tiger
reserves and ensure their due compliance

To provide information on protection measures includ-
ing future conservation plan, estimation of population
of tiger and its natural prey species, status of habitats,
disease surveillance, mortality survey, patrolling, re-
ports on untoward happenings and such other manage-
ment aspects as it may deem fit including future plan
of conservation

To ensure that tiger reserves and areas linking on pro-
tected area or tiger reserve with another protected area
or tiger reserve are not diverted for ecologically unsus-
tainable uses, except in public interest and with the
approval of the National Board for Wild Life.

To facilitates and support tiger reserve management in
the State for biodiversity conservation initiatives
through eco-development and peoples participation as
per approved management plans, and to support simi-
lar initiatives in adjoining areas consistent with the
Central and State laws

To ensure critical support including scientific, informa-
tion technology and legal support for better implemen-
tation of the tiger conservation plan

QF 6° go

8.

ENVIRONMENT

To facilitate ongoing capacity building program for skill
development of officers and staff of tiger reserves

16.1.2. Estimation of Tiger Populations

The process of estimating the number of tigers in a
given area is called ‘Tiger census.’

This exercise provides us with an estimate of tiger num-
ber, density and change in tiger indices - a measure of
tiger occupancy in a given area.

It is conducted at regular intervals to know the current
tiger populations and population trends.

Besides estimating the number of tigers the method also
helps to gather information on the density of the tiger
populations and associated prey.

The most commonly used technique in the past was
‘Pugmark Census Technique’. In this method the im-
prints of the pugmark of the tiger were recorded and
used as a basis for identification of individuals. Now it
is largely used as one of the indices of tiger occurrence
and relative abundance.

Recent methods used to estimate the numbers of tigers
are camera trapping and DNA finger-printing.

In camera trapping, the photograph of the tiger is taken
and individuals are differentiated on the basis of the
stripes on the body.

In the latest technique of DNA fingerprinting, tigers can
be identified from their scats.

2010 Assessment Methodology

The All India Tiger Estimation exercise is one of the

most crucial components of our national tiger conserva-

tion efforts.

Since 2006, this monitoring exercise is being under-

taken every four years.

This report presents the results of the 2010 National

Tiger Assessment, undertaken through a best-in-class

scientific process.

This presents an estimate of India’s current tiger popu-

lation and a broader assessment of our tiger landscapes.

The three phases of the tiger estimation procedure are

as follows:

e Phase 1: Field data collected at the beat-level (i.e. the
primary patrolling unit) by trained personnel using
a standardised protocol.

e Phase 2: Analysis of habitat status of tiger forests
using satellite data.

e Phase 3: Camera trapping was the primary method
used, where individual tigers were identified from

188

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 240 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

photographs based on their unique stripe patterns.
This information was analysed using a well estab-
lished scientific framework. Camera trapping was
carried out by teams of wildlife biologists and local
forest personnel.

Based on the tiger numbers recorded in sampled sites,
an estimate for other contiguous tiger-occupied land-
scapes, was made. For this, additional information such
as tiger signs, prey availability, habitat conditions and
human disturbance was used. Thus, the final estimates
provide a comprehensive and statistically robust result
for the whole country

“Phase IV”

India has announced a major expansion of its tiger
monitoring programme, through ‘Phase IV’ of the na-
tional tiger estimation programme.

This initiated intensive, annual monitoring of tigers at
the tiger reserve level, across protected areas in the
country, from November 2011.

The methodology is developed by the Wildlife Institute
of India (WII) and the National Tiger Conservation Au-
thority (NTCA), in consultation with experts, and will
use statistically sound procedures to estimate numbers
of both tigers and their prey.

The tiger monitoring protocol use camera traps, at a
density of 25 double-sided cameras per 100 square kilo-
metres, and a minimum trapping effort of 1000 trap
nights per 100 square kilometres. (Note: Tiger reserve
- see appendix)

This will provide a yearly indication of the status of
critical tiger populations around the country, and will
be critical to long-term management and conservation
of tiger populations.

Prey population monitoring will be conducted simul-
taneously, using Distance sampling protocols. Distance
sampling will be conducted along line transects already
established in phase I, and will use a minimum of 30
spatial replicates for 2 km each, and a total effort of
300 km.

Do you know?

Royal Bengal tiger, is a tiger subspecies native to India,
Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhutan, and has been classified
as endangered by IUCN as the population is estimated
at fewer than 2,500 individuals with a decreasing
trend. The Bengal tiger is the national animal of Bang-
ladesh. Panthera tigris is the national animal of India.

QF 6° go

Innovations In 2010 National Tiger assessment

ENVIRONMENT

e The 2010 National Tiger Assessment has several innova-

tions over previous assessments. These include:

e Partnerships with civil society organizations

e Local communities involved in data collection and
analysis.

e Genetic analysis to estimate tiger populations from
faecal samples.

e Along with tigers, co-predators, prey, and habitat
quality assessed.

e Pioneering attempt to estimate tiger populations in
Sunderbans Tiger Reserve (West Bengal) using satel-
lite telemetry and sign surveys.

e First estimation of tiger population in Sahyadri Tiger
Reserve (Maharashtra).

Tiger Population Estimates

e The same scientifically robust methods were consist-

ently used in 2006 and 2010. This enabled comparison
of results from both estimation exercises and in under-
standing the trend in tiger numbers.

The estimated tiger population in 2006 was 1411 and
due to conservation efforts it has steadily increased and
the tiger population was 1706 in the 2010 tiger estimate.

Do you know?

e Tigers have a lifespan of 10-15 years in the wild,
but can live longer than 20 years in captivity.
e They are highly adaptable and range from the Si-

berian taiga to open grasslands and tropical man-
grove swamps.

16.1.3 International Cooperation

e India has a Memorandum of Understanding with Nepal

on controlling trans-boundary illegal trade in wildlife
and conservation, apart from a protocol on tiger con-
servation with China.

The process is on for bilateral protocol with Bangladesh,
Bhutan & Myanmar.

e A Global Tiger Forum of Tiger Range Countries has

been created for addressing international issues related
to tiger conservation.

Asian Ministerial Conference on Tiger Conservation.

e The New Delhi Resolution on Tiger Conservation was

adopted by the 3rd Asian Ministerial Conference on
Tiger Conservation.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 241 ---
Tae tine WA Recndtey b> Heme Sen

; a IAS ACADEMY By Casa

e Partnerships with civil society organizations

e Local communities involved in data collection
and analysis.

e Genetic analysis to estimate tiger populations
from faecal samples.

e Along with tigers, co-predators, prey, and
habitat quality assessed.

e Pioneering attempt to estimate tiger
populations in Sunderbans Tiger Reserve (West
Bengal) using satellite telemetry and sign
surveys.

e First estimation of tiger population in Sahyadri
Tiger Reserve (Maharashtra).

Tiger Population Estimates

e The same scientifically robust methods were
consistently used in 2006 and 2010. This enabled
comparison of results from both estimation
exercises and in understanding the trend in tiger
numbers.

e The estimated tiger population in 2006 was 1411
and due to conservation efforts it has steadily
increased and the tiger population was 1706 in the
2010 tiger estimate and 2226 tigers in 2014 tiger
census.

All India Tiger Estimation - 2018

¢ Guinness World Record for being world largest
camera trap wildlife survey.

* India has nearly 70% of World Tiger Population.

* According to the fourth cycle of All India Tiger
Estimation - 2018, the count of tigers in India has
risen to 2967. Madhya Pradesh has the highest
number of tigers at 526, closely followed by
Karnataka at 524 with Uttarakhand at number 3
with 442 tigers.

* Chhatisgarh and Mizoram saw a decline in their

tiger numbers while tiger’s numbers in Odisha

remained constant. All other States witnessed a

positive trend. Viewed at the landscape level, all 5

landscapes showed an increase with the Central

Indian landscape recording the highest increment.

India achieved its commitment to the St.

Petersburg Declaration, of doubling Tiger

population, much in advance to the 2022 deadline.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission i
. rmission in writing.

Do you know?
e Tigers have a lifespan of 10-15 years in the wild,
but can live longer than 20 years in captivity.
e They are highly adaptable and range from the
Siberian taiga to open grasslands and tropical
mangroveswamps.

be

16.1.4 International Cooperation

e India has a Memorandum of Understanding with
Nepal on controlling trans-boundary illegal trade
in wildlife and conservation, apart from a protocol
on tiger conservation with China.

e The process is on for bilateral protocol with
Bangladesh, Bhutan & Myanmar.

e A Global Tiger Forum of Tiger Range Countries
has been created for addressing international
issues related to tiger conservation.

Asian Ministerial Conference on Tiger
Conservation.

e The New Delhi Resolution on Tiger Conservation
was adopted by the 3rd Asian Ministerial
Conference on Tiger Conservation.

e The salient features of the Resolution include:

recovery of tiger in low density protected areas by

three Rs - Restoration, Reintroduction and

Rehabilitation, acceleration of the implementation
of Global Tiger Recovery Programme, which
includes habitat improvement and anti-poaching
surveillance through modern technology, align
development and tiger conservation by ensuring
intensive participation of locals and other
stakeholders, promotion of tiger habitats to
provide ecosystem service, economic growth and
addressing climate change and strengthening
cooperation to combat wildlife crime.

This is the third conclave, with the earlier ones
being held at Hua Hin, Thailand (2010) and
Thimpu, Bhutan (2012), besides the Tiger Summit
at St Petersburg in 2010. Tiger Range Countries
include Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, China,
Indonesia, India, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar,
Nepal, Russian Federation, Thailand, Vietnam.


--- PAGE 242 ---
—_

, SAC = ‘a et

* Central Government launched “Asiatic Lion

Conservation Project” for three financial years
Rajasthan has become the first state to launch 2018-21 with an aim to protect and conserve the
project Leopard to conserve it by improving their world’s last ranging free population of Asiatic Lion
prey base, mitigating man and leopard conflict and and its associated ecosystem.

Do you know?

controlling poaching.

, ¢ The project will be funded from the Centrally
Project Leopard will be chaired by State Forest Sponsored Scheme- Development of Wildlife
Minister and it will be implemented in 8 Wildlife Habitat (CSS-DWH) with the contributing ratio

Sanctuaries in Rajasthan being 60:40 of Central and State share.

* The Asiatic Lion, endemic to Gir landscape of

16.2 PROJECT LION Gujarat, is one of the 21 critically endangered

e Increase in the number of Asiatic lions in Gujarat’s species identified by the Ministry for taking up
Gir forest from 523 in 2015 to to 674 in 2020. recovery programmes. Asiatic Lion, being listed in

¢ Lion relocation has been talked since 1995, when Schedule-! of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, to be
the Kuno Wildife Sanctuary was identified as an accorded the highest degree of protection.

alternate site. The motive behind finding a ® This project has “Species Conservation over a
relocation site for the species is because the large landscape” approach. Besides this approach,
population in Gir has low genetic diversity, the Greater Gir Region (GGR) is being divided into
making it vulnerable to threats of extension from various zones and management approach of “Zone

epidemics. The proposal sought to create free- Plaiis ‘and Theme Plans” for the conservation of
ranging lion population within Gujarat and

: . the Asiatic Lion.
in other states to counter this problem. The
Supreme Court also issued a order in 2013
directing the state to relocate lions to the Kuno- 16.3. PROJECT ELEPHANT
Palpur Wildlife Sanctuary. e Project Elephant was launched in February, 1992
© the CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular as centrally sponsored scheme to assist states
Biology, Hyderabad sequenced the entire genome having free ranging populations of wild elephants
of the Asiatic lion and it has shown them to be and to ensure long term survival of identified
lacking genetic diversity in comparison to other viable populations of elephants in their natural
lion populations and historical samples of Asiatic habitats.
lions. ¢ The Project is being mainly implemented in 13
* Six new sites apart from the Kuno-Palpur Wildlife States / UTs , viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal
Sanctuary have been identified under Project Lion Pradesh, Assam, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala,
for possible lion relocation in the future include: Meghalaya, Nagaland, Orissa, Tamil Nadu,
1. Madhav National Park, Madhya Pradesh Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.
2. Sitamata Wildlife Sanctuary, Rajasthan Small support is also being given to Maharashtra
d Chhattisgarh.
3. Mukundra Hills Tiger Reserve, Rajasthan ae . -
4. Gandhi Sagar Wildlife Sanctuary, Madhya ° mine are nein ~~ rw “s — a
Pradesh assistance in achieving the objectives of the

Project. Help is also provided to other states with
small populations of elephants for the purpose of
census, training of field staff and mitigation of
human-elephant conflict.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Kumbhalgarh Wildlife Sanctuary, Rajasthan

ay

Jessore-Balaram Ambaji WLS and adjoining
landscape, Gujarat



--- PAGE 243 ---
SHANK AR
a IAS ACADEMY

Do you know?
The hippopotamus, walrus, narwhal, mammoth,

Rhino and most commonly, Asian and African
elephants are poached for their ivory tusk,

e To protect elephants, their habitat & corridors

e To address issues of man-animal conflict

e Welfare of domesticated elephants

Aim

e Ecologically restoring the natural habitats and
migratory routes of the elephants

Mitigation of the increasing conflicts between man
and elephants in important habitats and
moderating the pressures of human and domestic
stock activities in important elephant habitats.

e Developing scientific and planned management
measures for conservation of elephants.

e Protecting the elephants from poachers and other
unnatural causes of death and preventing illegal
ivory trade is also one of the major concerns of the
Elephant Project in India

¢ Researching on issues related to elephants and

creating public awareness and education programs
for it.

* Eco-development and Veterinary care for the
elephants.

* It also aims at maintaining health care and
breeding of tamed elephants.

* (Elephant reserve of India see appendix)

16.3.1. Elephant Corridor

¢ An elephant corridor is defined as a stretch/
narrow strips of forested (or otherwise) land that
connects larger habitats with elephant populations
and forms a conduit for animal movement
between the habitats. This movement helps
enhance species survival and birth rate.

There are 88 identified elephant corridors in India.
Out of total 88 corridors, 20 were in south India,
12 in north-western India, 20 in central India, 14
in northern West Bengal and 22 in north-eastern
India.

Of the total, 77.3 per cent is regularly used by
elephants. About one-third is of ecologically high
priority and remaining two third of medium
priority.

Fragmentation of elephant habitat was severe in
northern West Bengal followed by north-western
India, north-eastern India and central India
respectively. The least fragmentation was noted in
south India.

In south India, 65 per cent of the corridors are in
protected area or in reserved forests.

go per cent in central India are jointly under
forest, agriculture and settlements, Only 10 per
cent are completely under forest area.

Nationally, only 24 per cent of the corridors are
under complete forest cover.

16.3.2. Threats to Elephant Corridors

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission i
’ ssion in writing.

The primary threat is the Habitat loss leading to
fragmentation and destruction caused by
developmental activities like construction of
buildings,roeds, railways, holiday resorts and the
fixing solar energized electric fencing, etc.

Coal mining and iron ore mining is the two “single

biggest threats” to elephant corridors in central
India.

Orissa, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh, are mineral-
rich states, but also have the highest number of
elephant corridors in the country, which makes
them known for elephant-man conflicts.

There is also a serious poaching problem, as

elephant ivory from the tusks jis extremely
valuable.

Elephants need extensive grazing grounds and
most reserves cannot accommodate them. If
protected areas are not large enough, elephants
may search for food elsewhere. This often results


--- PAGE 244 ---
——

a ee

——— + a ——_—

SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY ™ \ 4) Vas)
nefeersnahoyDiant ahh ne

in conflicts with humans, due to elephants raiding
or destroying crops.

Do you know?
White tigers are not a separate sub-species, but are

white in color due to an expression of recessive
‘

16.3.3. Mitigation

¢ Fusion of the corridors with nearby protected
areas wherever feasible; in other cases, declaration
as Ecologically Sensitive Areas or conservation
reserves to grant protection.

e During the process of securing a corridor,
monitoring for animal movement have to be
carried out; depending on the need, habitat
restoration work shall also be done.

e Securing the corridors involves sensitizing local
communities to the option of voluntarily relocation
outside the conflict zones to safer areas. It would
also have great conservation value, preventing
further fragmentation of the continuous forest
habitat by encroachment from urban areas, as
well as providing continued refuge for tiger,
elephant, sambar, marsh crocodile, gharial and
many species of bird.

16.3.4. Monitoring of Illegal Killing of

Elephants (MIKE) Programme

e Mandated by COP resolution of CITES, MIKE
program started in South Asia in the year 2003
with following purpose —

© To provide information needed for elephant range
States to make appropriate management and
enforcement decisions, and to build institutional
capacity within the range States for the long-term
management of their elephant populations

Main objectives

1. to measure levels and trends in the illegal hunting
of elephants;

2. to determine changes in these trends over time;
and

3. to determine the factors causing or associated

with such changes, and to try and assess in
particular to what extent observed trends are a

result of any decisions taken by the Conference of
the Parties to CITES

Under the programme data are being collected
from all sites on monthly basis in specified MIKE,
patrol form and submited to Sub Regional Support
Office for South Asia Programme located in Delhi
who are assisting Ministry in the implementation
of the progremme.

Do you know?

16.3.5. Haathi Mere Saathi

Haathi Mere Saathi is a campaign launched by the
Ministry of environment and forest (MoEF) in
partnership with the wildlife trust of India (WTI).

To improve conservation and welfare prospects of
the elephant - India’s National Heritage Animal.

The campaign was launched at the “Elephant- 8”
Ministerial meeting held in Delhi on 24th May
2011.

The E-8 countries comprise of India, Botswana,
the Republic of Congo, Indonesia, Kenya, Srilanka,
Tanzania, and Thailand.

This public initiative was aimed at increasing
awareness among people and developing
friendship, companionship between people and
elephants.

The campaign mascot ‘Gaju’.

The campaign focuses on various target audience
groups including locals near elephant habitats,
youth, policy makers, among others.

It envisions setting up of Gajah (the elephant)
centres in elephant landscapes across the country
to spread awareness on their plight and invoke
people's participation in addressing the threats to
them.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 245 ---
e It also plants to build capacity of protection and
jaw enforcement agencies at the ground level, and
advocate for policies favouring the pachyderms
(the elephant).

e Recommended by the elephant task force (ETF)
constituted by the ministry last year, the campaign
to “Take Gajah (the elephant) to the prajah (the
people)” aims to spread awareness and encourage
people’s participation in elephant conservation
and welfare.

Tiger; faces threat of extinction, whereas the
elephant faces threat of attrition. The elephant Nos.
have not increased or decreased drastically but

there is a increasing pressure on the elephant
habitats and it is a serious concern which has to be
addressed by involving people in elephant
conservation and welfare through this campaign.

e The Asian elephant is threatened by habitat
degradation, conflicts and poaching for ivory.
These threats are more intense in India which
harbours more than 50% of worlds Asian elephant
population.

e India has about 25000 elephants in the wild.
Despite this seemingly large number, the elephant
particularly the tuskers (male), in India is as
threatened as the tiger. There are just about 1200
tuskers left in the country.

16.3.6. Elephant - 8 Ministerial Meeting
¢ The E-8 ministerial meeting represented regions
with all 3 species of elephants, viz.,

1. Elephas maximus (Asian elephant)
2. Loxodonta africana (African Bush Elephant)

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without ission in writin
, permission in writing.

a |

NKAR » a)

3. Loxodonta cyclotis (African Forest Elephant)

e The participants included policy makers,
conservationist, scientists, historians, art and
culture experts among the participating countries.

e Discussions covered a wide range of issues
categorised under three basic themes.

1. Science and conservation
2. Management and conservation

3. Cultural and Ethical perspectives of conserva-
tion

e The E-8 countries besides resolving to take
necessary steps in the direction of elephant
conservation also decided to actively pursue a
common Agenda to ensure a long term welfare
and survival of all species of elephants in all range
countries.

e To realise this global goal, the meeting has called
upon all range countries to join hands under

e the umbrella of elephant-50:50 forum. It is the
shared vision of 50 states to promote conservation,
management and welfare of elephants in the next
50 years.

16.3.7. E-50:50 forum

e The E-8 countries decided to hold the 1st
International Congress of E-50:50 forum in early
2013 at New Delhi, India for adopting a common
global vision on conservation, management and
welfare of elephants across all range countries.

16.4. PROJECT VULTURE

India has nine species of vultures in the wild. They
are the

Oriental White-backed Vulture (Gyps bengalensis),
. Slender billed Vulture (Gyps tenuirostris),
. Long billed Vulture (Gyps indicus),

=
:

2

3

4. Egyptian Vulture (Neophron percnopterus),
5. Red Headed Vulture (Sarcogyps calvus),

6. !ndian Griffon Vulture (Gyps fulvus),

7. Himalayan Griffon (Gyps himalayensis),

8

- Cinereous Vulture (Aegypius monachus) and


--- PAGE 246 ---
ee LLs—<—Ss

SHANKAR
ee fe 0. ENVIRONMENT”
BR 1h te it aendeny m Seem mate SEN Dee : -.

g. Bearded Vulture or Lammergeier (Gypaetus

barbatus).

Decline of vulture populations in India was first
recorded at the Keoladeo Ghana National Park,
Rajasthan

The decline of Gyps genus in India has been put
at 97% (over a 12 year period) by 2005.

Similar declines have occurred in other countries
in Asia, including Nepal and Pakistan.

In India the population of three species i.e. White-
backed Vulture, Slender billed Vulture and Long
billed Vulture in the wild has declined drastically
over the past decade.

Red-headed vulture or king vulture, Slender billed
Vulture and Long billed Vulture are listed as
critically endangered.

Populations of Egyptian vultures and White-
backed Vulture have also undergone decline in
India and are now classified as Endangered.

It is initially thought the drastic decline in
population was due to non-availability of food
(dead livestock) or an unknown viral epidemic
disease, but later on confirmed that decline in
population was due to the drug diclofenac.

16.4.1. Diclofenac Sodium as the Probable
Cause

Diclofenac is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drug (NSAID) administered to reduce
inflammation and to reduce pain in certain
conditions.

NSAIDs are associated with adverse kidney (renal)
failure which is caused due to the reduction in
synthesis of renal prostaglandins.

Vultures which were unable to break down the
chemical diclofenac, suffer from kidney failure
when they eat the carcass of animals which have
been administered with the drug - Diclofenac

Visceral gout, an accumulation of uric acid within
tissues and on the surfaces of internal organs, was
observed in 85% of dead vultures found. Death
caused by renal failure, which is known to occur
as a result of metabolic failure or toxic disease.

“Neck drooping” - vulture exhibit this behaviour
for protracted periods over several weeks before
collapsing and falling out of trees or just prior to
death. It is the only obvious behavioural indication
that birds are ill. Neck drooping is also reported
in healthy birds under hot conditions.

16.4.2. Meloxicam - An Alternative

Meloxicam is a second generation NSAID and
rated better than Diclofenac for the treatment of
livestock, with reduced risk of side effects, and is
also approved for human use in more than 70
countries. Meloxicam is licensed as a veterinary
drug in India, Europe and USA.

16.4.3. Banned but still in use

The Indian Government in May 2006 banned the
veterinary use of diclofenac. Unfortunately, the
ban didn’t reach far enough and human forms of
diclofenac were used to treat sick cattle.

One particular problem is that the human form of
diclofenac is much cheaper than alternative drugs
like meloxicam which have been safety tested for
vultures

16.4.4. Significance of vultures in India

Scavenging on animal carcasses of animals and
thereby helping keep the environment clean;
Disposal of dead bodies as per the religious
practices of the Parsi community.

Vultures are the primary removers of carrion in
India and Africa.

16.4.5. Without vultures

Equilibrium between populations of other
scavenging species will be affected.

Result in increase in putrefying carcasses.
Movement of Feral dogs into carcass dumps
increasing the spread of diseases such as rabies,
anthrax.

Traditional custom of the Parsis of placing their
dead in the ‘Towers of Silence’ for vultures to feed
upon will be affected.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 247 ---
e: or all

iahalled

Life will be much harder for local hide and bone-
collectors, who rely on cleaned carcasses in order
to earn a living.

SHANKAR

. \ ©
IAS ACADEMY

Do you know?

Although all snakes can swim, sea snakes live

mostly in the water. They do need to come up for.
air ut cam.stay under water for up to an hour!

16.4.6. Vulture Safety Zones

The concept of a VSZ is unique for the Asian
continent but similar VSZ are in operation in both
Europe and Africa.

Aim of developing VSZs is to establish targeted
awareness activities surrounding 150 km radius
of vultures’ colonies so that no diclofenac or the
veterinary toxic drugs are found in cattle
carcasses, the main food of vultures(to provide
safe food).

The VSZ is spread around in several hundred
kilometers covering the Jim Corbett in
Uttarakhand, Dudhwa and Kartarniaghat forest
reserves in UP which is adjoining the Indo-Nepal
border. Nepal has already set up VSZ on the Indian
borders.

Do you iow?

© Frog bones form a ring when the Fri is
hibernating, just |ike trees do. Scientists can

use these rings to figure out the age of a frog
© Frogs don’t drink water oe ao ite :

sfiaris skin

16.4.7. VSZ’s provide:
e Asafe source of food that is free of contamination

from veterinary drugs, poisons and other
agricultural chemicals.

e Extra food close to breeding colonies, this helps to

increase their breeding success by improving the
survival chances of the young vultures.

0]
2

1 |

Additional food, such as bone fragments, which
can be supplied to breeding birds.

Help to reduce the risk of spreading diseases.

A place for scientists to study the biology and
ecology of these threatened species.

An opportunity to raise public awareness on
vulture conservation and to raise funds.

An excellent opportunity for eco-tourists to
observe these magnificent birds.

16.4.8. Zones

a HE

The zone between Uttarkhand to Nepal, which
spans from Corbett to Katriya Ghat, a Tarai belt,
covering 30,000 square kilometers will be
earmarked as Vulture Safe zone. Slender-billed
vulture and white-backed vulture are found in
this area, which is marshy grassland, savannas
and forests.

Similarly, a belt between Dibrugarh in Assam to
North Lakhimpur in Arunachal Pradesh will also
be conserved as a vulture safe zone where
slender-billed and white-backed species of
vultures are found.

The third zone would be in central India, covering

Chhatisgarh, where white-backed and long-billed
vultures are found.

16.4.9. What have to be done?

Diclofenac free zones’ (DFZ) meant the complete
removal of diclofenac in the identified vulture safe

zones i.e. places where vulture colonies have been
identified.

16.4.10. Vulture Restaurants

e At this sestaurant, tables are reserved only for the

unique and rare vultures by Maharashtra and
Punjab forest departments

Aim

Conserve the fast dwindling vulture population.

e As uncontaminated food shortage is one of the

All Rights Reserved, No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing

reasons for vultures’ decline, these scavengers will


--- PAGE 248 ---
SHANKAR

be fed by serving diclofenac free carcasses of cattle
through restaurants.

e VR includes involvement of local communities in
in-situ conservation, is having dual benefits to
vultures and to our society.

e People inform the forest department in case of the
death of an animal in their village and the
department tests the dead animal for the presence
of diclofenac.

e In their absence the department pays monetary
benefits to the owner of the animal and informer,
transports it to the vulture restaurant.

e Apart from this, whenever a vulture nesting is
found, conservation measures like providing safe
food near nesting trees, constant protection from
all sorts of disturbances, etc., are put in place
without delay.

Benefits

e Conservation of vulture from extinction

¢ Community participation in conservation

e Economic incentive to local cattle breeders

e Phasing out the use of diclofenac

e Awareness

e Dining spots

e Punjab - Kathlore, Chandola and Chamraur

e Maharastra - Gadchiroli, Thane, Nagpur, Nashik,
Raigad districts

16.4.11. Breeding Centres in India

¢ Vulture Breeding and Conservation Centre had
already been established at Pinjore, Haryana in
2001, and Rani, Guwahati (Assam) and another
one has been established at Buxa, West Bengal in
2005. The Central Zoo Authority of India has also
committed for supporting 4 such centers in the
zoos at Junagadh, Bhopal, Hyderabad and
Bhubhaneshwar in 2006-07.

¢ The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF)
& BNHS has taken up a program to release 30
young vultures from the breeding centre’s to the

demarcated safe zones at three places by year
2014.

Though the breeding facilities had started some
years back, it takes time for the reproduction
amongst vultures. Young vultures take at least four
to five years to fly.

Do you know?

India has more than 100,000 brick kilns and they
are noxious sources of pollution, particularly soot.

16.4.12. Measures taken to Conserve Vultures

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

The veterinary drug Diclofenac has been banned
by Indian and Nepalese governments.
Meloxicam, a safe alternative for vultures and
other scavenging birds, is being promoted as an
effective replacement.

Government of India has formulated a National
Action Plan (2006) on Vulture Conservation. The
Action Plan provides for strategies, actions for
containing the decline of vulture population
through ex-situ, in-situ vulture conservation.
Protection status of White backed, Long Billed and
Slender Billed Vultures has been upgraded from
Schedule IV to Schedule I of the Wild Life
(Protection) Act, 1972.

Vultures Safety Zone.

Vulture Restaurant sites.

A ‘Vulture Captive Care facility’ has been
established at Panchkula.

The State Governments have been advised to set
up vulture care centres for the conservation of
three species of vultures.

Captive breeding centers have been established to
secure healthy birds from the wild for breeding in
captivity for purposes of conservation and future
release.

Awareness raising activities targeting various
groups such as veterinarians, pharmacists, school



--- PAGE 249 ---
SHANKAR A

children, government agencies, conservation
partners and local communities are being

organized regularly.

16.4.13. India‘S Role in Conservation

e India moved a motion in IUCN in 2004 for vulture
conservation, which was accepted in the form of
the IUCN resolution which called upon Gyps
vulture Range countries to begin action to prevent
all uses of diclofenac in veterinary applications,
and establishment of IUCN South Asian Task Force
under the auspices of the IUCN and range
countries to develop and implement national
vulture recovery plans, including conservation
breeding and release.”

16.4.14. Save - Saving Asia’s Vultures From
e It’s a consortium of like-minded, regional and
international organizations, created to oversee
and co-ordinate conservation, campaigning and
fundraising activities to help the plight of south

To save three species of Gyps vulture

¢ Oriental white-backed vulture or White-rumped
vulture

¢ Long-billed vulture
e Slender-billed vulture

Partners

¢ Bird Conservation Nepal, Bombay Natural History
Society (India), International Centre for Birds of
Prey (UK), National Trust for Nature Conservation
(Nepal),, Royal Society for the Protection of Birds
(UK)

e Asia’s first ‘Gyps Vulture Reintroduction
Programme’ launched at Pinjore. Two Himalayan
Griffons were released into the wild from the
Jatayu Conservation Breeding Centre, Pinjore.

¢ The Himalayan Griffon is closely related to the
critically endangered resident Gyps species of
vultures but is not endangered.

16.5. PROJECT ONE HORN RHINO

One-horned Rhinoceros is also one of the 21 species
identified for Recovery programme for critically
endangered species by the MoEFF & CC

Approximately 75% of the entire population of
Greater One-horned Rhinoceros now occurs in India
in the three States viz, Assam, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal.

MoEFF & CC launched the “National Conservation
Strategy for the Indian One-Horned Rhinoceros” with
the goal to repopulate Rhinoceros ion in those
areas also which used to hold the Rhinoceros earlier
by augmenting the existing conservation efforts and
strengthening them through scientific and
administrative measures.

The Ministry and the State Forest Departments of
the Assam, Uttar Pradesh &West Bengal with support
from other organizations are taking appropriate steps
in accordance with the

New Delhi Declaration was signed after the 2™ Asian
Rhino range States Conservation meeting held on
February, 2019 at MoEF & CC, New Delhi wherein
representatives from Bhutan, Indonesia, Malaysia and
Nepal attended the meeting besides India.

16.5.1. Indian Rhino Vision 2020

¢ Indian rhino vision 2020 implemented by the
department of environment and forests, Assam
with The Bodo autonomous council as a active
partner. The programme will be supported by
WWF - India, WWF areas (Asian rhino and
elephant action strategy) programme, the
international rhino foundation (IRF), save the
rhino’s campaign of zoological institutions
worldwide and a number of local NGOs.

The vision of this program is to increase the total
thino foundation in Assam from about 2000 to
3000 by the year 2020 and to ensure that these
rhinos are distributed over at least 7 protected

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permissi
. 1on in writing.


--- PAGE 250 ---
SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY G3.

areas (PA) to provide long term viability of the
one-horned rhino population.

16.5.2. Why?

* Concentrating so many rhinos in a single protected
area like Kaziranga exposes the species to risks of
calamities (epidemics, floods, massive poaching
attempts). Further, rhinos in Pabitora have
exceeded carrying capacity and numbers must be
reduced to protect the habitat and to mitigate the
increasing rhino-human conflicts.

e Rhino species: Greater one-horned rhino
(Rhinoceros unicornis)

e Activities: Anti-poaching, monitoring,
translocations, community conservation.

e Translocations are the backbone of the IRV 2020
program

e The goal set was to populate the potential rhino
habitat areas identified viz. Manas NP, Dibru
Saikhowa WLS, Laokhowa - Bura Chapori WLS
with a viable population of rhino through
translocations from Kaziranga NP and Pobitora
WLS.

e Manas National Park was selected as the first site
for translocation of rhinos.

e Ten rhinos have been released into Manas since
2008. Ten more rhinos will be moved from
Kaziranga National Park before the end of the
year. Translocating rhinos will help to create a
viable population of this threatened species.

16.6. PROJECT SNOW LEOPARD

Snow leopard (ghost of the mountains) an elusive
carnivore found in the high altitude region of 12
countries. They are India, Nepal, Bhutan, China,

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Mongolia, Russia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan,
Kazakhstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.

In India, they inhabit the higher Himalayan and
Trans- Himalayan landscape in an altitudinal range
between approximately 3,000 m to 5,400 m above
MSL, spanning c. 100,000 km” (about 5% of the
global snow leopard range). They are found in the
States/UTs of Ladakh, Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and Arunanchal
Pradesh.

The cold-desert ecosystem of the Indian Trans-
Himalaya also supports other unique wildlife, such
as Pallas’s cat, Eurasian lynx, black necked crane,
Tibetan gazelle, Tibetan argali and kiang. Due to the
large home range sizes of snow leopard, it’s
considered as the ‘flagship’ for conservation of the
Indian Himalayas under the Government of India’s
Project Snow Leopard. Additionally, since snow
leopards and prey occur in areas outside protected
areas, the Project Snow Leopard adopted a landscape
level participatory approach to snow leopard
conservation, the first of its kind initiative for wildlife
conservation in India

They are categorized as ‘Vulnerable’ by IUCN and in
the Schedule I of the Indian Wildlife (Protection) Act
1972, and the J&K Wildlife (Protection) Act 1978. They
are listed in Appendix I of the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES)
and the Convention on Migratory Species (CMS),
affording the highest conservation status to the
species, both globally and in India.
In India, snow leopard is threatened by prey depletion
due to excessive livestock grazing, retribution killing,
poaching, illegal trade, unregulated tourism, climate
change, infrastructure development in the mountains
and poor waste management practices leading to
increase in free-ranging dog populations.
Global protocol for the Population Assessment of
World’s Snow Leopards (PAWS) is under the Global
Snow Leopard Ecosystem Protection Program
(GSLEP)
e India has ratified, in 2013, and played an important
role in the Global Snow Leopard and Ecosystem



--- PAGE 251 ---
SHANKAR ae
a IAS ACADEMY "

Protection Program (GSLEP), a high level inter-
governmental alliance of all the 12 snow leopard
range countries. These Governments have jointly
initiated an effort to conduct Population
Assessment of the World’s Snow Leopards, or
PAWS.

e Recognizing the importance of understanding
snow leopard occurrence and status for
conservation planning, the Government of India
has launched India’s PAWS effort, referred to here
as the ‘Snow Leopard Population Assessment in
India (SPAI)’, which is expected to lead to
scientifically robust national and state-wise
population -estimates of this endangeredand
elusive cat across its high altitude habitat, both
inside and outside protected areas.

e Snow Leopards are not restricted to protected
areas but spread across the high elevations
Himalayan and Trans- Himalayan regions.

¢ Gol hosted the 4th Steering Committee of the
GSLEP program in October 2019 at New Delhi.
This meeting resulted in the “New Delhi
Statement” of strengthening the resolve of the
snow leopard range countries towards
conservation of the mountain ecosystems of
Central and South Asia.

Snow Leopard Population Assessment of

India-

¢ SLPAI is the First National Protocol to Enumerate
Snow Leopard Population in India for first time

¢ SLPAI is a two-step process of field surveys
implemented simultaneously at the state level, for
snow leopard population assessment.

* Step 1 - systematically assess the spatial
distribution of snow leopards (as a function of
habitat covariates). This occupancy-based
approach based on data on sign and interview
surveys and field and geospatial mapping would
lead to a refined snow leopard distribution map.

* Step 2 - snow leopard abundance can be estimated
through camera trapping and genetics in habitat
patches (> 500 sq. km) of low and high quality, as

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

a function of heterogeneous density across space.

¢ The results from the first step would inform and
help improve the design of the second step.

¢ Under SPAI, assessments of the population of wild
ungulates (prey species) such as blue sheep, ibex,
argali and others will also be undertaken in
specific locations. The survey will also do
undertake Situation Description of the ecosystem
and Assessment of Threats

India now has 12,852 leopards as compared to the
previous estimate of 7910 conducted 2014. More than
60% increase in population has been recorded. The
States of Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka and
Maharashtra recorded the highest leopard estimates
respectively.

16.6.1. Project Snow Leopard - Jan 2009

e The Project Snow Leopard is an Indian initiative
for strengthening wildlife conservation in the
Himalayan high altitudes.

Aim:
* to promote a knowledge-based and adaptive
conservation framework that fully involves the

local communities, who share the snow leopard’s
range, in conservation efforts.

Goal:

¢ To safeguard and conserve India’s unique natural
heritage of high altitude wildlife populations and
their habitats by promoting conservation through
participatory policies and actions.

Location:

¢ All biologically important landscapes in the
Himalayan high altitudes in the states of Jammu
& Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Sikkim, and Arunachal Pradesh.

»


--- PAGE 252 ---
EE —————————————

OO — a

———— eS LOOOeel( iC

SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY”

e Project Snow Leopard is designed for all
biologically important habitats within the snow
leopard’s range, irrespective of their ownership
(e.g. Protected Areas, common land, etc,).

e Forming an estimated 1,29,000 km? within India,
these areas generally comprise the non-forested
or sparsely-forested high altitude regions of the
Himalaya and Trans-Himalaya above elevations of
3,000 m in the Western Himalaya and above
4,000m in the eastern Himalaya.

16.6.2. Why to conserve the high altitude

ecosystem?

¢ The high altitudes of India (> 3000 m. to 130,000
km?, including the Himalaya and Trans-Himalaya
biogeographic zones) support a unique wildlife
assemblage of global conservation importance.

¢ This includes highly endangered populations of
species such as the snow leopard, two species of
bears, wolf, red panda, mountain ungulates such
as the wild yak, chiru, Tibetan gazelle, Tibetan
argali, Ladakh urial, two species of musk deer, the
hangul, three species of goral, serow, and takin,
etc. High altitude lakes and bogs provide breeding
grounds for a variety of avifauna including the
black-necked crane, barheaded Geese, brahminy
ducks, and brown-headed gulls, etc.

¢ India has ratified international agreements
promoting the conservation of high altitude
wildlife species such as the snow leopard.

* In 2003, the Convention on Migratory Species
included the snow leopard as a Concerted Action
Species under its Appendix I.

* Similarly, in 2003, the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species
(CITES) expanded the scope of the CITES Tiger
Enforcement Task Force to include all Asian big
Cat species including the snow leopard.

* In both cases, representatives of the MoEF played
a vital role in elevating the conservation
Prominence of the snow leopard internationally.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

© Each state will select one biologically important
site and develop a science-based, participatory
conservation programme in that site in the first
five years of Project Snow Leopard. This will be
subsequently expanded to include other
biologically important sites.

16.7 SECURE HIMALAYA

¢ The project was launched by the MoEF&CC in
collaboration with UNDP. The plan intends to
conserve the snow leopards by protecting their
habitats and improve the ecology of Himalayan
ranges and lives of the mountain communities. It
covers Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,
Uttarakhand and Sikkim.

Focus areas
1. Strengthening and improving protected area

network

2. Landscape-level approach for wildlife

conservation

3. Control of poaching and illegal trade in wildlife

Mitigation of human-wildlife conflicts and

5. Management of tourism in wildlife areas

16.8. SEA TURTLE PROJECT
e A significant proportion of world’s Olive Ridley

Turtle population migrates every winter to Indian
coastal waters for nesting mainly at eastern coast.

¢ With the objective of conservation of olive ridley

turtles and other endangered marine turtles,
Ministry of Environment & Forests initiated the
Sea Turtle Conservation Project in collaboration
of UNDP in November, 1999 with Wildlife Institute
of India, Dehradun as the Implementing Agency.

¢ The project is being implemented in 10 coastal

States of the country with special emphasis in
State of Orissa.

¢ The project has helped in preparation of inventory

map of breeding sites of Sea Turtles, identification
of nesting and breeding habitats along the shore



--- PAGE 253 ---
4ANKAR “i a)

line, and migratory routes taken by Sea Turtles,
development of guidelines to safeguard and
minimize turtle mortality, development of
national and international cooperative and
collaborative action for Sea Turtle Conservation,
developing guideline plans for tourism in sea
turtle areas and developing infrastructure and
human resources for Sea Turtle Conservation.

e One of the important achievements have been
demonstration of use of Satellite Telemetry to
locate the migratory route of Olive Ridley Turtles
in the sea and sensitizing the fishermen and State
Government for the use of Turtle Exclusion Device
(TED) in fishing trawlers to check turtle mortality
in fishing net.

16.9. INDIAN CROCODILE
CONSERVATION PROJECT

© The Indian Crocodile Conservation Project has
pulled back the once threatened crocodilians from
the brink of extinction and place them on a good
path of recovery. The Project has not just produced
a large number of crocodiles, but has contributed
towards conservation in a number of related fields
as well.

e To protect the remaining population of
crocodilians in their natural habitat by creating
sanctuaries.

© To rebuild natural population quickly through
‘grow and release’ or ‘rear and release’ technique
- more than seven thousand crocodiles have been

restocked - about 4000 gharial (Gavialis
gangeticus), 1800 mugger (Crocodylus palustris)
and 1500 salt- water crocodiles (Crocodylus
porosus)

To promote captive breeding,

To take-up research to improve management.

To build up a level of trained personnel for better
continuity of the project through training
imparted at project-sites and through the
(erstwhile) Central Crocodile Breeding and
Management Training Institute, Hyderabad.

To involve the local people in the project intimately

16.10. PROJECT HANGUL

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing

The Kashmir stag (Cervus affinis hanglu) also
called Hangul is a subspecies of Central Asian Red
Deer native to northern India.

It is the state animal of jammu & kasmir

This deer lives in groups of two to 18 individuals
in dense riverine forests, high valleys, and
mountains of the Kashmir valley and northern
Chamba in Himachal Pradesh.

In Kashmir, it’s found in Dachigam National Park
at elevations of 3,035 meters.

These deer once numbered from about 5,000
animals in the beginning of the 2oth century.
Unfortunately, they were threatened, due to
habitat destruction, over-grazing by domestic
livestock and poaching.

This dwindled to as low as 150 animals by 1970.
However, the state of Jammu & Kashmir, along
with the IUCN and the WWF prepared a project
for the protection of these animals. It became
known as Project Hangul. This brought great

results and the population increased to over 340
by 1980.


--- PAGE 254 ---
a

[a

SHANKAR

pa

ae sal

16.11. CAPTIVE BREEDING

Captive breeding means that members of a wild
species are captured, then bred and raised in a
special facility under the care of wildlife biologists
and other expert.

Bringing an animal into captivity may represent
the last chance to preserve a species in the wild
in these situations:

When a population drops dangerously, captive
breeding can boost numbers. Captive-produced
young can sometimes be released into the wild
where populations have diminished or
disappeared, yet where suitable habitat remains
to support them.

When all of the existing habitat is poor quality or
other environmental problems occur, a captive
population can be maintained until the problems
can be solved or another appropriate habitat can
be found for the animal in the wild.

When the existing habitat is fragmented, captive
breeding combined with management may
provide the only hope for survival by providing
opportunities for genetic mixing.

When a group of birds stays in one area of
degraded habitat because they are behaviorally
trapped, captive breeding and release programs
can help them to expand their range.

By holding and breeding birds in captivity we
acquire knowledge about them that may be
difficult or impossible to accomplish in the wild.
Sometimes this scientific research provides some
of the information necessary to save a species.

cn i?”
The Rew A Reetnrmy Lem Soe RORY Dee = of}

e If situation demands reintroduction or |

reestablishment in the natural habitat may also
arise.

E.g. captive breeding of lion tailed macaque in
Arignar Anna Zoological Park, Chennai and in
mysore Zoo.

16.12. PROJECT DOLPHIN

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Dolphins are animals of aquatic ecosystems. They
are found in the sea, brackish water and fresh
water. A total of 15 species of marine and harbour
dolphins have been reported from Indian waters
and coasts. Besides, the Irrawady Dolphins are
found in brackish waters of Odisha. Amongst the
fresh water dolphins, the Gangetic Dolphin is
found in the Ganges river and its tributaries.

Apart from this, Indus River Dolphins have also

been reported in Indus River in Punjab.

All fresh water, brackish water and marine

Dolphins (Cetaceans) are listed in Schedule-I of

the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, thereby

according them the highest degree of protection

against hunting.

Gangetic Dolphin is one of the 17 species identified

for taking up ‘Recovery programme of Critically

Endangered Species, under the Centrally

Sponsored Scheme of ‘Integrated Development of
Wildlife Habitat’

National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) has
initiated dolphin conservation programme in 2016
to ensure long term survival of dolphin and other
river fauna.


--- PAGE 255 ---
Ganges Dolphin

e The Ministry of Environment and Forests notified
the Ganges River Dolphin as the National Aquatic
Animal.

the Gangetic dolphin has been notified by the

Assam government as the state aquatic animal

e Itcan survive only in freshwater and is essentially
blind. This mammal hunts by emitting ultrasonic
sounds, which bounce off fish and other prey,
enabling it to “see” an image in its mind.

e As per assessment reports available with the
environment ministry, there are about 3,700
Ganges River Dolphins in Indian rivers, of which
Uttar Pradesh has highest. In India, they are
sighted in the deep rivers of Assam, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar
Pradesh and West Bengal.

e the Conservation Action Plan for the Gangetic

Dolphin (2010-2020) launched by MoEF & cc

identified threats to Gangetic dolphins and the

impact of river traffic, irrigation canals and
depletion of prey-base on dolphin populations.

¢ The River Dolphin inhabits the Ganges-
Brahmaputra-Meghna and Karnaphuli-Sangu
river systems of Nepal, India, and Bangladesh.

© It is estimated that their total population is around
2,000 and they are listed in Schedule | of the
Wildlife Protection Act (1972).

© The Ganges Dolphin is among the four “obligate”
freshwater dolphins found in the world - the other
three are the ‘baiji’ found in the Yangtze River
(China), the ‘bhulan’ of the Indus (Pakistan) and
the ‘boto’ of the Amazon River (Latin America).

¢ Although there are several species of marine
dolphins whose ranges include some freshwater

habitats, these four species live only in rivers an

lakes.
e The Chinese River Dolphin was declared
functionally extinct by a team of international

scientists in 2006.

In India, the Ganges River Dolphin is threatened
by river water pollution and siltation, accidental
entanglement in fishing nets and poaching for

their oil.

¢ Inaddition, alterations to the rivers in the form of
barrages and dams are separating populations.
Various organizations, including the WWF-India
in Uttar Pradesh have initiated programs for
conservation and re-introduction of the River

Dolphin.

Doyouknow? 4

Nothing specified in wildlife protection act 1972,
shall affect the hunting rights conferred on the
Sthidauied THOSE of che Nicobar Weibae i the
‘Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands.

Conservation efforts-Project Dolphin

e MoEF&CC will launch the 10-year project to give
impetus to conserving and protecting the fast-
depleting species of both river and sea dolphins,
and “strengthen biodiversity, create employment
opportunities and attract tourism”,

e It envisages addressing concerns over conservation
and empowering stakeholders, such as the river-
dependent population, in reducing river pollution
and allowing for sustainable fishery and other
river-based livelihood options through scientific
conservation methods.

“The project will involve conservation of dolphins
and the overall aquatic habitat through the use of
0

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without Permission j
On in Writin
g.


--- PAGE 256 ---
SHANKAR ; Bt Pe
: IAS ACADEMY "Siig sae

- BS one a 5 ve ¢

modern technology, especially in enumeration and
anti-poaching activities. It will engage fishermen
and other river and ocean dependent population,
and strive for improving the livelihood of local

communities.”

16.13 GOVERNMENT MEASURES
TAKEN TO PREVENT THE MENACE OF
WILD ANIMAL’S ENTRY TO HUMAN
HABITATS

e Financial assistance is provided to the State
Governments under the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes, viz., ‘Integrated Development of Wildlife
Habitats’, ‘Project Tiger’ and ‘Project Elephant’ for
improvement of forest and wildlife areas like the
national parks and sanctuaries to augment food
and water availability in forests which can reduce
migration of animals from forests to the
habitations.

e Construction of barriers like boundary walls and
solar-powered electric fences around the sensitive
areas to prevent the wild animal attacks. These
activities are also permissible under the Central
assistance.

e Development of necessary infrastructure and
support facilities for immobilization of the
identified problematic animals through
tranquilization, and their relocation to the natural
habitat or rehabilitation in rescue centers.

e The Chief Wildlife Wardens of the States/Union
Territories are empowered to permit hunting of
problematic animals under the provisions of the
Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.

¢ Programmes are launched to sensitize people and
create awareness about the Do's and Don'ts in
case of scare and attacks of wild animals.

* Eco-development activities are undertaken in
villages around Protected Areas. to elicit the

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

cooperation of communities in management of the
Protected Areas, which includes actions to address
the grievances of people regarding human-wildlife
conflicts.

16.14. INDIA ADOPTS SAWEN

¢ India has adopted the Statute of the South Asia
Wildlife Enforcement Network (SAWEN) sand
becoming its formal member in order to
strengthen ties with the member countries in
controlling the trans-boundary wildlife crime
through communication, coordination,
collaboration, capacity building and cooperation
in the region.

e SAWEN, a Regional network is comprised of eight
countries in South Asia: Afghanistan, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri
Lanka. It aims at working as a strong regional inter
governmental body for combating wildlife crime by
attempting common goals and approaches for

combating illegal trade in the region.

16.15. DNA BARCODING

a MoU signed between Zoological Survey of India
(ZSI), a subordinate organization under MoEF&CC
and International Barcode of Life (iBOL), a Canadian
not-for-profit corporation.

ZSI and iBOL have come together for further efforts
in DNA barcoding, a methodology for rapidly and
accurately identifying species by sequencing a short
segment of standardized gene regions and comparing
individual sequences to a reference database.

iBOL is a research alliance involving nations that
have committed both human and financial resources
to enable expansion of the global reference database,
the development of informatics platforms, and/or the
analytical protocols needed to use the reference
library to inventory, assess, and describe biodiversity.


--- PAGE 257 ---
Tl ———

SHANKAR ‘i 6)

The MoU will enable ZSI to participate at the Global
level programmes like Bioscan and Planetary
Biodiversity Mission.

16.15.1. Programs of iBOL

BARCODE 500K, completed in 2015, was
the foundation that established the sequencing
facilities, analytical protocols, informatics platforms,
and international collaboration needed to build the
DNA barcode reference libraries. Building on this
success, BIOSCAN launched in June 2019 with an
intent to complete by 2026 to scan life and codify
species interactions while expanding the reference
library and demonstrating its utility. BIOSCAN will
be the foundation for the Planetary Biodiversity
Mission, a mission to save our living planet will
n=be launched in 2026 and completed by 2045.

BARCODE 500K

Goals:
e Deliver DNA barcode coverage for 0.5 million
species.

>,
“

>,
“

o,
“

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in.any form or by
any means, without permission in writing.

¢ Develop the informatics platform and analytical
protocols required for the development of the DNA
barcode reference library.

e Establish a core facility to provide sequencing and
informatics support.
16.15.2. BIOSCAN

Goals:

e Deliver DNA barcode coverage for 2 million
species.

e Activate biomonitoring for one or more ecoregions
in each participating nation & codify species
interactions for these sites.

¢ Develop informatics support for high-throughput
sequencing.

e Promote applications of DNA barcoding.

16.15.3. Planetary Biodiversity Mission
Goals:

¢ Complete the census of all multicellular species.
e Establish a global biosurveillance program.

e Construct a ‘library of life’ by preserving DNA
extracts from all species.

% Me o%
eo “~


--- PAGE 258 ---
| CHAPTER - 17 |

QW

CLIMATE CHANGE

limate is the long-term average of a region’s weather

events. The Earth’s climate is not static. Over the

billions of years of earth’s existence, it has changed
many times in response to natural causes like sun spot, ice
age glaciations, etc.

“Climate change” means a change of climate which is at-
tributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters
the composition of the global atmosphere and which is in
addition to natural climate variability observed over com-
parable time periods.

However, when today people talk about ‘climate change’,
they mean the changes in climate over the last 100 years
which is caused predominantly by human activity.

The phrase ‘climate change’ represents a change in the
long-term weather patterns. Climate change is not a
change of weather in a particular day; it is the cumulative
change of long term weather pattern i.e. changes in cli-
mate. For example, it’s possible that a winter day in Jammu,
could be sunny and mild, but the average weather, the
climate, tells us that Jammu’s winters will mainly be cold
and include snow and rain. The change in the pattern of
Jammu’s winters from the normal winter pattern repre-
sents an epitome of climate change.

Climate change is the measurable effects of the continual
warming trend. Climate change is usually measured in
major shifts in temperature, rainfall, snow, and wind pat-
terns lasting decades or more.

Humans are creating climate change by burning large
amounts of fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural gas), deforestation
(when forests are cut down or burned, they can no longer
store carbon, and the carbon is released to the atmosphere).

17.1. GLOBAL WARMING

Earth has warmed at an unprecedented rate over the last
hundred years and particularly over the last two decades.
Since 1992, each year has been one of the warmest years

on record. 2016 was the hottest year on record, worldwide.
An upsurge in the amount of extreme weather events, such
as wildfires, heat waves, and strong tropical storms, is also
attributed

“Global warming is an average increase in the temperature
of the atmosphere near the Earth’s surface and in the
troposphere, which can contribute to changes in global
climate patterns. Global warming can occur from a variety
of causes, both natural and human induced. In common
usage, “global warming” often refers to the warming that
can occur as a result of increased emissions of greenhouse
gases from human activities.”

17.1.1. Global Warming - Impacts
e Rise in Sea level
e Changes in rainfall patterns.

e Increased likelihood of extreme events such as heat
wave, flooding, hurricanes, etc.

e Melting of the ice caps.
e Melting of glaciers.

e Widespread vanishing of animal populations due to
habitat loss.

e Spread of disease (like malaria, etc).
e Bleaching of Coral Reefs.

e Loss of Plankton due to warming of seas.

Do you know?

Black Panther is not a separate species. Blackness, the
general darkening of colour is due to the excessive pres-
ence of a substance called Melanin which intensifies
pigmentation. The production of melanin is increased
where there is a combination of high temperature,
humidity and reduced light. Both black and normal-
coloured cubs may be produced in the same litter.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 259 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

17.2. GREENHOUSE EFFECT

The greenhouse effect is a naturally occurring phenome-
non that blankets the earth lower atmosphere and warms
it, maintaining the temperature suitable for living things
to survive.

Just as greenhouses, that keeps the air warm inside its
chamber, water vapor and green house gases warms the
Earth. Greenhouse gases play an important role in the
balance of Earth’s cooling and warming.

According to one estimate, in the absence of naturally oc-
curring green house effect, the average temperature of the
earth surface would be -19°C instead of present value of
15°C and the earth would be a frozen lifeless planet.

Green House

A greenhouse/ glasshouse is a building made of glass
chambers in which plants are grown in cold countries or
in cold climate areas. There is a continued increase in tem-
perature in green house even when the outside tempera-
ture remained low. It protects plants from frost.

Do you know?

e Tree rings provide precise information about envi-

ronmental events, including volcanic eruptions.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

17.2.1. What is the Greenhouse Effect?

THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT

Intra+ead heat ane ray trom
the ground is partly
reflected by the glass, and
some is trapped inside the
greenhouse

Visible enargy from the sun
passes through the glass
and heats the qround

The greenhouse effect is a process (similar to green house)
caused by greenhouse gases, which occur naturally in the
atmosphere. This process plays a crucial role in warming
the Earth’s surface, making it habitable.

However, human-generated greenhouse gas emissions
upset the natural balance and lead to increased warmth.

Natural
Greenhouse Effect

Human Enhanced
Greenhouse Effect

More heat escapes

into ~“e

Less heat escapes

r into space

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 260 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Incoming Energy

e The Sun emits energy that is transmitted to Earth. Be-
cause the Sun is very hot, the energy is emitted in high-
energy short wavelengths that penetrate the Earth’s
atmosphere.

Absorption

e About 30% of the Sun’s energy is reflected directly back
into space by the atmosphere, clouds, and surface of the
Earth. The rest of the Sun’s energy is absorbed into the
Earth’s system.

Emission

e The Earth re-emits energy back into the atmosphere.
Because the Earth is cooler than the Sun, the energy is
emitted in the form of infrared radiation, at wave-
lengths longer than the incoming solar energy.

Role of Greenhouse Gases

e Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere absorb much of
the long-wave energy (infrared radiation) emitted from
the Earth’s surface, preventing it from escaping from
the Earth’s system. The greenhouse gases then re-emit
this energy in all directions, warming the Earth’s sur-
face and lower atmosphere.

Human Role

e The atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases has
increased significantly over the past two centuries,
largely due to human-generated carbon dioxide emis-
sions from burning fossil fuels, deforestation.

e This increase has amplified the natural greenhouse ef-
fect by trapping more of the energy emitted by the
Earth. This change causes Earth’s surface temperature
to increase.

Do you know?

e No tree dies of old age. They are generally killed by
insects, disease or by people.
Trees grow from the top, not from the bottom as
is commonly believed.

Tree leaves help trap and remove tiny particles of
soot and dust which otherwise damages human
lungs.

Tree root networks filter contaminants in soils pro-
ducing clean water.

Trees prevent erosion by trapping soil that would
otherwise become silt

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

17.3. GREEN HOUSE GASES

e Greenhouse gases means those gaseous constituents of
the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that
absorbs and re-emit infrared radiation.

17.3.1. Water vapour

Water vapour is the biggest overall contributor to the
greenhouse effect and humans are not directly responsible
for emitting this gas in quantities sufficient to change its
concentration in the atmosphere. However, CO, and other
greenhouse gases is increasing the amount of water vapour
in the air by boosting the rate of evaporation.

Unlike CO,, which can persist in the air for centuries, water
vapour cycles through the atmosphere quickly, evaporating
from the oceans and elsewhere before coming back down
as rain or snow.

Since the rate of evaporation rises with temperature, the
amount of water vapour in the air at any one time (and the
amount of warming it causes) is strongly related to the
amount of other greenhouse gases in the air.

17.3.2. CARBON DIOXIDE

Carbon Effect on Green House Gas

stratification

s fess productive

e Carbon dioxide (CO,) is the primary greenhouse gas
emitted through human activities. Carbon dioxide
is naturally present in the atmosphere as part of the
Earth’s carbon cycle (the natural circulation of car-
bon among the atmosphere, oceans, soil, plants, and
animals).

e Human activities are altering the carbon cycle both by
adding more CO, to the atmosphere and by reducing
the natural sinks, like deforestation, to remove CO,
from the atmosphere.

e While CO, emissions come from a variety of natural
sources, human-related emissions are responsible for
the increase that has occurred in the atmosphere since
the industrial revolution.

The main sources

i. The combustion of fossil fuels to generate electricity.

ii. The combustion of fossil fuels such as gasoline and
diesel used for transportation.

iii. Many industrial processes emit CO, through fossil fuel
combustion.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 261 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

iv. Several processes also produce CO, emissions through
chemical reactions that do not involve combustion, for
example, the production and consumption of mineral
products such as cement, the production of metals such
as iron and steel, and the production of chemicals, etc.

Emissions and Trends

e Changes in CO, emissions from fossil fuel combustion
are influenced by many factors, including population
growth, economic growth, changing energy prices, new
technologies, changing behavior, and seasonal temper-
atures.

¢ Between 1990 and 2010, the increase in CO, emissions
corresponded with increased energy use by an expand-
ing economy and population.

Do you know?

USA is the second largest Greenhouse Gas emitter
presently. However, if cumulative historical emission
is considered, USA would be a largest GHG emitter.
So, its withdrawal will affect control of cumulative
global GHG emissions. It will also affect the availabil-
ity of international funds for climate change, as USA
was a contributor to climate finance.

Reducing Carbon Dioxide Emissions

e The most effective way to reduce carbon dioxide (CO,)
emissions is to reduce fossil fuel consumption. Other
strategies include Energy Efficiency, Energy Conserva-
tion, Carbon Capture and Sequestration.

Do you know?

The pesticide industry in India, which is the fourth

largest in the world and second largest in the Asia-
Pacific region, only after China.

17.3.3. METHANE

e Methane (CH,) is emitted by natural sources such as
wetlands, as well as human activities such as leakage
from natural gas systems and the raising of livestock.

e Natural processes in soil and chemical reactions in the
atmosphere help remove CH, from the atmosphere.

Source

Natural sources:

e Wetlands are the largest source, emitting CH, from bac-
teria that decompose organic materials in the absence
of oxygen.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Smaller sources include termites, oceans, sediments,
volcanoes, and wildfires.

Human induced:

e Agriculture: Domestic livestock such as cattle, buffalo,
sheep, goats, and camels produce large amounts of CH
as part of their normal digestive process. Also, when
animals’ manure is stored or managed in lagoons or
holding tanks, CH, is produced. Because humans raise
these animals for food, the emissions are considered
human-related. Globally, the Agriculture sector is the
primary source of CH, emissions

e Industry: Methane is the primary component of natural
gas. Some amount of CH, is emitted to the atmosphere
during the production, processing, storage, transmis-
sion, and distribution of crude oil & natural gas.

e Waste from Homes and Businesses: Methane is gener-
ated in landfills as waste decomposes and from the
treatment of wastewater.

Do you know?

Polar bears are the largest living carnivorous quadru-
ped (animals with four legs).

17.3.4. NITROUS OXIDE

e Nitrous oxide (N,O) is naturally present in the atmos-
phere as part of the Earth’s nitrogen cycle, and has a
variety of natural sources.

e However, human activities such as agriculture, fossil
fuel combustion, wastewater management, and indus-
trial processes are increasing the amount of N_O in the
atmosphere.

Sources

Natural sources:

e Natural emissions of N,O are mainly from bacteria
breaking down nitrogen in soils and the oceans.

Human induced:

e Agriculture. Nitrous oxide is emitted when people add
nitrogen to the soil through the use of synthetic fertiliz-
ers. Nitrous oxide is also emitted during the breakdown
of nitrogen in livestock manure and urine, which con-
tributed to 6% of N.O emissions in 2010.

e Transportation. Nitrous oxide is emitted when trans-
portation fuels are burned.

e Industry. Nitrous oxide is generated as a byproduct dur-
ing the production of nitric acid, which is used to make

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 262 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

synthetic commercial fertilizer, and in the production
of adipic acid, which is used to make fibers, like nylon,
and other synthetic products.

e Removal: Nitrous oxide is removed from the atmos-
phere when it is absorbed by certain types of bacteria
or destroyed by ultraviolet radiation or chemical re-
actions.

Do you know?

Telecoeras, a single-horned, hippo-like grazer, once
common in North America.

17.3.5. FLUORINATED GASES

e They are emitted through a variety of industrial pro-
cesses such as aluminum and semiconductor manu-
facturing & Substitution for Ozone-Depleting
Substances.

e Many fluorinated gases have very high global warming
potentials (GWPs) relative to other greenhouse gases.
Fluorinated gases are well-mixed in the atmosphere,
spreading around the world after they’re emitted.

e Fluorinated gases are removed from the atmosphere
only when they are destroyed by sunlight in the far
upper atmosphere. In general, fluorinated gases are the
most potent and longest lasting type of greenhouse
gases emitted by human activities.

e There are three main categories of fluorinated gases—
1. hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
2. perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and
3. sulfur hexafluoride (SF6).

Substitution for Ozone-Depleting Substances:

e Hydrofluorocarbons are used as refrigerants, aerosol
propellants, solvents, and fire retardants. These chem-
icals were developed as a replacement for chlorofluoro-
carbons (CFCs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs)
because they do not deplete the stratospheric ozone
layer.

e Unfortunately, HFCs are potent greenhouse gases with
long atmospheric lifetimes and high GWPs, and they are
released into the atmosphere through leaks, servicing,
and disposal of equipment in which they are used.

Industry:

e Perfluorocarbons are compounds produced as a by-
product of various industrial processes associated with
aluminum production and the manufacturing of semi-
conductors.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Like HFCs, PFCs generally have long atmospheric life-
times and high GWPs.

e Sulfur hexafluoride is used in magnesium processing
and semiconductor manufacturing, as well as a tracer
gas for leak detection. HFC-23 is produced as a by-prod-
uct of HCFC-22 production.

Transmission and Distribution of Electricity:

e Sulfur hexafluoride is used in electrical transmission
equipment, including circuit breakers.

Do you know?

Planting trees on denuded and waste land, along
roads, railway tracks, deserted areas, watersheds, etc.
protects soil from erosion by wind or water by firmly
binding it with roots and by diverting runoff during
rains

17.3.6. BLACK CARBON

e Black carbon (BC) is a solid particle or aerosol, (though
not a gas) contributes to warming of the atmosphere.

e Black carbon, commonly known as soot, is a form of
particulate air pollutant, produced from incomplete
combustion. It consists of pure carbon in several linked
forms.

Source
e biomass burning,
e cooking with solid fuels, and

e diesel exhaust,etc.

What does BC do?

e Black carbon warms the Earth by absorbing heat in the
atmosphere and by reducing albedo, (the ability to re-
flect sunlight) when deposited on snow and ice.

e BC is the strongest absorber of sunlight and heats the
air directly. In addition, it darkens snow packs and gla-
ciers through deposition and leads to melting of ice and
snow.

e Regionally, BC disrupts cloudiness and monsoon rainfall
and accelerates melting of mountain glaciers such as
the Hindu Kush-Himalayan glaciers.

Life time

e Black carbon stays in the atmosphere for only several
days to weeks.

e Thus the effects of BC on the atmospheric warming and
glacier retreat disappear within months of reducing
emissions.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 263 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

How far India contributes to globe?

e According to estimates, between 25 and 35 percent of
black carbon in the global atmosphere comes from
China and India, emitted from the burning of wood and
cow dung in household cooking and through the use of
coal to heat homes.

Government Measures

e Project Surya has been launched to reduce black carbon
in atmosphere by introducing efficient stove technolo-
gies, solar cookers, solar lamps and biogas plants.

17.3.7 Brown Carbon

e Brown carbon is a ubiquitous and unidentified compo-
nent of organic aerosol which has recently come into
the forefront of atmospheric research.

e Light-absorbing organic matter (other than soot) in at-
mospheric aerosols of various origins, e.g., soil humics,
humic-like substances (HULIS), tarry materials from
combustion, bioaerosols, etc.

Possible Sources of Brown Carbon are

e Biomass burning (possibly domestic wood burning) is
shown to be a major source of brown carbon

e smoke from agricultural fires may be an additional
source.

e “Brown carbon” is generally referred for greenhouse
gases and “black carbon” for particles resulting from
impure combustion, such as soot and dust.

Do you know?

A flowering tree usually has a dome-shaped appear-
ance and a deliquescent stem in which the main trunk
divides at some distance from the ground into several
branches, which branch again and again, making the
trunk appear to deliquese or melt away

17.4. CLIMATE FORCINGS

e Climate “forcings” are factors in the climate system that
either increase or decrease the effects to the climate
system.

e Positive forcings such as excess greenhouse gases warm
the earth while negative forcings, such as the effects of
most aerosols and volcanic eruptions, actually cool the
earth.

e Atmospheric aerosols include volcanic dust, soot from
the combustion of fossil fuels, particles from burning
forests and mineral dust.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Dark carbon-rich particles such as soot from diesel en-
gines absorb sunlight and warm the atmosphere.

¢ Conversely, exhaust from high-sulphur coal or oil pro-
duce light aerosols that reflect sunlight back to space,
producing a cooling effect. Aerosols that form naturally
during volcanic eruptions cool the atmosphere. Large
volcanic eruptions can eject enough ash into the atmos-
phere to lower temperature for a year or more until the
sulfate particles settle out of the atmosphere.

17.4.1. Forcing

Altering the Energy Balance

e The power of a process to alter the climate is estimated
by its “radiative forcing,” the change in the Earth’s en-
ergy balance due to that process.

¢ Some climate forcings are positive, causing globally av-
eraged warming, and some are negative, causing cool-
ing. Some, such as from increased CO, concentration,
are well known; others, such as from aerosols, are more
uncertain.

Natural Forcings

e Natural forcings include changes in the amount of en-
ergy emitted by the Sun, very slow variations in Earth’s
orbit, and volcanic eruptions.

e Since the start of the industrial revolution, the only
natural forcing with any long-term significance has been
a small increase in solar energy reaching Earth. How-
ever, this change is not nearly enough to account for the
current warming.

Human-Induced Forcings

e Climate forcing can also be caused by human activities.
These activities include greenhouse gas and aerosol
emissions from burning fossil fuels and modifications
of the land surface, such as deforestation.

Human-Generated Greenhouse Gases

e Greenhouse gases are a positive climate forcing; that is,
they have a warming effect. Carbon dioxide emitted
from the burning of fossil fuel is presently the largest
single climate forcing agent, accounting for more than
half of the total positive forcing since 1750.

Human-Generated Aerosols

e Burning fossil fuels adds aerosols to the atmosphere.
Aerosols are tiny particles in the atmosphere composed
of many things, including water, ice, ash, mineral dust,
or acidic droplets.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 264 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Aerosols can deflect the Sun’s energy and impact the
formation and lifetime of clouds. Aerosols are a negative
forcing; that is, they have a cooling effect.

Causes of Climate Change

e While natural forcings do exist, they are not significant
enough to explain the recent global warming. Human
activities are very likely responsible for most of the
recent warming.

How to estimate the effect of each gas?

e Each gas’s effect on climate change depends on
three main factors:

. How much of these gases are in the atmosphere?

e Concentration, or abundance, is the amount
of a particular gas in the air. Greenhouse gas
concentrations are measured in parts per mil-
lion, parts per billion, and even parts per
trillion.

One part per million is equivalent to one drop of
water diluted into about 13 galloons of liquid (roughly
the fuel tank of a compact car).

. How long do they stay in the atmosphere?

e Each of these gases can remain in the atmos-
phere for different amounts of time, ranging
from a few years to thousands of years.

All of these gases remain in the atmosphere
long enough to become well mixed, meaning
that the amount that is measured in the atmos-
phere is roughly the same all over the world,
regardless of the source of the emissions.

. How strongly do they impact global temperatures?
e Some gases are more effective than others at

making the planet warmer and “thickening the
Earth’s blanket (green house gas)”.

For each greenhouse gases, a Global Warming
Potential (GWP) has been calculated to reflect
how long it remains in the atmosphere, on aver-
age, and how strongly it absorbs energy.

17.5. GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL

e Global warming potential describes the impact of each
gas on global warming.

e The two most important characteristics of a GHG in
terms of climate impact are how well the gas absorbs

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

energy (preventing it from immediately escaping
to space), and how long the gas stays in the atmos-
phere.

e The Global Warming Potential (GWP) for a gas is a
measure of the total energy that a gas absorbs over a
particular period of time (usually 100 years), compared
to carbon dioxide.

e Gases with a higher GWP absorb more energy, per

pound, than gases with a lower GWP, and thus contrib-
ute more to warming Earth.

GWP & Lifetime of Green House Gases:

GAS GWP LIFETIME
(100-year) (years)

Carbon di oxide 100
Nitrous oxide 310 120

4 Hydro fluoro 140-11,700 1-270
carbons (HFCs)
5 Perfluoro 6,500-9,200 | 800-50,000
carbons (PFCs)
Sulfur 23,900 3,200
hexafluoride (SF6)

Carbon dioxide (CO,) has a GWP of 1 and serves as a base-
line for other GWP values.

e The larger the GWP, the more warming the gas causes.
For example, methane’s 100-year GWP is 21, which
means that methane will cause 21 times as much warm-
ing as an equivalent mass of carbon dioxide over a 100-
year time period.

e Methane (CH,) has a GWP more than 20 times higher
than CO, for a 100-year time scale. CH, emitted today
lasts for only 12 years in the atmosphere, on average.
However, on a pound-for-pound basis, CH, absorbs
more energy than CO,, making its GWP higher.

e Nitrous Oxide (N,O) has a GWP 310 times that of CO,
for a 100-year timescale. NO emitted today remains in
the atmosphere for an average of 120 years.

e Chloro fluoro carbons (CFCs), hydro fluoro carbons
(HFCs), hydro chloro fluoro carbons (HCFCs), perfluoro
carbons (PFCs), and sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) are called
high-GWP gases because, for a given amount of mass,
they trap substantially more heat than CO.,.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 265 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY Q@, 0° A Do ENVIRONMENT

e The Himalayas and other mountain chains of central
Do you know? Asia support large regions that are glaciated. These gla-
ciers provide critical water supplies to dry countries
such as Mongolia, western China, Pakistan and Afghan-
istan. The loss of these glaciers would have a tremen-
dous impact on the ecosystem of the region.

Spices and condiments are flavoring agents obtained
from plants. Because they have little nutritive value,
they are not classified as foods. They contain essential
oils, which impart flavor and aroma to food and add
greatly to the pleasure of eating. They stimulate the ¢ World’s leading scientists predict that global warming
appetite and increase the flow of gastric juices. may pose serious threat to national and global economy
and the environment.

e The poor and low-lying countries will find it difficult to
cope with the damages caused by changing climate and
rise in sea level

Do you know?

Shola forest, Temperate forest is an evergreen ecosys-
tem found at the high altitude regions. It is distributed
in Nilgris and Palani hills of Tamil Nadu, Kerala and 17.6.2. Chain of events
Karnataka. Sholas are found at sites where adjacent
slope converges. These are interrupted by grasslands
ecosystem with stunted evergreen woods and confined
to sheltered valleys, gleeves, hallows and depressions.
The main role of shola forest is conservation of water
in that region. It needs well drained soils and avoids
swampy soils.

Combustion of fossil fuels due to

Human Activities

Increase of Green House Gases

17.6. RECEDING GLACIERS-A SYMPTOM

OF GLOBAL CLIMATE CHANGE
@ 150 years ago there were 147 glaciers in Glacier National —

park, but today only 37 glaciers remain, and scientists
predict that they are likely to melt by the year 2030.
Similarly, glaciers all across the Himalayas and Alps are
retreating and disappearing every year. There are al-
most 160,000 glaciers found in Polar Regions and high
mountain environments. Therefore, researchers are

increasingly using satellite remote sensors to routinely Flooding / Rise in sea level

survey our world’s glaciers in a fraction of the time.

17.6.1. Impact of glacial retreat

Sub f Low-lying Coastal Land
e The retreat of glaciers in the Andes and the Himalayas —E—E—_ Ores

will have a potential impact on water supplies.

e Climate change may cause variations in both tempera-
ture and snowfall, causing changes in mass balance of
a glacier.

Large-scale destruction of Ecosystems

and Extinction of species

%. 2% o% 0% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 266 ---
| CHAPTER - 18 |

QW

OCEAN ACIDIFICATION

18.1. OCEAN ACIDIFICATION

Oceans are an important reservoir for CO,, absorbing a
significant quantity of it (one-third) produced by anthro-
pogenic activities and effectively buffering climate change.

Ocean acidification is the change in ocean chemistry - low-
ering of ocean pH (i.e. increase in concentration of hydro-
gen ions) driven by the uptake of carbon compounds by the
ocean from the atmosphere.

As the uptake of atmospheric carbon dioxide by the ocean
increases, the concentration of hydrogen ions in the ocean
increases, the concentration of carbonate ions decreases,
the pH of the oceans decreases and the oceans become less
alkaline - this process is know as ocean acidification.

18.1.1. CO, effect on ocean acidification

Ico.

; Less plankton
production

_, Oce4ean
Acidification

The uptake of atmospheric carbon dioxide is occurring at
a rate exceeding the natural buffering capacity of the
ocean.

The pH of the ocean surface waters has decreased by about
0.1 pH unit (i.e. 26% increase in ocean hydrogen ion con-
centration) since the beginning of the industrial revolution.

The ocean currently has a pH around 8.0 and is therefore
‘basic’ and it is nearly impossible, chemically, for all of it to
actually become a pH less than 7.0. Why do we therefore
refer to ‘ocean acidification’?

That is because acidification is the direction of travel, the
trend, regardless of the starting point. Acidification refers
to lowering pH from any starting point to any end point
on the pH scale.

Forms of calcium carbonate

Calcite and aragonite are two different forms of cal-
cium carbonate.

1. Calcite is the mineral form found in the shells of
planktonic algae, amoeboid protists, some corals,
echinoderms, and some molluscs (e.g. oysters); it
is relatively less soluble.

. Aragonite is a more soluble form of calcium car-
bonate; it is found in most corals, most mollusks
(small planktonic snails), as well as some species
of algae.

18.1.2. Influence of other factors

Various factors can locally influence the chemical reactions
of CO2 with sea water and add to the effects to ocean acid-
ification. For example,

i. Acid rain
Acid rain can have a pH between 1 and 6 and has impact

on surface ocean chemistry. It has major effect on ocean
acidification locally and regionally but very small globally.

ii. Eutrophication

Coastal waters are also affected by excess nutrient inputs,
mostly nitrogen, from agriculture, fertilizers and sewage.
The resulting eutrophication leads to large plankton
blooms, and when these blooms collapse and sink to the
sea bed the subsequent respiration of bacteria decomposing
the algae leads to a decrease in sea water oxygen and an
increase in CO, (a decline in pH).

How it reacts?

The term ‘ocean acidification’ summarizes several pro-
cesses that occur when CO, reacts with sea water.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 267 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Two reactions are particularly important. Firstly, the for-
mation of carbonic acid with subsequent release of hydro-
gen ions:

co, + HO HCO, —=H+ = HCO-

(Carbon dioxide) + (Water) (Carbonic acid) (Hydrogen ions) + (Bicarbonate ions)

OCEAN ACIDIFICATION
Less More

i. —
Atmospheric acidic | acidic
carbon dioxide

H+

sicarnonnt ae
i Carbonate
i—> HCOo;-* ions

-2

rccsnnet
sholis

The above reaction and release of hydrogen ions increases
acidity and thus pH level is reduced.

A second reaction, between carbonate ions, CO, and water
produces bicarbonate ions.

The combined effect of both these reactions not only in-
creases acidity but also lowers the availability of carbon-
ate ions.

18.1.3. Effect of ocean acidification

Seawater absorbs CO, to produce carbonic acid (H,CO,),
bicarbonate (HCO,--) and carbonate ions (CO,,-).

These carbonate ions are essential to the calcification pro-
cess that allows certain marine organisms to build their
calcium carbonate shells and skeletons (e.g. hard tropical
corals, cold water corals, molluscs, crustaceans, sea ur-
chins, certain types of plankton, lobsters, etc).

However, increases in atmospheric CO, levels lead to de-
crease in pH level, increase in the concentration of carbonic
acid and bicarbonate ions, causing a decrease in the con-
centration of carbonate ions.

Thus carbonate ions are less available and calcification is
therefore harder to achieve, and may be prevented alto-
gether. Imagine trying to build a house while someone
keeps stealing your bricks.

This impact of ocean acidification may therefore have po-
tentially catastrophic consequences for ocean life and many
marine species of economic importance.

Qe ss

W 0 ENVIRONMENT

18.1.4. Mitigation

e Reducing CO,

© promoting government policies to cap CO, emissions,
e eliminate offshore drilling,

e by advocating for energy efficiency and

e Alternative energy sources such as wind power, solar,
etc.

18.1.5. Saturation horizons

e Deep, cold ocean waters are naturally under saturated
with carbonate ions causing the shells of most calcifying
organisms to dissolve.

e Surface waters are over saturated with carbonate ions
and do not readily dissolve shells of calcifying organisms.

e The saturation horizon is the level below which calcium
carbonate minerals undergo dissolution.

e Those organisms that can survive below the saturation
horizon do so due to special mechanisms to protect
their calcium carbonate from dissolving.

e As ocean acidification causes this horizon to rise verti-
cally in the water column so more and more calcifying
organisms will be exposed to under saturated water
and thus vulnerable to dissolution of their shells and
skeletons.

e The saturation horizon of calcite occurs at a greater
ocean depth than that for aragonite, but both horizons
have moved closer to the surface presently when com-
pared to the 1800s.

Do you know?

Chameleons are seen inhabiting almost all the parts
of south India and west of the Ganges. However, they
are rarely seen in areas that receive heavy rainfall.
Chameleons are mostly arboreal and are found in
trees or on smaller bushes.

18.1.6. Ocean acidification and the short and
long-term fate of carbon in the system

On long timescales (>100,000 years) there is a natural bal-
ance maintained between the up-take and release of CO,
on Earth; the CO, produced by volcanoes, the main natural
source of CO., is taken up by the production of organic
matter by plants and by rock weathering on land.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 268 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

UPWELLING

Surface Coastal regions periodically experience
upwelling events where deeper ocean water circu-
lates onto continental shelves and near-shore
areas.

This exposes the productive upper ocean ecosys-
tems to colder water containing more nutrients &
more CO..

As ocean acidification makes the upper oversatu-
rated layer of sea water shallower each year, these
natural upwelling events will more often cause
undersaturated water to well up and flow to the
shore.

Coastal marine organisms that form shells are un-
accustomed to such events, and periodic exposures
to these significantly different conditions may af-
fect these communities.

However, rock weathering takes tens of thousands of years
so will not remove the current anthropogenic input of CO,
to the atmosphere and ocean fast enough.

On shorter time scales (>1,000 years), the ocean has an
internal stabilizing feedback linking the ocean carbon cycle
to the underlying carbonate rich sediment known as car-
bonate compensation.

The upper layers of the ocean tend to be supersaturated

with CaCO, so little dissolution takes place, whilst the deep
ocean is undersaturated and carbonate readily dissolves.

The first boundary between these two states is known as
the lysocline, the depth at which dissolution strongly in-
creases in the deep ocean.

The CaCO, in the form of dead shells sink to the sea bed.
If it is of shallow water depth, the majority is buried in

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

the sediment and trapped for a long time, but where the
shells sink in deep water nearly all the Caco, is dis-
solved, thereby not locking the carbon away for millions
of years.

The current increased rate of dissolution of atmospheric
CO, into the ocean results in an imbalance in the carbonate
compensation depth (CCD), the depth at which all carbon-
ate is dissolved.

As the pH of the ocean falls, it results in a shallowing of
the lysocline and the CCD, thus exposing more of the
shells trapped in the sediments to understaturated condi-
tions causing them to dissolve, which will help buffer
ocean acidification but over a long time scale of a thousand
years.

Do you know?

The park had been put on the tentative list of future
heritage sites of UNESCO in 2009 and had been in-
cluded in the final list in 2014. The Odisha govern-
ment had submitted a dossier, compiled by the Wildlife
Institute of India, recommended to UNESCO that the
park be declared a World Heritage Site.

18.1.7-Winners and losers

e The growth and level of photosynthesis of certain ma-
rine phytoplankton and plant species may increase with
higher CO, levels, but this is by no means a general rule.

e For others, higher CO, and rising acidity may have ei-
ther negative or neutral effects on their physiology.

e Therefore, particular marine plants will be winners’,

while others will be ‘losers’ and some may show no
signs of change but change is inevitable.

A reduction in atmospheric CO, levels is essential to halt
ocean acidification before it is too late.

%, 9% of o% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 269 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 270 ---
| CHAPTER - 19 |

OZONE DEPLETION

QW

zone is a natural gas; it is an allotrope of oxygen

consisting of three atoms of oxygen bound together

in a non-linear fashion. The chemical symbol of
ozone is O..

It is found in two different layers of the atmosphere. Ozone
in the troposphere is “bad” because it dirties the air and
helps to form smog, which is not good to breathe. Ozone
in the stratosphere is “good” because it protects life on
Earth by absorbing some of the sun’s harmful Ultra Violet
(UV) rays.

The ozone layer is very important because the configura-
tion of the ozone molecule and its chemical properties are
such that ozone efficiently absorbs ultraviolet light, thus
acting like a sun-screen.

The UV rays cause direct damage to the genetic mate-
rial or DNA of animal and plant cells. Exposure of
mammals to UV light has been shown to act on the
immune system, thereby making the body more sus-
ceptible to diseases.

Do you know?

e Hoolock Gibbon is the only ape found in India. Rest
of the monkeys are all macaques and langurs. In
India is distributed in the northeast India.

Palms are typically unbranched trees with only one
trunk (columnar stem), called the “caudex,” which
ends in a crown of large leaves.

In doing so, ozone protects oxygen at lower altitudes from
being broken up by the action of ultraviolet light and also
keeps most of the ultraviolet radiation from reaching the
earth’s surface.

It helps in reducing the risks of mutation and harm to plant
and animal life. Too much UV rays can cause skin cancer
and will also harm all plants and animals. Life on Earth
could not exist without the protective shield of the ozone
layer.

19.1. OZONE DEPLETION

19.1.1. Change in equilibrium

e The equilibrium between the formation and destruction
of ozone, has been upset by the influx of several sub-
stances into the atmosphere which react with ozone and
destroy it.

e The rate at which ozone is being destroyed is much
faster than the rate at which it is being formed.

e It implies that there is a significant decrease in the con-
centration of ozone in a particular region of the atmos-
phere, hence the name ‘Ozone Depletion’.

e The best example of such an Ozone Depletion is the
atmosphere over the Antarctic which has only about 50
percent of the ozone that originally occurred there. The
actual realization of ozone-depletion came only in 1985.

19.1.2. Sources

chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs):

CFCs molecules are made up of chlorine, fluorine and
carbon.

Where it is used?

They are used as refrigerants, propellents in aerosol sprays,
foaming agents in plastic manufacturing, fire extinguish-
ing agents, solvents for cleaning electronic and metallic
components, for freezing foods etc .

Two-thirds of CFC is used as refrigerants while one-third
is used as blowing agents in foam insulation products.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 271 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Why CFCs are used?

CFCs has a wide and varied application due to its proper-
ties like non-corrosiveness, non-inflammability, low toxic-
ity and chemical stability, etc.

Lifetime & removal of CFCs

Unlike other chemicals, CFCs cannot be eliminated from
the atmosphere by the usual scavenging processes like
photodissociation, rain-out and oxidation.

In fact, the residence time of CFCs in the atmosphere esti-
mated to be between 40 and 150 years. During this period,
the CFCs move upwards by random diffusion, from the
troposphere to the stratosphere.

The escape of CFCs

The CFCs enter into the atmosphere by gradual evapora-
tion from their source. CFCs can escape into the atmos-
phere from a discarded refrigerator. Since the CFCs are
thermally stable they can survive in the troposphere. But
in the stratosphere, they are exposed to UV radiation.

The chemical reaction

The molecules of CFCs when exposed to UV radiation break
up, thus freeing chlorine atoms. A free chlorine atom reacts
with an ozone molecule to form chlorine monoxide (ClO).
The molecules of chlorine monoxide further combine with
an atom of oxygen. This reaction results in the formation
of an oxygen molecule (O,) and reformation of the free
chlorine atom (CI).

Chlorine +——» Chlorine monoxide + oxygen

Chlorine monoxide——» Chlorine + Oxygen
+ monoxide (0)

Net reaction:

ozone +——> oxygen + oxygen
monoxide (0)

1, UV causes 3
chiorine atom
to break way from

Gens the CFC molecule.

‘a

0 cterne ©, - sxrgen
meres oueute

2. The free chiorine 3. The chlorine atom
atom hits an ozone pulls one oxygen ator
molecule, away.

snnere
ae fee cttenne
©, «mayan
bee cergen oe olecole

eed
free crerine 9, - aneee ,
‘naar Utrton neve

4. A free oxygen 5. The result is
atom hits the chlorine another free chiorine
monoxide motecule, atom,

6, Free chlorine will continue to deplete ozone in the stratosphere. geal

CFC Ozone Depletion

Qe ss

WD 0 ENVIRONMENT
The depletion of 03 is catalystic. The element that de-
stroys O3 (i.e chlorine) is being reformed at the end of
cycle. A single chlorine atom destroys thousands of ozone
molecules before encountering reactive nitrogen or hy-
drogen compounds that eventually return chlorine to its
reservoirs.

Do you know?

Barking deer /common muntjac is the mammal with
the lowest recorded chromosome number. It gives
calls similar to barking, usually on sensing a predator.
Status - least threatened.

CFC substitutes - characteristics

e The substitute for CFCs should be safe, low cost,
increased energy efficiency of CFC replacement
technology, effective refrigerants with low ozone
layer depletion potential (ODP) and low global
warming potential (GWP).

CFC-12 (R-12) is a widely used refrigerant. HFC
134a (R-134a) is the most promising alternative (R-
143a) and (R-152a) can also be used.

19.1.3. Nitrogen Oxides:

Source

The sources of nitrogen oxides are mainly explosions of
thermonuclear weapons, industrial emissions and agricul-
tural fertilizers.

The chemical reaction

Nitric oxide (NO) catalytically destroys ozone.

Nitric oxide
+ ozone

Nitrogen dioxide
+ Oxygen

Nitric oxide
+ Oxygen

Nitrogen dioxide
+ monoxide

The escape of NO

Nitrous oxide (N,0) is released from solid through denitri-
fication of nitrates under anaerobic conditions and nitrifi-
cation of ammonia under aerobic conditions. This NO can
gradually reach the middle of the stratosphere, where it is
photolytically destroyed to yield nitric oxide which in turn
destroys ozone.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 272 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Other substances:

Bromine containing compounds called halons and HBFCs,
i.e. hydrobromo fluorocarbons [both used in fire extin-
guishers and methyl bromide (a widely used pesticide)].
Each bromine atom destroys hundred times of more ozone
molecules than what a chlorine atom does.

Bromine monoxide
+ Oxygen

Bromine + ozone —»>

Bromine monoxide —}>
+ chlorine monoxide

Oxygen + Bromine
+ chlorine

Bromine (Br) combines with ozone forming bromine mon-
oxide (BrO) and Oxygen (02). The BrO further reacts with
chlorine monoxide (CIO) to give oxygen (O2) and free atoms
of bromine (Br) and chlorine (Cl). This free atoms can
further react with ozone.

Sulphuric acid particles: These particles free chlorine from
molecular reservoirs, and convert reactive nitrogen into
inert forms thus preventing the formation of chlorine res-
ervoirs.

Carbon tetrachloride (a cheap, highly toxic solvent) and
methyl chloroform (used as a cleaning solvent for clothes
and metals, and a propellant in a wide range of consumer
products, such as correction fluid, dry cleaning sprays,
spray adhesives) and other aerosols.

Monitoring the Ozone Layer
Some organizations that help in monitoring the at-
mosphere and form a network of informations com-
munication about the atmosphere, including ozone
layer monitoring are:
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
World Weather Watch (WWW)
Integrated Global Ocean Services Systems (IGOSS)
Global Climate Observing System (GCOS)

19.1.4. Role of polar stratospheric clouds in ozone
depletion.

There are three types of stratospheric clouds. They are:

1. Nacreous clouds extend from 10 to 100km in length and
several kilometers in thickness. They are also called
‘mother-of-pearl’ clouds due to their glow with a sea-
shell like iridescence.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

2. The second type of clouds contain nitric acid instead of
pure water.

3. The third type of clouds have the same chemical com-
position as nacreous clouds, but form at a slower rate,
which results in a larger cloud with no iridescence.

The chlorine released by the breakdown of CFCs exists
initially as pure chlorine or as chlorine monoxide (active
chlorine / instable) but these two forms react further to
form compounds Chlorine nitrate and HCL that are stable
(inactive chlorine).

Chlorine + methane —>HCI + methyliumcation (CH3)

Chlorine monoxide —> Chlorine nitrate
+ Nitrogen dioxide

The stable compounds HCL and CLONO, are reservoirs of
chlorine, and therefore for chlorine to take part in reac-
tions of any sort, it has to be freed.

Conversionof Chlorine from
“Active” to “Inactive” States

UV Radiation

He 02
ii a oom

——— ClO ——pj + CIONC2

4

“Chiorinated
Fluorocarbon
(CFC)

“Active”

Chlorine Inactive

Chlorine

Effect of Polar Stratospheric Clouds

“Inactive”
Chlorine

“Active”

UV Radiation: Chlorine O2

: iii ome
CIONO2 bid ci By. cio -
—_
Hel ci Se cio Aw

@o%,? A ied
®2°%,? Clz02
HNO3 G2

There is a correlation exist between the cycle of ozone
depletion and the presence of polar stratospheric clouds
(PSCs) i.e. the ice particles of the cloud provided substrates
for chemical reactions which freed chlorine from its res-

ervoirs. Usually the reaction between HCl and CIONO, is
very slow, but this reaction occurs at a faster rate in the
presence of a suitable substrate which is provided by the
stratospheric clouds at the poles.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 273 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

HCl + Chlorine nitrate —) molecular chlorine

It results in the formation of molecular chlorine and nitric
acid. The molecular chlorine formed in the above reaction
can be broken down to atomic chlorine and the ozone
depletion reaction would continue. The PSCs not only ac-
tivate chlorine, but they also absorb reactive nitrogen. If
nitrogen oxides were present they would combine with
chlorine monoxide to form a reservoir of chlorine nitrate
(CIONO,).

Dimer of chlorine monoxide: Stratospheric chlorine mon-
oxide reacts with itself forming a dimer Cl2O02. This dimer
is easily dissociated by sunlight, giving rise to free chlorine
atoms which can further react to destroy ozone.

Every spring, a hole as big as the USA develops in the
ozone layer over Antarctica, in the South Pole. A

smaller hole develops each year over the Arctic, at the
North Pole. And there are signs that the ozone layer
is getting thinner all over the planet.

19.1.5. Why is the Ozone Depletion predominant
at the Antarctic?

e The Antarctic stratosphere is much colder. The low tem-
perature enables the formation of Polar stratospheric
Clouds (PSCs), below 20 km.

¢ Ozone absorbs sunlight, causing the characteristic in-
crease in temperature with increase in altitude in the
stratosphere. If ozone is being depleted, the air becomes
cooler, further adding to the favourable conditions for
the formation of PSCs and stabilization of the vortex.
The vortex is a ring of rapidly circulating air that con-
fines the ozone depletion in the Antarctic region.

e The longetivity of the Antarctic vortex is another factor,
enhancing favourable conditions for the depletion of
ozone. The vortex remains, in fact, throughout the polar
winter, well into midspring whereas the vortex in the
Arctic disintegrates by the time the polar spring (March-
April) arrives.

e Typical happenings in the winter months leading to the
Ozone Depletion over the Antarctic.

e InJune Antarctic winter begins, the vortex develops and
the temperature falls enough for the clouds to form.

e During July and August PSCs denitrify and dehydrate
the stratosphere through precipitation, hydrochloric acid

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

and chlorine nitrate react on cloud surfaces to free chlo-
rine and winter temperatures drops to their lowest
point.

e In September sunlight returns to the centre of the vor-
tex as the austral spring begins and PSCs disappear
because of increasing temperature. CIO-ClO and ClO-
BrO catalystic cycles destroy ozone.

e During October lowest levels of ozone are reached.

e In November, Polar vortex breaks down, ozone-rich are
from the mid-latitudes replenishes the Antarctic strato-
sphere and ozone-poor air spreads over the southern
hemisphere.

19.1.6. Arctic Ozone Depletion

e The Ozone Depletion has been increasingly evident over
the Arctic as well.

e The Arctic Ozone Depletion which swept across Britain
in March 96 was the greatest depletion of ozone ever
seen in the northern hemisphere.

e Scientists claim that it had been caused, in past, by a
dramatic cooling of the upper atmosphere in the north-
ern latitudes over.

e The ozone depletion over the northern hemisphere has
been increasing steadily since the winter of 1992.

e Apart from the build-up of ozone depleting chemicals,
the main cause is the increasing cold temperature in
the arctic stratosphere which encourages the formula-
tion of PSCs.

How ozone is measured?

e The ozone measurement instruments and tech-
niques are varied. Some of them are the Dobson
spectrophotometer and the filter ozonometer called
M83, and total ozone mapping spectrometer
(TOMS) in the Nimbus-7 satellite.

The Umheher technique

e The most common measure of total ozone abun-
dance is the Dobson unit (named after the pioneer-
ing atmospheric physical Gordon Dobson) which is
the thickness of the ozone column (compressed at
Standard Temperature and Pressure (STP)) in
milli-centimeters. At STP one Dobson unit is equal
to 2.69x1020 molecules per square meter.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 274 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

19.1.7. Environmental Effects Of Ozone
Depletion

Decrease in the quantity of total-column ozone; tend to
cause increased penetration of solar UV-B radiation
(290-315nm) to the earth’s surface. UV-B radiation is the
most energetic component of sunlight reaching the
earth’s surface. It has profound effects on human health,
animals, plants, micro-organisms, materials and on air
quality.

Effects of human and animal health

e Potential risks include an increase in the incidence of
and morbidity from eye diseases, skin cancer and infec-
tious diseases.

e UV radiation has been shown in experimental systems
to damage the cornea and lens of the eye. Experiments
in animals show that UV exposure decreases the im-
mune response to skin cancers, infectious agents and
other antigens and can lead to unresponsiveness upon
repeated challenges.

e In susceptible (light-skin coloured) populations, UV-B
radiations is the key risk factor for development of non-
melanoma skin cancer (NMSC).

Do you know?

All the chameleons have the ability to change color
whenever they are subject to changes in stimuli, like
a change in light, temperature or emotion. For exam-
ple, when angered, they are likely to become darker
in color.

Effects on terrestrial plants

e Psychological and developmental processes of plants are
affected by UV-B radiation.

e Response to UV-B also varies considerably among spe-
cies and also cultivars of the same species. In agricul-
ture, this will necessitate using more UV-B tolerant
cultivars and breeding new ones.

e In forests and grasslands, this is likely to result in
changes in the composition of species; therefore there
are implications for the biodiversity in different eco-
systems.

e Indirect changes caused by UV-B such as changes in
plant form, biomass allocation to parts of the plant,

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

timing of developmental phases and second metabolism
may be equally or sometimes more important that the
damaging effects of UV-B.

Effects on aquatic ecosystems

e Exposure to solar UV-B radiation has been shown to
affect both orientation mechanisms and motility in phy-
toplankton, resulting in reduced survival rates for these
organisms.

e Solar UV-B radiation has been found to cause damage
in the early developmental stages of fish, shrimp, crab,
amphibians and other animals. The most severe effects
are decreased reproductive capacity and impaired larval
development.

Effects on bio-geochemical cycles

e Increases in solar UV radiation could affect terrestrial
and aquatic bio-geochemical cycles, thus, altering both
sources and sinks of greenhouse and chemically impor-
tant trace gases.

e These potential changes would contribute to bio-sphere
atmosphere feedbacks that reinforce the atmospheric
build-up of these gases.

Effects on air quality

e Reduction in stratospheric ozone and the concomitant
increase in UV-B radiation penetrating to the lower
atmosphere result in higher photo dissociation rates of
key trace gases that control the chemical reactivity of
the troposphere.

e This can increase both production and destruction of
ozone ©,) and related oxidants such as hydrogen per-
oxide (H,O,), which are known to have adverse effects
on human health, terrestrial plants, and outdoor mate-
rials.

e Changes in the atmospheric concentrations of the hy-
droxyl radical (OH) may change the atmospheric life-
times of climatically important gases such as methane
(CH,) and the CFC substitutes.)

e Increased tropospheric reactivity could also lead to
increased production of particulates such as cloud
condensation nuclei, from the oxidation and subse-
quent nucleation of sulphur, of both antropogenic and
natural origin (e.g. carbonyl sulphide and dimethyl-
sulphide.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 275 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY ENVIRONMENT

QF 6° go

Effects on materials

e Synthetic polymers, naturally occurring bio-polymers,

as well as some other materials of commercial interest
are adversely affected by solar UV radiation.

The application of these materials, particularly, plas-
tics, in situations which demand routine exposure to
sunlight is only possible through the use of light-stabi-
lizers and / or surface treatment to protect them from
sunlight.

e Any increase in solar UV-B content due to partial

ozone depletion will therefore accelerate the photogra-

dation rates of these materials, limiting their life out-
doors.

Do you know?

The gray slender loris (primate) It is found in India
and Sri Lanka. Its natural habitats are subtropical
or tropical dry forests and subtropical or tropical
moist lowland forests. It is threatened by habitat
loss

%, o% of of o% o%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 276 ---
| CHAPTER - 20 |

QW

IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE

20.1. AGRICULTURE AND FOOD

SECURITY

Climate Change can affect crop yield as well as the types
of crops that can be grown in certain areas, by impacting
agricultural inputs such as water for irrigation, amounts
of solar radiation that affect plant growth, as well as the
prevalence of pests.

Rise in temperatures caused by increasing green house
gases is likely to affect crops differently from region to
region. For example, moderate warming (increase of 1
to 3°C in mean temperature) is expected to benefit crop
yields in temperate regions, while in lower latitudes
especially seasonally dry tropics, even moderate tem-
perature increases (1 to 2°C ) are likely to have negative
impacts for major cereal crops. Warming of more than
3°C is expected to have negative effect on production in
all regions.

The Third Assessment Report of the IPCC, 2001 con-
cluded that climate change would hit the poorest coun-
tries severely in terms of reducing the agricultural
products.

The Report claimed that crop yield would be reduced
in most tropical and sub-tropical regions due to de-
creased water availability, and new or changed insect/
pest incidence.

In South Asia losses of many regional staples, such as
rice, millet and maize could top 10 per cent by 2030.

As a result of thawing of snow, the amount of arable
land in high-latitude region is likely to increase by re-
duction of the amount of frozen lands.

At the same time arable land along the coast lines are
bound to be reduced as a result of rising sea level.

e Erosion, submergence of shorelines, salinity of the

water table due to the increased sea levels, could mainly
affect agriculture through inundation of low lying lands.

In a recent study, the International Commission for
Snow and Ice (ICSE) reported that Himalayan glaciers
- that are the principal dry-season water sources of
Asia’s biggest rivers - Ganges, Indus, Brahmaputra,
Yangtze, Mekong, Salween and Yellow - are shrinking
quicker than anywhere else and that if current trends
continue they could disappear altogether by 2035.

If agricultural production in the low-income developing
countries of Asia and Africa is adversely affected by
climate change, the livelihoods of large numbers of the
rural poor will be put at risk and their vulnerability to
food insecurity will be manifold.

Do you know?

A conifer usually has a conical appearance and has an
excurrent stem; i.e., its main stem is thickest at the
base and gradually tapers toward the apex, with lat-
eral branches in an acropetal succession.

20.1.1. Impacts on Indian agriculture

e A large part of the arable land in India is rain-fed, the

productivity of agriculture depends on the rainfall and
its pattern.

e Agriculture will be adversely affected not only by an

increase or decrease in the overall amounts of rainfall
but also by shifts in the timing of the rainfall.

e Any change in rainfall patterns poses a serious threat

to agriculture, and therefore to the economy and food
security.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 277 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Summer rainfall accounts for almost 70 per cent of the
total annual rainfall over India and is crucial to Indian
agriculture.

However, studies predict decline in summer rainfall by
the 2050s.

Semi arid regions of western India are expected to re-
ceive higher than normal rainfall as temperatures soar,
while central India will experience a decrease of be-
tween 10 and 20 per cent in winter rainfall by the 2050s.

Relatively small climate changes can cause large water
resources problems particularly in arid and semi arid
regions such as northwest India.

Productivity of most crops may decrease due to increase
in temperature and decrease in water availability, es-
pecially in Indo-Gangetic plains.

This apart, there would be a decline in the productivity of
rabi as compared to kharif season crops.

Rising temperature would increase fertilizer require-
ment for the same production targets and result in
higher GHG emissions, ammonia volatilization and cost
of crop production.

Increased frequencies of droughts, floods, storms and
cyclones are likely to increase agricultural production
variability.

Do you know?

The sloth bear, also known as the labiated bear, is a
nocturnal insectivorous species of bear found wild
within the Indian subcontinent. They feed on termites,
honeybee colonies and fruits

20.2. WATER STRESS AND WATER

INSECURITY

Lack of access to water is a perturbing issue, particu-
larly in developing countries.

Climate change is expected to exacerbate current
stresses on water resources.

By 2020, between 75 and 250 million people are pro-
jected to be exposed to increased water stress due to
climate change.

Spreading water scarcity is contributing to food inse-
curity and heightened competitions for water both
within and between countries.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

As the world population expands and the consumption
of water spirals upwards, water problems are bound to
intensify.

Increase in temperature due to climate change has been
widespread over the globe.

Warming has resulted in decline in mountain glaciers
and snow cover in both hemispheres and this is pro-
jected to accelerate throughout the 21st century.

This will in turn lead to reducing water availability, hy-
dropower potential, and would change the seasonal flow
of rivers in regions supplied by melt water from major
mountain ranges (e.g. Hindu-Kush, Himalaya, Andes).
By 2050s freshwater availability in Central, South, East
and South-East Asia, particularly in large river basins,
is projected to decrease.

A warmer climate will accelerate the hydrologic cycle,
altering rainfall, magnitude and timing of run-off.

Available research suggests a significant future increase
in heavy rainfall events in many regions, while in some
regions the mean rainfall is projected to decrease.

The frequency of severe floods in large river basins has
increased during the 2oth century.

Increasing floods poses challenges to society, physical
infrastructure and water quality.

Rising temperatures will further affect the physical,
chemical and biological properties of fresh water lakes
and rivers, with predominantly adverse impacts on
many individual fresh water species, community com-
position and water quality.

In coastal areas, sea level rise will exacerbate water
resource constraints due to increased salinisation of
groundwater supplies.

20.2.1. Impacts on water situation in India

Water resources will come under increasing pressure
in the Indian subcontinent due to the changing climate.

The Himalayan glaciers are a source of fresh water for
perennial rivers, in particular the Indus, Ganga, and
Brahmaputra river systems.

In recent decades, the Himalayan region seems to have
undergone substantial changes as a result of extensive
land use (e.g. deforestation, agricultural practices and
urbanization), leading to frequent hydrological disas-
ters, enhanced sedimentation and pollution of lakes.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 278 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

There is evidence that some Himalayan glaciers have re-
treated significantly since the 19th century.

Available records suggest that the Gangotri glacier is
retreating about 28 m per year.

Glacial melt is expected to increase under changed cli-
mate conditions, which would lead to increased summer
flows in some river systems for a few decades, followed
by a reduction in flow as the glaciers disappear.

As a result of increase in temperature significant
changes in rainfall pattern have been observed during
the 2oth century in India.

A serious environmental problem has also been wit-
nessed in the Indo-Gangetic Plain Region (IGPR) in the
past whereby different rivers (including Kosi, Ganga,
Ghaghara, Son, Indus and its tributaries and Yamuna)
changed their course a number of times.

The recent devastating floods in Nepal and Bihar due
to change of course of River Kosi is a case in point.

Available study suggests that food production has to be in-
creased to the tune of 300 mt by 2020 in order to feed India’s
ever-growing population, which is likely to reach 1,30 billion
by the year 2020.

The total foodgrain production has to be increased by
50 per cent by 2020 to meet the requirement.

It is feared that the fast increasing demand for food in
the next two or three decades could be quite grim par-
ticularly in view of the serious problem of soil degrada-
tion and climate change.

The rise in population will increase the demand for
water leading to faster withdrawal of water and this in
turn would reduce the recharging time of the water
tables.

As a result, availability of water is bound to reach crit-
ical levels sooner or later. During the past four decades,
there has been a phenomenal increase in the growth of
groundwater abstraction structures.

Growing demand of water in agriculture, industrial and
domestic sectors, has brought problems of overexploita-
tion of the groundwater resource to the fore.

The falling groundwater levels in various parts of the
country have threatened the sustainability of the
groundwater resources.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

At present, available statistics on water demand shows
that the agriculture sector is the largest consumer of
water in India.

About 83% of the available water is used for agriculture
alone. If used judiciously, the demand may come down
to about 68% by the year 2050, though agriculture will
still remain the largest consumer.

In order to meet this demand, augmentation of the ex-
isting water resources by development of additional
sources of water or conservation of the existing re-
sources and their efficient use will be needed.

It is evident that the impact of global warming threats
are many and alarming.

Water security in terms of quantity and quality pose
problems for both developed and developing countries.

However, the consequences of future climatic change
may be felt more severely in developing countries such
as India, whose economy is largely dependent on agri-
culture and is already under stress due to current pop-
ulation increase and associated demands for energy,
freshwater and food.

Do you know?

Indian Flying Fox are the fruit eating bats. This spe-
cies is found in roosts in large colonies of hundreds to
thousands of individuals on large trees in rural and
urban areas, close to agricultural fields, ponds and by
the side of roads.

20.3. RISE IN SEA LEVELS

Sea level rise is both due to thermal expansion as well
as melting of ice sheets.

Satellite observations available since the early 1990s
show that since 1993, sea level has been rising at a rate
per year, significantly higher than the average during
the previous half-century.

IPCC predicts that sea levels could rise rapidly with ac-
celerated ice sheet disintegration.

Global temperature increases of 3-4°C could result in
330 million people being permanently or temporarily
displaced through flooding.

Warming seas will also fuel more intense tropical
storms.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 279 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

20.3.1. Impacts on Coastal States in India

The coastal states of Maharashtra, Goa and Gujarat face
a grave risk from the sea level rise, which could flood
land (including agricultural land) and cause damage to
coastal infrastructure and other property.

Goa will be the worst hit, losing a large percentage of
its total land area, including many of its famous beaches
and tourist infrastructure.

Mumbai’s northern suburbs like Versova beach and
other populated areas along tidal mud flats and creeks
are also vulnerable to land loss and increased flooding
due to sea level rise.

Flooding will displace a large number of people from
the coasts putting a greater pressure on the civic amen-
ities and rapid urbanisation.

Sea water percolation due to inundations can diminish
freshwater supplies making water scarcer.

The states along the coasts like Orissa will experience
worse cyclones. Many species living along the coastline
are also threatened.

The coral reefs that India has in its biosphere reserves
are also saline sensitive and thus the rising sea level
threatens their existence too, not only the coral reefs
but the phytoplankton, the fish stocks and the human
lives that are dependent on it are also in grave danger.

People living in the Ganges Delta share the flood risks
associated with rising sea levels.

20.4. ECOSYSTEMS AND BIO-DIVERSITY

Climate Change has the potential to cause immense
biodiversity loss, affecting both individual species and
their ecosystems that support economic growth and
human well being.

The projected extinctions of flora and fauna in the fu-
ture will be human driven i.e. due to adverse impact of
human activities.

According to International World Wildlife Fund (WWF)
species from the tropics to the poles are at risk.

Many species may be unable to move to new areas
quickly enough to survive changes that rising tempera-
tures will bring to their historic habitats.

WWE asserted that one-fifth of the world’s most vulner-

able natural areas may be facing a “catastrophic” loss
of species.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

It have catastrophic impact on the marine ecosystems.
They will be affected not only by an increase in sea
temperature and changes in ocean circulation, but also
by ocean acidification, as the concentration of dissolved
carbon dioxide (carbonic acid) rises.

This is expected to negatively affect shell forming or-
ganisms, corals and their dependent ecosystems.

Do you know?

Grizzled giant squirrel is distributed in the patches of
riparian forest along the Kaveri River and in the hill
forests in the Tamil Nadu and Kerala states of south-
ern India. IUCN Status - near threatened

20.5. IMPACTS ON INDIA’S BIODIVERSITY

India is a land of mega-biodiversity, encompassing fea-
tures from glaciers to deserts. However, climate change
is posing grave threat to its ecosystems.

Mountain ecosystems are hot spots of biodiversity. How-
ever, temperature increases and human activities are
causing fragmentation and degradation of mountain
biodiversity.

The Himalayan Ecosystem is considered as the lifeline
not only to India but also to our neighbouring countries
such as China, Pakistan, Nepal, owing to the perennial
rivers that arise out of the melting glaciers.

It is home to the largest amount of glaciers after the
North and the South Poles. However, climate change is
threatening this life giver drastically.

It is also predicted that there will be an increase in the
phenomenon of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs)
in the eastern and the central Himalayas, causing cata-
strophic flooding downstream, with serious damage to
‘life, property, forests, farms, and infrastructure’.

The melting glaciers of the Himalayas have a serious
impact given the fact that they give rise to the perennial
rivers that further flourishes the agriculture.

The Himalayan rivers are closely interlinked with the
Indo-Gangetic Ecosystem, which is primarily an agri-
cultural ecosystem, nearly 65-70% of Indians having
agriculture as their primary occupation.

The National Environment Policy, 2006 states that the
Indian Desert Ecosystems (arid and semi-arid region)

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 280 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa B72 6 ENVIRONMENT

occupies 127.3 mha (38.8%) of the country’s geograph-
ical area and spreads over 10 states.

e The Indian desert fauna is extremely rich in species
diversity of mammals and winter migratory birds.

e Recent studies have shown that deserts have shown
signs of expansion, thus leading to a process called de-
sertification.

e The climate patterns have altered the natural attributes
of a desert region; for example the floods in the desert
district of Barmer in Rajasthan in 2006.

¢ Coastal and Marine Ecosystem is one of the assets of
India.

e The mangrove forests (wetlands) of the rivers and the
coasts acts as carbon sink as well as a habitat for a
unique and diverse species of plants and animals.

e The wetlands act as a natural barrier to flooding (that
may be caused by the rising sea levels) and cyclones.

e The most explicit event in the perspective of climate
change affecting the marine ecosystem is the example
of coral bleaching.

e Inthe Peninsular India, even the rivers of the Peninsula
are dependent on the monsoons, thus the Peninsular
Ecosystem is basically a monsoon dependent ecosystem.

e India is heavily dependent on the monsoon to meet its
agricultural and water needs, and also for protecting
and propagating its rich biodiversity. Climate change is
linked with the changing patterns observed in the mon-
soons of India.

Do you know?

Narcotic substances that are used for smoking pur-
poses are called “fumitories,” and those that are used
for chewing purposes are called “masticatories.”

20.6. CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH

e Climate change poses a host of threats to the survival
of mankind.

e Each year, about 800,000 people die from causes at-
tributable to air pollution, 1.8 million from diarrhoea
resulting from lack of access to clean water supply,
sanitation, and poor hygiene, 3.5 million from malnutri-
tion and approximately 60,000 in natural disasters.

A warmer and more variable climate would result in
higher levels of some air pollutants, increased transmis-
sion of diseases through unclean water and through
contaminated food.

Climate change has a direct impact on human health.

For example, the warmer the climate the likelihood of
its impact on human health becomes worse.

It is anticipated that there will be an increase in the
number of deaths due to greater frequency and severity
of heat waves and other extreme weather events.

Climate change and the resulting higher global tem-
peratures are causing increasing frequency of floods
and droughts leading to the risk of disease infections.

Lack of freshwater during droughts and contamination
of freshwater supplies during floods compromise hy-
giene, thus increasing rates of diarrhoeal disease.

Endemic morbidity and mortality due to diarrhoeal dis-
ease primarily associated with floods and droughts are
expected to rise in East, South and South-East Asia due
to projected changes in hydrological cycle.

Flooding also creates opportunities for breeding of dis-
ease carrying insects such as mosquitoes.

Areas affected by frequent floods and drought condi-
tions also witness large scale migration of populations
to relatively stable regions leading to overcrowding and
unhygienic conditions resulting in transmission of dis-
eases like Japanese encephalitis and malaria.

Climate change is a major factor in the spread of infec-
tious diseases. Diseases, confined to one specific geo-
graphic region spread to other areas.

The World Health Organization (WHO) in their studies
have indicated that due to rising temperatures, malaria
cases are now being reported for the first time from
countries like Nepal and Bhutan.

It has also been predicted that an additional 220-400
million people could be exposed to malaria- a disease
that claims around 1 million lives annually.

Dengue fever is already in evidence at higher levels of
elevation in Latin America and parts of East Asia.

Studies suggest that climate change may swell the pop-
ulation at risk of malaria in Africa by 90 million by
2030, and the global population at risk of dengue by 2
billion by 2080s.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 281 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY ENVIRONMENT

QF 6° go

e In addition, the negative effects are concentrated on

e Rising temperatures and changing patterns of rainfall

are projected to decrease crop yields in many developing
countries, stressing food supplies. This will ultimately
translate into wider prevalence of malnutrition/ under-
nutrition. In some African countries, yields from rain-fed
agriculture could be reduced by up to 50 per cent by 2020.

Emission of the Green House Gases have been respon-
sible for the depletion of ozone layer, which protects the
Earth from the harmful direct rays of the sun. Depletion
of stratospheric ozone results in higher exposure to the
ultra violet rays of the sun, leading to an increase in the
incidents of skin cancer. It could also lead to an increase
in the number of people suffering from eye diseases
such as cataract. It is also thought to cause suppression
of the immune system.

The projections by WHO and IPCC suggest that the
negative effects of climate change on health are greater.

poor populations that already have compromised health
prospects, thus widening the inequality gap between
the most and the least privileged.

The balance of positive and negative health impacts will
vary from one location to another, and will alter over
time as temperatures continue to rise.

Do you know?

Saponins are a group of water-soluble glucosides that
yield soap froth in water, form emulsions with oils and
fats, and are capable of absorbing large amounts of
gases such as carbon dioxide. Soap nut tree yields
saponins.

%, 9% of o% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 282 ---
| CHAPTER - 21 |

QW

MITIGATION STRATEGIES

21.1. CARBON SEQUESTRATION:

Carbon capture and storage, also known as CCS or car-
bon sequestration, describes the technologies designed
to tackle global warming by capturing CO, at power
stations, industrial sites or even directly from the air
and permanently storing it underground.

Carbon sequestration describes long-term storage of
carbon dioxide or other forms of carbon to either miti-
gate or defer global warming.

It has been proposed as a way to slow the atmospheric
and marine accumulation of greenhouse gases, which
are released by burning fossil fuels.

Sinks

Carbon sequestration may be carried out by pumping
carbon into ‘carbon sinks’— an area that absorbs carbon.

e Natural sinks - Oceans, forests, soil etc.

e Artificial sinks - Depleted oil reserves, unmineable
mines, etc.

Carbon capture has actually been in use for years. The

oil and gas industries have used carbon capture for

decades as a way to enhance oil and gas recovery. Only

recently have we started thinking about capturing car-

bon for environmental reasons.

There are three main steps to carbon capture and
storage (CCS) -

trapping and separating the CO, from other gases,

transporting this captured CO, to a storage location,
and

storing that CO, far away from the atmosphere (under-
ground or deep in the ocean).

Types of Sequestration:

There are number of technologies under investigation
for sequestering carbon from the atmosphere. These
can be discussed under three main categories:

Ocean Sequestration: Carbon stored in oceans through
direct injection or fertilization.

Geologic Sequestration: Natural pore spaces in geologic
formations serve as reservoirs for long-term carbon
dioxide storage.

Terrestrial Sequestration: A large amount of carbon is
stored in soils and vegetation, which are our natural
carbon sinks. Increasing carbon fixation through pho-
tosynthesis, slowing down or reducing decomposition
of organic matter, and changing land use practices can
enhance carbon uptake in these natural sinks.

Geologic Sequestration is thought to have the largest
potential for near-term application.

Geologic Sequestration Trapping Mechanisms

Hydrodynamic Trapping: Carbon dioxide can be trapped
as a gas under low-permeability cap rock (much like
natural gas is stored in gas reservoirs).

Solubility Trapping: Carbon dioxide can be dissolved
into a liquid, such as water or oil.

Mineral Carbonation: Carbon dioxide can react with the
minerals, fluids, and organic matter in a geologic forma-
tion to form stable compounds/minerals; largely cal-
cium, iron, and magnesium carbonates.

Carbon dioxide can be effectively stored in the earth’s
subsurface by hydrodynamic trapping and solubility trap-
ping - usually a combination of the two is most effective.

Do you know?

Asian golden cat prefer forest habitats interspersed
with rocky areas, and are found in dry deciduous,
subtropical evergreen and tropical rainforests. In
India it is distribution in assam& arunachal Pradesh.
IUCN Status - near threatened.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 283 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

21.2. CARBON SINK

Unlike black and brown carbon that contribute to at-
mospheric green house gases, green and blue carbon
sequestrate the atmosphere green house gases

Green Carbon

Green carbon is carbon removed by photosynthesis and
stored in the plants and soil of natural ecosystems and
is a vital part of the global carbon cycle.

Many plants and most crops, have short lives and re-
lease much of their carbon at the end of each season,
but forest biomass accumulates carbon over decades
and centuries.

Furthermore, forests can accumulate large amounts of
CO, in relatively short periods, typically several decades.
Afforestation and reforestation are measures that can
be taken to enhance biological carbon sequestration.

Blue Carbon

Blue Carbon refers to coastal, aquatic and marine car-
bon sinks held by the indicative vegetation, marine or-
ganism and sediments.

In particular, coastal ecosystems such as tidal marshes,
mangroves, and seagrasses remove carbon from the
atmosphere and ocean, storing it in plants and deposit-
ing it in the sediment below them by natural processes.

These coastal ecosystems are very efficient at sequester-
ing and storing carbon - each square mile of these sys-
tems can remove carbon from the atmosphere and
oceans at rates higher than each square mile of mature
tropical forests.

Furthermore, coastal ecosystems have been found to
store huge quantities of carbon in organic rich sedi-
ments - up to 5 times more carbon than many temper-
ate and tropical forests.

These ecosystems are found in all continents, except
Antarctica.

Why is Blue Carbon Ecosystem Important?

Preventing degradation and destruction and promoting
restoration of coastal ecosystems is a significant tool to
mitigate climate change.

The coastal ecosystems of mangroves, tidal marshes,
and seagrasses are some of the most rapidly disappear-
ing natural systems on Earth.

When lost they not only stop sequestering carbon but
also release their stores of carbon and become new
sources of climate change causing carbon emissions
which can last for centuries.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

The Blue Carbon Initiative

The Blue Carbon Initiative is the first integrated program
with a comprehensive and coordinated global agenda
focused on mitigating climate change through the con-
servation and restoration of coastal marine ecosystems.

International Cooperation

Conservation International (CD, the International Union
for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), and the Intergov-
ernmental Oceanic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO is
collaborating with governments, research institutions,
non-governmental and international organizations, and
communities around the world to

Develop management approaches, financial incentives
and policy mechanisms for ensuring conservation and
restoration of coastal Blue Carbon ecosystems;

Engage local, national, and international governments
to ensure policies and regulations support coastal Blue
Carbon conservation, management and financing;

Develop comprehensive methods for coastal carbon ac-
counting;

Develop incentive mechanisms such as carbon payment
schemes for Blue Carbon projects; and

Implement projects around the world that demonstrate
the feasibility of coastal Blue Carbon accounting, man-
agement, and incentive agreements;

Support scientific research into the role and importance
of coastal Blue Carbon ecosystems for climate change
mitigation.

Do you know?

The seeds of Phytelephas macrocarpa, in the family
Arecaceae, commonly called “ivory nut” or “tagua
palm tree,” is the chief source of vegetable ivory. It is
extensively used as a substitute for true ivory. It can
be carved and used in the manufacture of buttons,
chess pieces, poker chips, dice, knobs, inlays, billiard
balls, toys, etc. Metroxylon amicarum, in the Are-
caceae family, can likewise be used for these purposes

21.3. CARBON CREDIT:

A carbon credit is a tradeable certificate or permit rep-
resenting the right to emit one tonne of carbon or car-
bon dioxide equivalent (tCO2e).

One carbon credit is equal to one ton of carbon dioxide,
or in some markets, carbon dioxide equivalent gases.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 284 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

How does one earn a carbon credit?

An organisation which produces one tonne less of car-
bon or carbon dioxide equivalent than the standard
level of carbon emission allowed for its outfit or activity,
earns a carbon credit.

How does it help?

Countries which are signatories to the Kyoto Protocol
under the UNFCCC have laid down gas emission norms
for their companies to be met by 2012. In such cases, a
company has two ways to reduce emissions.

(i) It can reduce the GHG (greenhouse gases) by adopt-
ing new technology or improving upon the existing
technology to attain the new norms for emission of
gases.

(ii) It can tie up with developing nations and help them
set up new technology that is eco-friendly, thereby
helping developing country or its companies ‘earn’
credits. This credit becomes a permit for the com-
pany to emit GHGs in its own country. However, only
a portion of carbon credits of the company in devel-
oping country can be transferred to the company in
developed country.

Developing countries

Developing countries like India and China are likely to
emerge as the biggest sellers and Europe is going to be
the biggest buyers of carbon credits.

Last year global carbon credit trading was estimated at
$5 billion, with India’s contribution at around $1 billion.

China is currently the largest seller of carbon credits
controlling about 70% of the market share.

Carbon, like any other commodity, has begun to be
traded on India’s Multi Commodity Exchange.

MCX has become first exchange in Asia to trade carbon
credits.

Do you know?

Several species of nitrogen-fixing bacteria of Rhizo-
bium, live inside the root nodules of leguminous trees.
Similarly, Frankia, a nitrogen-fixing mycelial bacte-
rium, is associated symbiotically with the root nod-
ules of several non-legume plants, including Alnus,
Casuarina, Coriaria, Myrica and Rubus. Both Rhizo-
bium and Frankia are capable of fixing atmospheric
nitrogen.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

21.4. CARBON OFFSETTING:

Carbon offsets are credits for reductions in greenhouse
gas emissions made at another location, such as wind
farms which create renewable energy and reduce the
need for fossil-fuel powered energy.

Carbon offsets are quantified and sold in metric tonnes
of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO.e).

Buying one tonne of carbon offsets means there will be
one less tonne of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere than
there would otherwise have been.

Carbon offsetting is often the fastest way to achieve the
deepest reductions within businesses and it also often
delivers added benefits at the project site, such as em-
ployment opportunities, community development pro-
grammes and training and education.

For a carbon offset to be credible it must meet essential
quality criteria, including proof that it is additional (the
reduction in emissions would not have occurred without
the carbon finance), that it will be retired from the car-
bon market so it cannot be double counted, and that it
addresses issues such as permanence (it delivers the
reductions it stated) and leakage (the emission reduc-
tion in one area doesn’t cause an increase in emissions
somewhere else)

Example:

Business A1 is unable to reduce 100 tonnes of its CO,
emissions in the short term.

There is a project somewhere else in the world which
could save 100 tonnes easily, but they need a cash in-
jection.

For example, a community in India could swap from
carbon intensive kerosene as an energy source to solar
panels - but they can’t afford the solar panels.

Through the purchase of carbon offsets, you provide the
financial assistance to subsidise the cost of getting solar
panels onto housing, and through that means you have
enabled a saving of 100 tonnes of CO.,.

Business A1 has therefore reduced global net CO, emis-
sions by 100 tonnes.

The added benefit is that Business A1 has helped facili-
tate a step change in local technology in a developing
market.

21.5. CARBON TAX:

Carbon tax is the potential alternative to the ‘cap and
trade’ method currently used by the protocol.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 285 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

This tax is based on the amount of carbon contained in
a fuel such as coal, etc.

The aim of this tax is to cause less fossil fuel use and
hopefully cause an incentive to use other sources of
energy.

If the carbon tax was implemented it would be gradual
and start at a low amount and increase over time to
allow better industry and technology to be developed.

Five primary reasons why a carbon tax could prove
more beneficial than the ‘cap and trade’ system.

Predictability - the tax could help predict energy prices
which might also help investments in energy efficiency
and alternate fuels.

. Implementation - a carbon tax could be put into use
much quicker compared to the legalities that go along
with the ‘cap and trade’ method.

Understandable - the carbon tax is simpler to under-
stand and may therefore be embraced more by every-
day people

. Lack of Manipulation - special interest groups have less
of a chance to manipulate a carbon tax because of its
simplicity.
Rebates - like other forms of taxes, the carbon tax could
be open for rebates to the public

India’s Position on carbon tax:

e India will bring a WTO challenge against any “carbon
taxes” that rich countries impose on Indian imports.
“If they impose such a tax, we will take them to the
WTO dispute settlement forum,” “We will deal [with
this] through hard negotiations. Such barriers are not
going to be WTO-compatible and we will fight it.” - the
minister, MoEF

e Both United States and European Union have discussed
the possibility of imposing tariffs or other forms of “bor-
der carbon adjustment” on goods imported from coun-
tries with tax regulations on greenhouse gas emissions.

Do you know?

Generally, softwood tracheids are preferred over hard-
wood fibers for papermaking because the tracheids of
conifers are longer (about 2-4 mm) than are hard-
wood fibers (0.5-1.5 mm).

21.6. GEO-ENGINEERING:

e Geo-engineering primarily aims at modifying and cool-
ing Earth’s environment, defeating the environmental

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

damage and ensuing climate changes to make the
planet more inhabitable. Geoengineering, at this point,
is still only a theoretical Concept

Hoisting parasols, placing mirrors in space, whitening
the stratosphere with sulfate aerosols, whitewashing
building roofs to reflect sunlight or flinging iron filings
into the ocean to promote carbon-gulping algae are
some of the modes.

How Geoengineering Works: 5 Big Plans to Stop
Global Warming

1. Copy a Volcano

A volcanic eruption can bellow many million tons of
sulfur-dioxide gas into the atmosphere, creating a cloud
that blocks some of the sun’s radiation. By injecting the
atmosphere with sulfur, some scientists believe they
could likewise block solar radiation and potentially cool
the planet.

Those droplets are particularly good at scattering the
sun’s light back out into space. And because sulfur
doesn’t heat the stratosphere as much as other aerosols,
it wouldn’t work against the cooling effect. Hydrogen
sulfide is an even better candidate for atmospheric seed-
ing than sulfur dioxide.

. Shoot Mirrors Into Space

In order to deflect enough sunlight to bring the Earth’s
climate back to its pre-industrial level, geoengineers
plan to launch a mirror, the size of Greenland and stra-
tegically position it between the planet and the sun.

. Seed the Sea with Iron

Scientist suggests iron will be the key to turn things
around. Phytoplankton, which dwell near the surface,
prefer iron.

They are also adapt at pulling carbon out of the atmos-
phere during photosynthesis.

When they die after about 60 days, the carbon the organ-
isms have consumed falls to the bottom of the ocean.
By pumping iron into the sea and stimulating phyto-
plankton to grow like crazy, scientist believe, global
warming could be reversed.

. Whiten the Clouds with Wind-Powered Ships

Scientist hopes, like the volcanic eruption, the tops of
clouds also reflect solar radiation. Spraying a lot of sea-
water into the sky by wind powered remotely activated
ships to whiten the clouds and thus it will reflect solar
radiation.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 286 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

5. Build Fake Trees

Do you know?

Mugger crocodile is a freshwater species, which primar-
ily occupies Indian lakes, rivers and marshes. It prefers
slow-moving, shallower bodies of water and may be
found in man-made reservoirs and irrigation canals.

“artificial tree,” a scaled-down version of an earlier pro-
totype capable of capturing a ton of carbon in the at-
mosphere per day.

Panels covering the surface of the tree--which would
need to be about 50 square meters--will be made of an
absorbent resin that reacts with carbon dioxide in the
air to form a solid.

It can be compared to a furnace filter, capable of pulling
particles out of the air.

The panels, or “boxes,” can be removed and exposed to
113 F steam, which effectively cleans the filter.

The chemical reaction with the steam causes the solid
to release the carbon it has captured, which can then
seize as liquid CO..

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

But pulling carbon dioxide from the atmosphere is only
half the battle--afterwards it must be sequestered, or
permanently trapped.

How sequestrated CO, can be commercials used?

Horticulturists need CO, in greenhouses for plants to
use during photosynthesis,

For dry ice production, and

For developing new kinds of plastic and concrete that
can be made with CO.,.

Drawbacks

Scientists have no idea whether they could shut down
some of these geoengineering projects once they start.

Geoengineering treats the symptoms of global warm-
ing, and could very well undermine efforts to address
the root cause.

people may feel as though they don’t need to reduce
their personal carbon emissions and companies may
continue to conduct business as usual, expecting re-
searchers to clean up the mess.

The cost, maintenance for geoengineering projects are
too high.

%, 9% of o% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 287 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 288 ---
| CHAPTER - 22 |

QW

INDIA AND CLIMATE CHANGE

22.1. INDIA’'S POSITION ON CLIMATE

CHANGE

India emitted 2,136.84 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent
greenhouse gases in 2010.

Energy sector was the prime contributor to emissions
and with 71% of total emissions in 2010. Energy sector
includes - electricity production, fuel combustion in in-
dustries, transport and fugitive emissions.

Industrial processes and product use contributed 8%;
agriculture and waste sectors contributed 18% and 3%
respectively to the national GHG inventory.

About 12% of emissions were offset by carbon sink ac-
tion of forests and croplands, considering which the
national GHG emissions are arrived at a total of 1,884.31
million tonnes of CO2 equivalent.

India’s per capita GHG emission in 2010 was 1.56 tCO2
equivalent, which is less than one- third of the world’s
per capita emissions and far below than many devel-
oped and developing countries.

A reduction of emission intensity of GDP by about 12%
between 2005 and 2010 has been achieved against our
voluntary pledge to reduce the emission intensity of its
GDP by 20-25 per cent by 2020, compared with the
2005 level.

India will continue to be a low-carbon economy (World
Bank study).

India’s primary focus is on “adaptation”, with specific
focus for “mitigation”.

India has already unveiled a comprehensive National
Action Plan on Climate Change whose activities are in
the public domain.

India advocates collaborative research in future low-
carbon technology and access to intellectual property
rights (IPRs) as global public goods.

22.2. OBSERVED CLIMATE AND

WEATHER CHANGES IN INDIA

India’s National Communication (NATCOM) to UNF-
CCC has consolidated some of the observed changes in
climate parameters in India. No firm link between the
documented changes described below and warming
due to anthropogenic climate change has yet been es-
tablished.

22.2.1. Surface Temperature

At the national level, increase of — 0.4° C has been ob-
served in surface air temperatures over the past cen-
tury. A warming trend has been observed along the
west coast, in central India, the interior peninsula, and
north-eastern India. However, cooling trends have been
observed in north-west India and parts of south India.

22.2.2. Rainfall

While the observed monsoon rainfall at the all-India
level does not show any significant trend, regional mon-
soon variations have been recorded.

A trend of increasing monsoon seasonal rainfall has
been found along the west coast, northern Andhra
Pradesh, and north-western India (+10% to +12% of the
normal over the last 100 years) while a trend of decreas-
ing monsoon seasonal rainfall has been observed over
eastern Madhya Pradesh, north-eastern India, and some
parts of Gujarat and Kerala (-6% to —8% of the normal
over the last 100 years).

22.2.3. Extreme Weather Events

Instrument records over the past 130 years do not indi-
cate any marked long-term trend in the frequencies of
large-scale droughts and floods. Trends are however
observed in multi-decadal periods of more frequent
droughts, followed by less severe droughts.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 289 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

There has been an overall increasing trend in severe
storm incidence along the coast at the rate of 0.011
events per year. While the states of West Bengal and
Gujarat have reported increasing trends, a decline has
been observed in Orissa.

22.2.4. Rise in Sea Level

The records of coastal tide gauges in the north Indian
Ocean for more than 40 years, reports that sea level rise
was between 1.06-1.75 mm per year. These rates are
consistent with 1-2 mm per year global sea level rise
estimates of IPCC.

22.2.5. Impacts on Himalayan Glaciers

The Himalayas possess one of the largest resources of
snow and ice and its glaciers form a source of water for
the perennial rivers such as the Indus, the Ganga, and
the Brahmaputra.

Glacial melt may impact their long-term lean-season
flows, with adverse impacts on the economy in terms
of water availability and hydropower generation.

The available monitoring data on Himalayan glaciers
indicates that while recession of some glaciers has oc-
curred in some Himalayan regions in recent years, the
trend is not consistent across the entire mountain
chain. It is accordingly, too early to establish long-term
trends, or their causation, in respect of which there are
several hypotheses.

Do you know?

Tripura is one of the highest CVP (Climate, Vegetation,
Precipitation) index zones (a measure of potential pro-
ductivity) in the country.

22.3. CURRENT ACTIONS FOR

ADAPTATION AND MITIGATION

Adaptation, in the context of climate change, comprises
the measures taken to minimize the adverse impacts of
climate change, e.g. relocating the communities living
close to the sea shore, for instance, to cope with the
rising sea level or switching to crops that can withstand
higher temperatures.

Mitigation comprises measures to reduce the emissions
of greenhouse gases that cause climate change in the
first place, e.g. by switching to renewable sources of
energy such as solar energy or wind energy, or nuclear

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

energy instead of burning fossil fuel in thermal power
stations.

Current Indian government expenditure on adaptation
to climate variability, exceeds 2.6% of the GDP, with
agriculture, water resources, health and sanitation, for-
ests, coastal-zone infrastructure and extreme weather
events, being specific areas of concern.

22.3.1. AGRICULTURE

Two risk-financing programmes support adaptation to
climate impacts. The Crop Insurance Scheme sup-ports
the insurance of farmers against climate risks, and the
Credit Support Mechanism facilitates the extension of
credit to farmers, especially for crop failure due to cli-
mate variability.

22.3.2. CROP IMPROVEMENT

The present programmes address measures such as
development of arid-land crops and pest management,
as well as capacity building of extension workers and
NGOs to support better vulnerability reducing practices.

22.3.3. DROUGHT PROOFING

The current programmes seek to minimize the adverse
effects of drought on production of crops and livestock,
and on productivity of land, water and human re-
sources, so as to ultimately lead to drought proofing of
the affected areas.

They also aim to pronmote overall economic develop-
ment and improve the socio-economic conditions of the
resource poor and disadvantaged sections inhabiting
the programme areas.

22.3.4. FORESTRY

India has a strong and rapidly growing afforestation
programme. The afforestation process was accelerated
by the enactment of the Forest Conservation Act of
1980, which aimed at stopping the clearing and deg-
radation of forests through a strict, centralized con-
trol of the rights to use forest land and mandatory
requirements of compensatory afforestation in case
of any diversion of forest land for any non-forestry
purpose.

In addition an aggressive afforestation and sustainable
forest management programme resulted in annual re-
forestation of 1.78 mha during 1985-1997, and is cur-
rently 1.1 mha annually. Due to this, the carbon stocks
in Indian forests have increased over the last 20 years
(during 1986 to 2005) to 9 -10 gigatons of carbon (GtC).

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 290 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

22.3.5. WATER

e The National Water Policy stresses that non-conven-
tional methods for utilization of water, including inter-
basin transfers, artificial recharge of groundwater, and
desalination of brackish or sea water, as well as tradi-
tional water conservation practices like rainwater har-
vesting, including roof-top rainwater harvesting, should
be practised to increase the utilizable water resources.
Many states now have mandatory water harvesting pro-
grammes in several cities.

22.3.6. COASTAL REGIONS

e In coastal regions, restrictions have been imposed in
the area between 200m and 500m of the HTL (high tide
line) while special restrictions have been imposed in the
area up to 200m to protect the sensitive coastal ecosys-
tems and prevent their exploitation.

e This, simultaneously, addresses the concerns of the
coastal population and their livelihood. Some specific
measures taken in this regard include construction of
coastal protection infrastructure and cyclone shelters,
as well as plantation of coastal forests and mangroves.

22.3.7. HEALTH

e The prime objective present of health programmes is
the surveillance and control of vector borne diseases
such as Malaria, Kala-azar, Japanese Encephalitis, Filaria
and Dengue. Programmes also provide for emergency
medical relief in the case of natural calamities, and to
train and develop human resources for these tasks.

22.3.8. DISASTER MANAGEMENT

e The National Disaster Management programme pro-
vides grants-in-aid to victims of weather related disas-
ters, and manages disaster relief operations. It also
supports proactive disaster prevention programmes,
including dissemination of information and training of
disaster-management staff.

Do you know?

A Chapter on Sustainable Development and Climate
Change has been for the first time introduced in the
annual Economic Survey. This new chapter reflects the
growing challenges of sustainable development and
climate change. Pressures on land, air, water, forests
and loss of plant and animal habitant are growing.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

22.4. INDIA’S NATIONAL ACTION PLAN
ON CLIMATE CHANGE

In dealing with the challenge of climate change we must
act on several fronts in a focused manner simultaneously.
The National Action Plan hinges on the development and
use of new technologies. The implementation of the Plan
would be through appropriate institutional mechanisms
suited for effective delivery of each individual Mission’s
objectives and include public private partnerships and civil
society action. The focus will be on promoting understand-
ing of climate change, adaptation and mitigation, energy
efficiency and natural resource conservation.

There are Eight National Missions which form the core of
the National Action Plan, representing multipronged, long-
term and integrated strategies for achieving key goals in
the context of climate change.

Do you know?

The Economic Survey 2011-12, suggests to make lower
carbon sustainable growth a central element of our
Twelfth Five Year Plan commencing in April 2012. The
Survey points out that India’s per capita CO, emissions
are much lower (1.52 CO, tons) than those of the devel-
oped countries even if historical emissions are excluded.

22.4.1. NATIONAL SOLAR MISSION

e The National Solar Mission is a major initiative of the
Government of India and State Governments to promote
ecologically sustainable growth while addressing India’s
energy security challenge.

Objective

e To establish India as a global leader in solar energy, by
creating the policy conditions for its diffusion across the
country as quickly as possible.

e The Mission will adopt a 3-phase approach,
e spanning the remaining period of the 11th Plan and
first year of the 12th Plan (up to 2012-13) as Phase 1,
e the remaining 4 years of the 12th Plan (2013-17) as
Phase 2 and
e the 13th Plan (2017-22) as Phase 3.

e At the end of each plan, and mid-term during the 12th
and 13th Plans, there will be an evaluation of progress,
review of capacity and targets for subsequent phases,
based on emerging cost and technology trends, both
domestic and global.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 291 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e The aim would be to protect Government from subsidy
exposure in case expected cost reduction does not ma-
terialize or is more rapid than expected.

e The first phase (up to 2013) will focus on capturing of
the low hanging options in solar thermal; on promoting
off-grid systems to serve populations without access to
commercial energy and modest capacity addition in
grid-based systems.

e In the second phase, after taking into account the ex-
perience of the initial years, capacity will be aggres-
sively ramped up to create conditions for up scaled and
competitive solar energy penetration in the country.

Mission targets are:

e To create an enabling policy framework for the deploy-
ment of 100 MW of solar power by 2022.

e The Centre has revised cumulative targets under Na-
tional Solar Mission from 20,000 MW by 2021-22 to
1,00,000 MW- a quantum jump.

e The target will principally comprise of 40 GW Rooftop
and 60 GW through Large and Medium Scale Grid Con-
nected Solar Power Projects.

Do you know?

In Kaziranga, which has the highest concentration of
the one-horned rhinoceros, the figure has gone up
from 2,048 in 2009 to 2,990 now, despite the death of
roughly 120 rhinos between 2009 and 2011. The rhino
census, also registered 100 rhinos in Orang National
Park and 93 in Pobitora wildlife sanctuary, besides 22
that have been translocated to Manas National Park
over the past four years.

22.4.2. THE NATIONAL MISSION FOR
ENHANCED ENERGY EFFICIENCY (NMEEE)

e The National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency
(NMEEBE), which seeks to strengthen the market for
energy efficiency by creating conducive regulatory and
policy regime.

e NMEEE has been envisaged to foster innovative and
sustainable business models to the energy efficiency
sector.

e The NMEEFE seeks to create and sustain markets for
energy efficiency in the entire country which will ben-
efit the country and the consumers”.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Objective

e Promoting innovative policy and regulatory regimes,
financing mechanisms, and business models which not
only create, but also sustain markets for energy effi-
ciency in a transparent manner with clear deliverables
to be achieved in a time bound manner.

Mission Goals

e Market-based approaches to unlock energy efficiency
opportunities, estimated to be about Rs. 74,000 Crores

By 2014-15:
e Annual fuel savings in excess of 23 million toe

e Cumulative avoided electricity capacity addition of
19,000 MW

e CO, emission mitigation of 98 million tons per year
e Four New Initiatives to Enhance Energy Efficiency:
a) Perform Achieve and Trade
b) Market Transformation for Energy Efficiency
c) Energy Efficiency Financing Platform (EEP)

d) Framework for Energy Efficient Economic Development
(FEEED)

National Mission for Enhanced Energy Efficiency

PAT - MTEE — Market
Perform, Transformation
Achieve and for Energy
Trade Efficiency

EEFP — Energy FEEED -

Efficiency Framework for

Financing Energy Efficient

Platform Economic
Development

Creation of

mechanisms Developing

The market Accelerating the
based shift to energy
mechanism to efficient that would help fiscal

enhance the appliances in finance demand instruments to
cost designated side promote energy
effectiveness in sectors through management efficiency.
improving the innovative programs in all

Energy measures to sectors by

Efficiency in make the capturing future

Energy Intensive products more energy savings.

industries affordable.

through

certification of

energy saving

which can be
traded,

22.4.3. NATIONAL MISSION ON SUSTAINABLE
HABITAT

e “National Mission on Sustainable Habitat” seeks to pro-
mote sustainability of habitats through improvements
in energy efficiency in buildings, urban planning, im-
proved management of solid and liquid waste, modal

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 292 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

shift towards public transport and conservation
through appropriate changes in legal and regulatory
framework.

It also seeks to improve ability of habitats to adapt to
climate change by improving resilience of infrastruc-
ture, community based disaster management and meas-
ures for improving advance warning systems for
extreme weather events.

It will broadly cover the following aspects:

e Extension of the energy conservation building
code - which addresses the design of new and large
commercial buildings to optimize their energy de-
mand;

e Better urban planning and modal shift to public
transport - make long term transport plans to fa-
cilitate the growth of medium and small cities in
such a way that ensures efficient and convenient
public transport;

e Recycling of material and urban waste management
- a special area of focus will be development of tech-
nology for producing power form waste.

e The National Mission will include a major R&D pro-
gramme, focusing on bio-chemical conversion,
waste water use, sewage utilization and recycling
options.

Do you know?

A rainforest is a forested biome with high annual
rainfall. Tropical rainforests arise due to the inter-
tropical convergence zone. The largest tropical rain-
forests exist in the Amazon basin, Nicaragua,
equatorial Africa, southeastern Asia from Myanmar
to Indonesia, eastern Queensland and part of
Australia.

The beneficial effects of rain forests are manifold. It
is also called “lungs of the world” and act as major
consumers of atmospheric carbon and play a large role
in cooling air.

It is estimated that the rainforests were reduced by

about 58,000 km? annually in the 1990s. Rainforests
used to cover 14% of the Earth’s surface. This percent-
age is now down to 6% and it is estimated by study
that the remaining natural rainforests could disap-
pear within 40 years.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

22.4.4. NATIONAL WATER MISSION (NWM)
MISSION OBJECTIVES

Ensuring integrated water resource management for
conservation of water, minimization of wastage and
equitable distribution both across and within states.

Developing a framework for optimum water use
through increase in water use efficiency by 20%
through regulatory mechanisms with differential enti-
tlements and pricing, taking the National Water Policy
(NWP) into consideration.

Ensuring that a considerable share of water needs of
urban areas is met through recycling of waste water.

Meeting water requirements of coastal cities (with in-
adequate alternative sources of water) through the
adoption of new and appropriate technologies such as
low-temperature desalination technologies allowing use
of ocean water.

Revisiting NWP to ensure basin-level management
strategies to deal with variability in rainfall and river
flows due to climate change, including enhancement of
storage both above and below ground, implementation
of rainwater harvesting and establishment of equitable
and efficient management structures.

Developing new regulatory structures to optimize ef-
ficiency of existing irrigation systems, to rehabilitate
run-down systems and to expand irrigation to increase
storage capacity.

Promotion of water-neutral and water-positive tech-
nologies through the design of a proper incentive struc-
ture combined with recharging of underground water
sources and adoption of large-scale irrigation pro-
gramme based on efficient methods of irrigation.

Do you know?

1. The 2009 State of the Environment Report by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) clubs
the issues under five key main challenges faced by
India, which are climate change, food, security,
water security, energy security and managing ur-
banization.

Mercury in the environment can be reduced by
using alternative products that don’t contain mer-
cury, cleaning up spills properly, recycling mer-
cury-containing products and properly handling
and disposing of mercury-containing equipment.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 293 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

22.4.5. NATIONAL MISSION FOR SUSTAINING
THE HIMALAYAN ECOSYSTEM (NMSHE)

The most crucial and primary objective of the mission
is to develop a sustainable National capacity to continu-
ously assess the health status of the Himalayan Ecosys-
tem and enable policy bodies in their policy-formulation
functions and assist States in the Indian Himalayan
Region with their implementation of actions selected for
sustainable development.

Mission Objectives

Building Human and Institutional capacities on climate
change related aspects

Network knowledge institutions and develop a coherent
database on all knowledge systems

Detect and decouple natural and anthropogenic global
environmental changes and project future trends on
potential impacts

Assess the socio-economic and ecological consequences
of global environmental change and design appropriate
strategies for growth in the economy of the region

Study traditional knowledge systems for community
participation in adaptation, mitigation and coping
mechanisms

Evaluate policy alternatives for regional development
plans

Create awareness amongst stakeholders in the region
Develop regional cooperation to generate a strong
knowledge and database for policy interventions

22.4.6. NATIONAL MISSION FOR A GREEN
INDIA

Mission Objectives

Increased forest/tree cover on 5 million hectares (ha)
of forest/non- forest lands and improved quality of for-
est cover on another 5 million ha of non-forest/forest
lands (a total of 10 million ha)

Improved ecosystem services including biodiversity,
hydrological services, and carbon sequestration from
the 10 million ha of forest/non-forest lands mentioned
above

Increased forest-based livelihood income of about 3 mil-
lion households, living in and around the forests

Enhanced annual CO2 sequestration by 50 to 60 million
tones in the year 2020

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Mission Targets

Improvement in the quality of forest cover and ecosys-
tem services of forests /nonforests, (including moder-
ately dense, open forests, degraded grassland and
wetlands: 5 million ha)

Eco-restoration/afforestation of scrub, shifting cultiva-
tion areas, cold deserts, mangroves, ravines and aban-
doned mining areas (2 million ha)

Improvement in forest and tree cover in urban/
peri-urban lands (0.20 million ha)

Improvement in forest and tree cover on marginal ag-
ricultural lands/fallows and other non-forest land under
agro-forestry/social forestry (3 million ha)
Management of public forest/non-forests areas (taken
up under the mission) by community institutions
Adoption of improved fuel wood-use efficiency and al-
ternative energy devices by households in the project
area

Diversification of forest-based livelihoods of about 3
million households living in and around forests

Sub Missions

Sub-mission 1: Enhancing quality of forest cover and
improving ecosystem services (4.9 million ha)
Sub-mission 2: Ecosystem restoration and increase in
forest cover (1.8 million ha)

Sub-mission 3: Enhancing tree cover in urban and peri-
urban areas (including institutional lands): 0.20 mil-
lion ha

Sub-mission 4: Agro-forestry and social forestry (in-
creasing biomass and creating carbon sink): 3 million ha

Sub-mission 5: Restoration of wetlands: 0.10 million ha

Do you know?

Indian government has announced a domestic goal of
reducing the carbon emission intensity by 20-25 per
cent of its GDP of the 2005 level by 2020.

22.4.7. NATIONAL MISSION FOR SUSTAINABLE
AGRICULTURE (NMSA)

Mission Objectives

To devise strategic plans at the agro-climatic zone level
so that action plans are contextualised to regional scales
in the areas of research and development (R&D), technol-
ogy and practices, infrastructure and capacity building

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 294 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

To enhance agricultural productivity through custom-
ised interventions such as use of biotechnology to de-
velop improved varieties of crops and livestock,
promoting efficient irrigation systems, demonstration
of appropriate technology, capacity building and skill
development

To facilitate access to information and institutional sup-
port by expanding Automatic Weather Station networks
to the panchayat level and linking them to existing in-
surance mechanisms including the Weather Based Crop
Insurance Scheme and the National Agriculture Insur-
ance Scheme (NAIS), scaling the returns at that level

To promote “laboratory to land” research by creating
model villages and model farm units in rainfed and
dryland areas

To strategise long-term interventions for emission re-
duction from energy and non-energy uses by way of
introduction of suitable crop varieties and farm prac-
tices, livestock and manure management

To realise the enormous potential of growth in dryland
agriculture, through the development of drought and
pest resistant crop varieties, adopting resource-con-
serving technologies, providing institutional support to
farmers and capacity building of stakeholders.

The NMSA has identified 10 key dimensions for adapta-
tion and mitigation:

1. Improved Crop Seeds, Livestock and Fish Culture
2. Water Efficiency

Pest Management

. Improved Farm Practices

Nutrient Management

Agricultural Insurance

Credit Support

. Markets

Cetra pw

Access to Information

10. Livelihood Diversification

22.4.8. The National Mission on Strategic
Knowledge for Climate Change (NMSKCC)

Mission Objectives

Formation of knowledge networks among the existing
knowledge institutions engaged in research and devel-
opment relating to climate science and facilitating data
sharing and exchange through a suitable policy frame-
work and institutional support

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Establishment of global technology watch groups with
institutional capacities to carry out research on risk
minimised technology selection for developmental
choices

Development of national capacity for modeling the re-
gional impact of climate change on different ecological
zones within the country for different seasons and liv-
ing standards

Establishing research networks and encouraging re-
search in the areas of climate change impacts on
important socio-economic sectors like agriculture,
health, natural ecosystems, biodiversity, coastal
zones, etc.

Generation and development of the conceptual and
knowledge basis for defining sustainability of develop-
ment pathways in the light of responsible climate
change related actions

Providing an improved understanding and awareness
of key climate processes and the resultant climate risks
and associated consequences

To complement the efforts undertaken by other national
missions, strengthen indigenous capacity for the devel-
opment of appropriate technologies for responding to
climate change through adaptation and mitigation and
promote their utilisation by the government and socie-
ties for the sustainable growth of economies

Creating institutional capacity for research infrastruc-
ture including access to relevant data sets, computing
and communication facilities, and awareness to improve
the quality and sector specific scenarios of climate
change over the Indian subcontinent

Ensuring the flow and generation of human resources
through a variety of measures including incentives to
attract young scientists to climate science

Building alliances and partnerships through global col-
laboration in research & technology development on
climate change under international and bilateral science
and technology (S&T) cooperation arrangements

Do you know?

The concept of “green GDP” arose in the early 1990s
in reaction to the deficiencies of the traditional gross
domestic product (GDP) to account for the economic
costs of depleted natural resources and incurred pol-
lution, which in turn affect human welfare.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 295 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

22.4.9. National Bio-Energy Mission

e According to estimates, biomass from agro and agro-
industrial residue can potentially generate 25,000 MW
of power in India. This can be further raised with
wasteland-based integrated energy plantation and
power generation systems.

Bio Energy

e “Bioenergy is renewable energy derived from biological
sources, to be used for heat, electricity, or vehicle fuel.
Biofuels derived from plant materials is among the most
rapidly growing renewable energy technologies.”

Sources of Bio - Energy

e Existing Sources

e Leftover organic residue

Leftover farm organic residue

Leftover forest residue

e Leftover organic urban residue

Algal residue
e New Sources
e Cultivation of short rotation energy crops

e Social forestry

Advantages of Bio - Energy

e Capital efficient

e High energy generation potential

e Significant carbon emission reduction potential

e Substantial employment and income generation po-
tential

e Investments & benefits remain within the country
e Sizable economic value add to GDP

e Wasteland regeneration

Do you know?

India is highly vulnerable to climate change due to a
combination of; (i) high levels of poverty, (ii) popula-
tion density, (iii) high reliance on natural resources,
and (iv) an environment already under stress (for in-
stance water resources).

22.5 INDC

Conference of Parties (COP) of United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at 19th Session

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

held in Warsaw in November 2013 invited all Parties to
initiate domestic preparations for their INDC towards
achieving the objective of the Convention and to commu-
nicate them, well in advance of the 21st session of the Con-
ference of Parties.

The concept of ‘Nationally Determined Contributions’, tak-
ing into account the outcomes of both Warsaw COP 19 and
Lima COP 20 has to (i) reflect the principles of equity and
Common But Differentiated Responsibilities (CBDR) and
(ii) the Country’s contributions must be seen in a balanced
and comprehensive context.

India declared a voluntary goal of reducing the emissions
intensity of its GDP by 20-25%, over 2005 levels by
2020, despite having no binding mitigation obligations
as per the Convention. A slew of policy measures to pro-
mote low carbon strategies and Renewable Energy have
resulted in the decline of emission intensity of our GDP
by 12% between 2005 and 2010. It is a matter of satisfac-
tion that United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) in its Emission Gap Report 2014 has recognized
India as one of the countries on course to achieving its
voluntary goal.

INDC outlines the post-2020 climate actions they intend to
take under a new international agreement. The INDC cen-
tre around India’s policies and programmes on promotion
of clean energy, especially renewable energy, enhancement
of energy efficiency, development of less carbon intensive
and resilient urban centres, promotion of waste to wealth,
safe, smart and sustainable green transportation network,
abatement of pollution and India’s efforts to enhance car-
bon sink through creation of forest and tree cover. It also
captures citizens and private sector contribution to com-
bating climate change.

The INDC proposals are on the following:
a. Sustainable Lifestyles
b. Cleaner Economic Development

c. Reduce Emission intensity of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP)

d. Increase the Share of Non Fossil Fuel Based Electricity
e. Enhancing Carbon Sink (Forests)

f. Adaptation

g. Mobilizing Finance

h. Technology Transfer and Capacity Building

In the INDC, the country has focused on adaptation efforts,
including:

a) developing sustainable habitats;

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 296 ---
b)
Co)

d)

e)

SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

optimizing water use efficiency;

creating ecologically sustainable climate resilient ag-
ricultural production systems;

safeguarding the Himalayan glaciers and mountain
ecosystem; and,

enhancing carbon sinks in sustainably managed for-
ests and implementing adaptation measures for vul-
nerable species, forest-dependent communities and
ecosystems.

India’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution:
At a Glance

India has submitted its Intended Nationally Determined
Contribution (INDC) to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change. Some of the salient points
of the INDC are:

To put forward and further propagate a healthy and
sustainable way of living based on traditions and values
of conservation and moderation.

To adopt a climate-friendly and a cleaner path than the
one followed hitherto by others at corresponding level
of economic development.

To reduce the emissions intensity of its GDP by 33 to 35
per cent by 2030 from 2005 level.

To achieve about 40 per cent cumulative electric power
installed capacity from non-fossil fuel based energy re-
sources by 2030, with the help of transfer of technology
and low cost international finance, including from
Green Climate Fund.

To create an additional carbon sink of 2.5 to 3 billion
tonnes of CO2 equivalent through additional forest and
tree cover by 2030.

To better adapt to climate change by enhancing invest-
ments in development programmes in sectors vulner-
able to climate change, particularly agriculture, water
resources, Himalayan region, coastal regions, health
and disaster management.

To mobilize domestic and new and additional funds
from developed countries to implement the above miti-
gation and adaptation actions in view of the resource
required and the resource gap.

To build capacities, create domestic framework and in-
ternational architecture for quick diffusion of cutting
edge climate technology in India and for joint collabora-
tive R&D for such future technologies.

Qd O°@ Wo ENVIRONMENT

22.6. INDIAN NETWORK ON CLIMATE
CHANGE ASSESSMENT

e The Indian Network on Climate Change Assessment
(INCCA) was launched in October 2009 by the Ministry
of Environment and Forests (MoEF) in an effort to pro-
mote domestic research on climate change, and build
on the country’s climate change expertise.

e INCCA is a network-based programme of the MoEF,
which consists of over 120 institutions and over 250
scientists country wide is aimed at bringing in more
science-based policy-making, based on measurements,
monitoring and modelling.

e The INCCA has been conceptualized as a Network based
Scientific Programme designed to address and assess
the drivers and implications of climate change through
scientific research; climate change assessments on var-
ious aspects of climate change, associated vulnerabili-
ties and adaptation; devise decision support systems;
and build capacity towards management of climate
change related risks and opportunities.

e The INCCA will carry out research on the effects of
climate change in different regions and sectors in India
and suggest suitable adaptation and mitigation steps.

e Objective - to have an independent body of Indian sci-
entists who could “prepare scientific reports at the do-
mestic level about the impact of climate change on
various sectors, which can give a real picture and influ-
ence the world debate”.

e Reports prepared by the INCCA will form a part of In-
dia’s National Communication (Nat Com) to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC).

22.6.1. INCCA - First Assessment ‘India:
Greenhouse Gas Emissions 2007 ’

e The first publication to come out from the INCCA has
been an updated greenhouse gas emissions inventory
for India for the year 2007.

e The first Assessment of the Green House Gas emissions
was released on May 11, 2010.

e INCCA prepared the country’s greenhouse gas (GHG)
emission data “India: Greenhouse Gas Emissions 2007”
which said the country’s emissions grew by 58 per cent
during 1994 to 2007

e It covers the sectors of Energy, Industry, Agriculture,
Land Use Land Use Change and Forest and Waste by
sources and removal by sinks presented in this do-
cument.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 297 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

22.6.2. INCCA - Second Assessment ‘Climate
Change and India: A 4x4 Assessment’

e A 4x4 Assessment’ addresses the impact of climate
change in 2030s to the natural resources and liveli-
hoods of the people in the four climate sensitive regions
of Himalayan region, North-East region, the Western
Ghats and the Coastal plains for the 4 key sectors of
Agriculture, Water, Health and Natural Ecosystems and
Biodiversity.

e The 4 region, 4 sectors Assessment in short has been
referred to as a 4x4 Assessment.

e The assessment examines the implications of the cli-
mate change scenario in 2030s using a regional climate
model (PRECIS).

e The assessment also brings out the future areas of work
to enhance the knowledge and areas of further im-
provement in the future assessments.

e 4 Regions: Western Ghats, Himalayan Region, Coastal
India, North-East

e 4 Thrust Areas: Agriculture, Water, Forests, Human
Health
Impacts

e Warmer seasons: Avg. temp rise: 2.0 deg C predicted.
1.0-4.0 deg C at extreme ranges

e Increased annual precipitation with lower frequency of
rainy days; increased intensity

e Cyclonic disturbances of lower frequency; increased
intensity and increased risk of storm surges

e Sea-level rise: 1.3mm/year on average

Agriculture
e Up to 50% reduction in maize yields
e 4-35% reduction in rice yields (with some exceptions)

e Rise in coconut yields (with some exceptions); reduced
apple production

e Negative impacts on livestock in all regions
e Fresh water supply

e High variability predicted in water yields (from 50%
increase to 40-50% reduction)

e 10-30% increased risk of floods; increased risks of
droughts

Forests and natural ecosystems

e Increased net primary productivity

e Shifting forest borders; species mix; negative impact on
livelihoods and biodiversity

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Human health

e Higher morbidity and mortality from heat stress and
vector/water-borne diseases

e Expanded transmission window for malaria

Do you know?

Article 21 conferring the Right of Life has been as-
signed the broadest interpretations by the judiciary to
encompass the right to a clean environment, right to
livelihood, right to live with dignity and a number of
other associated rights.

22.7. NATIONAL COMMUNICATION
(NATCOM)

e In pursuance of the implementation of the provisions of
the Convention, India’s Initial National Communication
(NATCOM) to the UNFCCC has been initiated in 2002
funded by the Global Environment Facility under its
enabling activities programme through the United Na-
tions Development Programme, New Delhi.

Parties to the Convention are enjoined to communi-
cate the following information to the Secretariat of
the Conference of Parties:

e A national inventory of anthropogenic emissions
by sources and removal by sink of all GHGs not
controlled by the Montreal protocol, to the extent
its capacities, permit, using comparable method-
ologies to be promoted and agreed upon by the
Conference of Parties.

A general description of steps taken or envisaged
by the Party to implement the Convention.

Any other information relevant to the achievement
of the objective of the Convention and suitable for
inclusion in its communication, including if feasi-
ble, material relevant for calculation of global emis-
sion trends.

e The National Communication process envisages com-
prehensive scientific and technical exercises for prepa-
ration of inventories of greenhouse gases of
anthropogenic origin, reduction of uncertainities in
these estimations and vulnerability assessment and ad-
aptation due to climate change, besides other related

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 298 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

information of India’s initiatives which address the ob-
jectives of the Convention.

Towards preparation of National Communication, a
broad participatory approach involving research institu-
tions, technical institutions, universities, government
departments, and non governmental and private or-
ganizations has been adopted, necessitated by vast re-
gional diversity and sector complexities in India.

Implementation arrangements

The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) is
implementing and executing agency of the project.

Work Programme envisaged

Development of comprehensive inventory for the base
year 1994 and improvement of its reliability vis-a-vis
earlier estimates. This would entail reducing uncertain-
ties of GHC emission coefficients in key source categories.

Identification of key steps to be taken towards imple-
menting the Convention.

Vulnerabilty and adaptation assessment for presenta-
tion of information on specific needs and concerns aris-
ing from the adverse impacts of climate change.

Creation of reliable and comprehensive database for all
the outputs produced through the establishment of a
‘Data Centre’ (DC). This information will be accessible
on the Internet.

Enhancement of capacity to respond to projected cli-
mate change through the preparation of a ‘Targeted
Research Proposal’ for developing a medium to long-
term action plan.

GHG Inventory Estimations

In accordance with the provisions of Article-4 and 12.1
of UNFCCC, preparation of inventories of a basket of
gases has been started for the areas of energy, indus-
trial processes, agriculture land use and land use
change and forestry (LULUCF) and waste.

The gases to be inventoried include carbon dioxide
methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluoro-
carbon and sulphur hexafluoride released from various
anthropogenic sources of the base year 1994.

This is in addition to estimating historical trends of
GHG growth as a part of the initial National Commu-
nication to UNFCCC.

The estimation of national GHG inventories for all sec-
tors is based on the 1996 guidelines of the ‘Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change’ (IPCC) and as good
practices guidelines.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Do you know?

Strengthening of ecological security is one of the goal
of the Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Guarantee
Programme (MGNREGA). MGNREGA is designed to
strengthen ongoing efforts in the areas of water har-
vesting, watershed management and soil health care
and enhancement.

22.8. INDIA’S POLICY STRUCTURE

=

RELEVANT TO GHG MITIGATION

. Integrated Energy Policy

India has in place a detailed policy, regulatory, and leg-
islative structure that relates strongly to GHG mitiga-
tion: The Integrated Energy Policy was adopted in 2006.

Some of its key provisions are:
e Promotion of energy efficiency in all sectors
e Emphasis on mass transport

e Emphasis on renewables including biofuels planta-
tions

Accelerated development of nuclear and hydropower for

clean energy

Focused R&D on several clean energy related tech-
nologies

. The Rural Electrification Policy, 2006

It promotes renewable energy technologies where grid
connectivity is not possible or cost-effective. The New
and Renewable Energy Policy, 2005, promotes utiliza-
tion of sustainable, renewable energy sources, and ac-
celerated deployment of renewables through indigenous
design, development and manufacture.

The National Environment Policy, 2006, and the Noti-
fication on Environment Impact Assessment (EIA),
2006, reform India’s environmental assessment regime.
A number of economic activities are required to prepare
environment impact assessments, and environment
management plans, which are appraised by regulatory
authorities prior to start of construction. The EIA provi-
sions strongly promote environmental sustainability

Several other provisions

It relates to reforming energy markets to ensure that
energy markets are competitive, and energy prices re-
flect true resource costs. These include: Electricity Act
2005, Tariff Policy 2003, Petroleum & Natural Gas Reg-
ulatory Board Act, 2006, etc.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 299 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY ENVIRONMENT

QF 6° go

e The provisions taken together are designed to: pro-gramme for manufacturers of electrical appliances

e Remove entry barriers and raise competition in ex-
ploration, extraction, conversion, transmission and
distribution of primary and secondary energy

e Accomplish price reform, through full competition
at point of sale

e Promote tax reform to promote optimal fuel choices

e Augment and diversify energy options, sources and
energy infrastructure

e Provide feed-in tariffs for renewables (solar, wind,
biomass cogeneration)

e Strengthen, and where applicable, introduce inde-
pendent regulation

Do you know?

Rajiv Gandhi Environment Award for Clean Technol-
ogy is given to industrial units that make a significant
contribution towards the development of new or the
innovative modification of existing, technologies or
adoption and use of clean technologies and practices
that substantially reduce or prevent environmental
pollution.

22.9. INTRODUCTION OF LABELLING

PROGRAMME FOR APPLIANCES

Do you know?

The UN General Assembly on 23.01.95 adopted a reso-
lution which proclaims 16th September as the Inter-
national Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer,
to commemorate the signing of the Montreal Protocol
on the Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer which
was signed on 16th September, 1987

e An energy labelling programme for appliances was
launched in 2006, and comparative star-based labelling
has been introduced for fluorescent tube-lights, air con-
ditioners, refrigerators, and distribution transformers.

The labels provide information about the energy con-
sumption of an appliance, and thus enable consumers
to make informed decisions. The Bureau of Energy Ef-
ficiency has made it mandatory for refrigerators to dis-
play energy efficiency label and is expected to do so for
air conditioners as well. The standards and labelling

is expected to lead to significant savings in electricity
annually.

22.10. ENERGY CONSERVATION

BUILDING CODE

An Energy Conservation Building Code (ECBC) was
launched in May, 2007, which addresses the design of
new, large commercial buildings to optimize the build-
ings’ energy demand based on their location in differ-
ent climatic zones. Commercial buildings are one of the
fastest growing sectors of the Indian economy, reflect-
ing the increasing share of the services sector in the
economy.

Nearly one hundred buildings are already following the
Code, and compliance with the Code has been incorpo-
rated into the mandatory Environmental Impact Assess-
ment requirements for large buildings.

It has been estimated that if all the commercial space
in India every year conform to ECBC norms, energy
consumption in this sector can be reduced by 30-40%.
Compliance with ECBC norms is voluntary at present
but is expected to soon become mandatory.

22.10.1. Green Building

Buildings are one of the major pollutants that affect
urban air quality and contribute to climate change.

Human Habitats (Buildings) interact with the environ-
ment in various ways. Throughout their life cycles, from
construction to operation and then demolition, they
consume resources in the form of energy, water, mate-
rials, etc. and emit wastes either directly in the form of
municipal wastes or indirectly as emissions from elec-
tricity generation.

Green building is the essence of which would be to ad-
dress all the pollution related issues of a building in an
integrated and scientific manner.

A green building depletes as little of the natural re-
sources during its construction and operation.

The aim of a green building design is to:

e Minimize the demand on non-renewable resources
and maximize the utilization efficiency of these re-
sources when in use, and

e Maximize reuse and recycling of available resources
e Utilization of renewable resources.

It costs a little more to design and construct a green
building.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 300 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e However, it costs less to operate a green building that
has tremendous environmental benefits and provides a
better place for the occupants to live and work in.

e Jt maximizes the use of efficient building materials and
construction practices; optimizes the use of on-site
sources and sinks by bio-climatic architectural practices;
uses minimum energy to power itself; uses efficient
equipment to meet its lighting, air-conditioning, and
other needs; maximizes the use of renewable sources of
energy; uses efficient waste and water management
practices; and provides comfortable and hygienic indoor
working conditions.

e It is evolved through a design process that requires all
concerned (the architect and landscape designer and the
air conditioning, electrical, plumbing, and energy con-
sultants) to work as a team to address all aspects of
building and system planning, design, construction, and
operation.

e They critically evaluate the impacts of each design deci-
sion on the environment and arrive at viable design
solutions to minimize the negative impacts and enhance
the positive impacts on the environment.

e Insum, the following aspects of the building design are
looked into in an integrated way in a green building:

e Building system designed in a way to efficiently use
HVAC (heating ventilation and air conditioning),
lighting, electrical, and water heating.

e Integration of renewable energy sources to generate
energy onsite.

Do you know?

The 42nd Amendment to the constitution brought
about in the year 1974 inserted two new Articles
namely.

Art. 48-A under Directive principles of State Policy,
making it the responsibility of the State Government
to protect and improve the environment and to safe-
guard the forests and wildlife of the country

Art. 51-A (g) under Fundamental duties of citizens;
making it the fundamental duty of every citizen to
protect and improve the natural environment includ-
ing forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife and to have com-
passion for living creatures

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Selection of ecologically sustainable materials (with
high recycled content, rapidly renewable resources
with low emission potential, etc.) for Water and
waste management.

e Indoor environmental quality (maintains indoor
thermal and visual comfort and air quality)

22.10.2. Green Rating for Integrated Habitat
Assessment (GRIHA)

e GRIHA is a Sanskrit word meaning - ‘Abode’.

¢ GRIHA has been conceived by TERI and developed
jointly with the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
Government of India.

e The green building rating system devised by TERI and
the MNRE is a voluntary scheme.

Objective

e The primary objective of the rating system is to help
design green buildings and, in turn, help evaluate the
‘greenness’ of the buildings.

Aim
e The rating system aims to achieve efficient resource

utilization, enhanced resource efficiency, and better
quality of life in the buildings.

Rating Tool

e GRIHA is a rating tool that helps people assess the per-
formance of their building against certain nationally
acceptable benchmarks and is suitable for all kinds of
buildings in different climatic zones of the country.

¢ Going by the old adage ‘what gets measured, gets man-
aged’, GRIHA attempts to quantify aspects such as en-
ergy consumption, waste generation, renewable energy
adoption, etc. so as to manage, control and reduce the
same to the best possible extent.

e It will evaluate the environmental performance of a
building holistically over its entire life cycle, thereby
providing a definitive standard for what constitutes a
‘green building’.

e The rating system, based on accepted energy and envi-
ronmental principles, will seek to strike a balance be-
tween the established practices and emerging concepts,
both national and international.

e The guidelines/criteria appraisal may be revised every
three years to take into account the latest scientific de-
velopments during this period.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 301 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

The basic features

e The system has been developed to help ‘design and
evaluate’ new buildings (buildings that are still at the
inception stages).

e A building is assessed based on its predicted performance
over its entire life cycle - inception through operation.

e The stages of the life cycle that have been identified for
evaluation are:
Rating system

e GRIHA rating system consists of 34 criteria categorized
under 4 categories.

e They are
1. Site Selection and Site Planning,
2. Conservation and efficient utilization of resources,
3. Building operation and maintenance, and
4. Innovation points.

e Eight of these 34 criteria are mandatory, four are partly
mandatory, while the rest are optional. Each criterion
has a number of points assigned to it.

e It means that a project intending to meet the criterion
would qualify for the points. Different levels of certifica-
tion (one star to five stars) are awarded based on the
number of points earned. The minimum points required
for certification is 50.

Do you know?

Medini Puraskar Yojana - This award is given to In-
dian authors each year to encourage original works in
Hindi on environment and its related subjects such as
wildlife, water resources and conservation

The benefits

e Ona broader scale, this system, along with the activities
and processes that lead up to it, will benefit the com-
munity at large with the improvement in the environ-
ment by reducing GHG (greenhouse gas) emissions,
reducing energy consumption and the stress on natural
resources.

e Reduced energy consumption without sacrificing the
comfort levels

e Reduced destruction of natural areas, habitats, and
biodiversity, and reduced soil loss from erosion etc.

e Reduced air and water pollution (with direct health
benefits)

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Reduced water consumption

e Limited waste generation due to recycling and reuse
e Reduced pollution loads

e Increased user productivity

e Enhanced image and marketability

The challenges

e The Indian building industry is highly de-centralized
with people and/ or groups engaged in design, con-
struction, equipment provision, installation, and reno-
vation working together.

e Each group may be organized to some extent, but there
is limited interaction among the groups, thus disabling
the integrated green design and application process.

e Hence, it is very important to define and quantify sus-
tainable building practices and their benefits.

e It is also important to separate the role of different par-
ticipants in ensuring that the building consumes mini-
mal resources over its entire life cycle and leaves behind
a minimal environmental footprint.

Do you know?

Amrita Devi Bishnoi Wildlife Protection Award is
given for significant contribution in the field of wild-
life protection, which is recognised as having shown
exemplary courage or having done exemplary work
for the protection of wildlife.

22.11. ENERGY AUDITS OF LARGE
INDUSTRIAL CONSUMERS

e In March 2007 the conduct of energy audits was made
mandatory in large energy-consuming units in nine
industrial sectors. These units, notified as “des-ignated
consumers” are also required to employ “certified en-
ergy managers”, and report energy con=sumption and
energy conservation data annually.

22.12. MASS TRANSPORT

e The National Urban Transport Policy emphasizes exten-
sive public transport facilities and non-motor-ized
modes over personal vehicles. The expansion of the
Metro Rail Transportation System in Delhi and other
cities (Chennai, Bangalore, Jaipur, etc) and other mass

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 302 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

transit systems, such as the Metro Bus project in Ban-
galore, are steps in its implementation. The state gov-
ernment of Maharashtra recently announced that it will
impose a congestion tax to discourage the use of private
cars in cities where it has created “sufficient public
transport capacity”.

Do you know?

Rajiv Gandhi Wildlife Conservation Award is Awarded
annually for significant contribution in the field of
wildlife conservation which has made or has the po-
tential to make, a major impact on the protection and
conservation of wildlife in the country

22.13. CLEAN AIR INITIATIVES

e In urban areas, one of the major sources of air pollution
is emissions from transport vehicles.

e Steps taken to reduce such pollution include

(i) introduction of compressed natural gas (CNG) in
Delhi and other cities;

(ii) Retiring old, polluting vehicles; and
(iii) Strengthening of mass transportation.

e Some state governments provide subsidies for purchase
and use of electric vehicles. For thermal power plants,
the installation of electrostatic precipitators is manda-
tory. In many cities, polluting industrial units have ei-
ther been closed or shifted from residential areas.

22.14. PROMOTION OF ENERGY SAVING
DEVICES

e The Bureau of Energy efficiency has introduced “The
Bachat Lamp Yojana”, a programme under which house-
holds may exchange incandescent lamps for CFLs (com-
pact fluorescent lamps) using clean develsopment
mechanism (CDM) credits to equate pur-chase price.

e Some states have made mandatory the installation of
solar water heaters in hospitals, hotels and large gov-
ernment and commercial buildings. Subsidy is provided
for installation of solar water heaters in residential
buildings.

22.15. PROMOTION OF BIOFUELS

e The Biodiesel Purchase Policy mandates biodiesel pro-
curement by the petroleum industry. A mandate on

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Ethanol Blending of Gasoline requires 5% blend-ing of
ethanol with gasoline from ist January, 2003, in 9 States
and 4 Union Territories.

Do you know?

Indira Gandhi Paryavaran Puraskar is Awarded each
year to Indian nationals or any Indian organisation for
significant contributions in the field of environment

22.16. INDIAN SOLAR LOAN PROGRAMME

e In April 2003, the United Nations Environment Pro-
gramme (“UNEP”) initiated a, three-year Programme,
credit facility in Southern India to help rural households
finance the purchase of Solar Home Systems.

e Canara Bank and Syndicate Bank, along with their eight
associate Regional Rural Banks, partnered with UNEP
to establish and run a Loan Programme through their
branch offices across Karnataka State and part of the
neighbouring Kerala State.

e In addition to providing financial support in the form
of interest rate subsidies for borrowers, UNEP provides
assistance with technical issues, vendor qualification
and other activities to develop the institutional capacity
for this type of finance.

22.17. NATIONAL INITIATIVE ON CLIMATE
RESILIENT AGRICULTURE (NICRA)

e The ICAR has launched National Initiative on Climate
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) during 2010-11 with an
outlay of Rs.350 crores for the XI Plan.

e This initiative will primarily enhance the resilience
of Indian Agriculture covering crops, livestock and
fisheries.

22.17.1. Objective

e To enhance the resilience of Indian agriculture cover-
ing crops, livestock and fisheries to climatic variability
and climate change through development and applica-
tion of improved production and risk management
technologies

Project Components
e The project is comprised of four components.
1) Strategic research on adaptation and mitigation

2) Technology demonstration on farmers’ fields to cope
with current climate variability

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 303 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

3) Sponsored and competitive research grants to fill
critical research gaps

4) Capacity building of different stake holders

Strategic Research

e The strategic research has been planned at leading re-

search institutes of ICAR in a network mode covering
crops, horticulture, livestock, natural resource manage-
ment and fisheries sectors.

To begin with, the project is focusing on crops like
wheat, rice, maize, pigeonpea, groundnut, tomato,
mango and banana; cattle, buffalo and small ruminants
among livestock and both marine and freshwater fish
species of economic importance.

The major research themes are:

e Vulnerability assessment of major production zones

e Linking weather based agro-advisories to contin-

gency planning

Assessing the impacts and evolving varieties tolerant
to key climatic stresses (drought, heat, frost, flood-
ing, etc.) in major food and horticulture crops

Continuous monitoring of greenhouse gases in open
field conditions in major production systems

Evolving adaptation and mitigation strategies
through enhancing water and nutrient use efficiency
and conservation agriculture

Studying changes in pest dynamics, pest/pathogen-
crop relationships and emergence of new pests and
pathogens under changing climate

Adaptation strategies in livestock through nutritional
and environmental manipulations

Harnessing the beneficial effects of temperature in
inland and marine fisheries through better under-
standing of the spawning behaviour.

Seven major research institutes of the ICAR will work
in unison to evolve coping technologies with Central
Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture (CRIDA),
Hyderabad as the lead centre.

Best-bet and cost-effective technologies to cope with
climate variability will be demonstrated on farmers’
fields in 100 most vulnerable districts of the country.

The technologies include rain water harvesting and its
judicious use, in-situ moisture conservation, drought

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

management strategies, seed and fodder banks, timely
and precision agriculture, effective agro-advisory sys-
tem using Information Communication Technology
kiosks.

Small and marginal farmers in rain-fed, coastal and hill
areas will benefit more in view of the focused attention

in these regions.

Capacity building of scientists in frontier areas is an-
other core activity of the project.

To prepare all stakeholders to face challenges, multi-
pronged awareness generation programs on issues of

climate change are planned.

Do you know?

MoEF&CC initiated a national campaign named “Green
Good Deeds” weaving around some 500 simple lifestyle
habits that can be easily adopted, in an effort to sensi-
tise the hazards of climate and global warming.

22.18. BSE-GREENEX

The BSE-GREENEX Index is a veritable first step in
creating a credible market based response mechanism
in India, whereby both businesses and investors can rely
upon purely quantitative and objective performance
based signals, to assess “carbon performance”.

gTrade Carbon Ex Ratings Services Private Limited
(gTrade) is a company based in India, which has co-
developed the BSE-GREENEX Index in close association
with the BSE.

Index Description

The BSE-GREENEX Index includes the top 20 compa-
nies which are good in terms of Carbon Emissions,
Free-Float Market Capitalization and Turnover.

The Index is a Cap Weighted Free-Float Market Capi-
talization weighted Index comprising from the list of
BSE-100 Index.

The Index has been back-tested from 1stOctober, 2008
(Base Date) with the base index value of 1000.

The Index is rebalanced on a bi-annual basis i.e. end of
March and September quarters.

The September quarter review will be based on the
fresh set of carbon emission numbers and the March
quarter review will be based on the existing carbon
emission numbers but latest financial data.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 304 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

22.19 FAME-INDIA PROGRAMME

Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of (Hybrid) and Elec-
tric Vehicles (FAME India) scheme rolled out in april, 2015
by Union Minister for Heavy Industries and Public Enter-
prises

The scheme will help promote use of electric and hybrid
vehicles, and initially, a subsidy of 30% will be provided to
the buyers.

Phased replacement of fossil fuel-based vehicles with those
based on latest technologies will lead to a net saving of Rs
14,000 crore.

The scheme is proposed to be implemented over six years,
till 2020, which looks at sales of electric and hybrid vehicles
up to 60-70 lakh units per year.

22.20. LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL
OBSERVATORIES (LTEO)

e Long Term Ecological Observatories (LTEO) for Climate
Change Studies are one of the components under the
‘Climate Change Action Programme’ with an outlay of
Rs. 40 crores in the 12th Plan Period.

e A Science Plan of LTEO was released during the 21st
Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change at Paris in December
2015.

e First phase of the LTEO Programme includes creating
a network of field sites to assess the health of eight dif-
ferent biomes of the country namely; Western Hima-
laya, Eastern Himalaya, North-Western Arid Zone,
Central Indian Forests, Western Ghats, Andaman &

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Nicobar Islands, Jammu & Kashmir and Sundarbans.

e LTEO Programme aims to understand the biophysical
and anthropogenic drivers of ecosystem change in the
selected biomes and their effects on social- ecological
responses through a network of scientific institutions.

e Activities include experimental work to assess the
change of structure and function in the natural ecosys-
tems, identification of patterns and drivers of change in
the natural ecosystems by monitoring populations of
fresh water fish, birds, mammals, herbivores & carni-
vores, animal movements, soil processes in forests &
grasslands, biophysical climatic variables, etc.

22.21. THE NATIONAL ADAPTATION
FUND FOR CLIMATE CHANGE (NAFCC)

e The National Adaptation Fund for Climate Change
(NAFCC) is a Central Sector Scheme set up in 2015-16.
The aim of NAFCC is to support concrete adaptation
activities which mitigate the adverse effects of climate
change. The activities under this scheme are imple-
mented in a project mode. The projects related to adap-
tation in sectors such as agriculture, animal husbandry,
water, forestry, tourism etc. are eligible for funding
under NAFCC. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development (NABARD) is the National Implementing
Entity (NIE).

22.22. OTHER “CRITICAL INITIATIVES”

e In addition, India has 24 other “Critical Initiatives” in
the anvil, for which detailed plans and an institutional
framework is being prepared

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 305 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

QO O°=@ 875 ENVIRONMENT
OR

Type

Initiative

Energy Efficiency in Power
Generation

Super critical technologies
Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC)

Technology

Natural Gas based Power Plants

Closed Cycle Three Stage Nuclear Power Programme
Efficient Transmission and Distribution

Hydropower

Other Renewable Energy
Technologies Programmes

RETs for power generation

Biomass based popup generation technologies
Small scale Hydropower

Wind Energy

Grid connected systems

RETs for transportation and industrial fuels

Disaster Management Response
to Extreme Climate Events

Reducing risk to infrastructure through better design
Strengthening communication networks and disaster management facilities

Protection of Coastal Areas

Undertake measures for coastal protection and setting up Early Warning System
Development of a regional ocean modelling system

High resolution coupled ocean-atmosphere variability studies in tropical oceans
Development of a high-resolution storm surge model for coastal regions
Development of salinity-tolerant crop cultivars

Community awareness on coastal disasters and necessary action;

Timely forecasting, cyclone and flood warning systems

Enhanced plantation and regeneration of mangroves and coastal forests

Health Sector

Provision of enhanced public health care services and assessment of increased
burden of disease due to climate change

Creating appropriate capacity at
different levels of Government

Building capacity in the Central, State and other at the local level to assimilate
and facilitate the implementation of the activities of national plan

%. 2% o% 0% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.



--- PAGE 306 ---
Ze SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY

23.1. UNFCC

e UN Summit Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janerio in
June 1992 adopted, by consensus, the first
multilateral legal instrument on Climate Change,
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
or the UNFCCC.

e In 1992, countries joined UNFCCC, to cooperatively
consider what they could do to limit average global
temperature increases and the resulting climate
change, and to cope with whatever impacts were,
by then, inevitable. There are now 195 Parties to
the Convention.

e The UNFCCC secretariat supports all institutions
involved in the international climate change
negotiations, particularly the Conference of the
Parties (COP), the subsidiary bodies (which advise
the COP), and the COP Bureau (which deals mainly
with procedural and organizational issues arising
from the COP and also has technical functions).

e All subsequent multilateral negotiations on
different aspects of climate change, including both
adaptation and mitigation, are being held based
on the principles and objectives set out by the
UNFCCC.

SAT

rtoise vs turtle being that
are called Tortoises and
| d Turtles. Tortoise are’
tleareomnivorous

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

ss UA Rati ntiadks: stv ak eatin
Timeline of International Climate Policy
The following is the Key Milestones in the Evolution
of International Climate Policy by UNFCCC. It has
only the timeline. The detailed description of the
concepts, projects, themes will be discussed later in
this chapter (few terminologies are explained in brief
in the glossary).

1988

WMO and UNEP established Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change

1990

IPCC released the first assessment report which
stated emissions resulting from human activities are
substantially increasing the atmospheric
concentrations of greenhouse gases.

The second World Climate Conference for a global
treaty took place.

UN General Assembly established the
Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee (INC) for
a Framework Convention on Climate Change.

1992

United Nations Framework Convention on Climaie
Change along with two sister Conventions the UN
Convention on Biological Diversity and
the Convention to Combat Desertification adopted

in UN conference on environment and development
(earth summit) in Rio De Janerio.


--- PAGE 307 ---
SHANKAR yo
2 Sn le

1994

The United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change entered into force. Countries that
sign the treaty are known as ‘Parties’. With 196
Parties, the UNFCCC has near-universal membership.
Parties meet annually at the Conference of the Parties
(COP) to negotiate multilateral responses to climate

change.

1995

Germany presides over the first Conference of the
Parties (COP 1) in Berlin, where Parties agreed that
commitments in the Convention were ‘inadequate’
for meeting Convention objectives. The Berlin
Mandate established a process to negotiate
strengthened commitments for developed countries,
thus laying the groundwork for the Kyoto Protocol.

1996

The UNFCCC secretariat relocated from Geneva to
Bonn. With that Bonn became an international
sustainability hub and home to 18 UN organizations

@

1997

3rd Conference of the Parties adopted the Kyoto
Protocol, the world’s first greenhouse gas emissions
reduction treaty.

2001

In Sixth Conference of the Parties, Bonn, parties
agreed for the operational rule book for the
1997 Kyoto Protocol.

2001

Seventh Conference of the Parties resulted in
the Marrakesh Accords, setting the stage for
ratification of the Kyoto Protocol. This formalized
agreement on operational rules for International
Emissions Trading, the Clean Development
Mechanism and Joint Implementation along with a
compliance regime and accounting procedures.

2005

The European Union Emissions Trading Scheme,
the first and largest emissions trading scheme in the
world was launched.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

]

A

Kyeto Protocol Entered into Force. Following the
entry into force of the Kyoto Protocol, the eleventh
Conference of the Parties (COP 11) for the first time
is held in conjunction with the first Conference of the
Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties (CMP 1).

2006

The Clean Development Mechanism, a key
mechanism under the Kyoto Protocol was opened
for business.

Twelfth Conference of the Parties held in Kenya,
resulted in creation of the Subsidiary Body for
Scientific and Technological Advice SBSTA. It is
mandated to undertake a programme to address
impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate
change - the Nairobi Work Programme N WP.

2007

Thirteenth Conference of the Parties adopted the Bali
Road Map, including the Bali Action Plan, charting
the course for a new negotiating process to address
climate change. The Plan has five main categories:
shared vision, mitigation, adaptation, technology
and financing.

2008

Joint Implementation, a key mechanism under
the Kyoto Protocol was started.

Fourteenth Conference of the Parties in Poznan,
Poland, delivered important steps towards assisting
developing countries, including the launch of
the Adaptation Fund under the Kyoto Protocol and

the Poznan Strategic Programme on Technology
Transfer.

2009

Fifteenth Conference of the Parties in Copenhagen,
Denmark, produced the Copenhagen Accord.
Developed countries pledge up to USD 30 billion in
fast-start finance for the period 2010-2012.

2010

Sixteenth Conference of the Parties resulted in
the Cancun Agreements, a comprehensive package


--- PAGE 308 ---
7 (i

[ SHANKAR

CS SS °.. TEV RONMENT

by governments to assist developing nations in
dealing with climate change. The Green Climate
Fund, the Technology Mechanism and the Cancun
Adaptation Framework are established.

2011

Seventeenth Conference of the Parties, governments
committed for a new universal climate change
agreement by 2015 for the period beyond 2020,

leading to the launch of the Ad Hoc Working Group
on the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action.

Momentum for Change, a special initiative of the
UNFCCC launched.

2012

Eighteenth Conference of the Parties, governments
agree to speedily work toward a universal climate
change agreement by 2015 and to find ways to scale
up efforts before 2020 beyond existing pledges to
curb emissions. They also adopted the Doha
Amendment, launching a second commitment period
of the Kyoto Protocol.

2013

Nineteenth Conference of the Parties resulted in
the Warsaw Outcomes, including a rule book
for reducing emissions from deforestation and
forest degradation (REDD) and a mechanism to
address loss and damage caused by long-term
climate change impacts.

2014

UN Secretary-General hosted a climate summit in
New York, with Heads of State and Government,
business, finance, civil society and local leaders to
mobilize action and ambition on climate change in
advance of COP 21 in Paris in 2015.

2015

195 nations agreed to combat climate change and
unleash actions and investment towards a low-
carbon, resilient and sustainable future in COP 21.
The Paris Agreement for the first time brings all
nations into a common cause based on their historic,
current and future responsibilities.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

2016

A crucial outcome of the COP 22, Marrakech climate
conference was to move forward on writing the rule
book of the Paris Agreement. The Conference
successfully demonstrated to the world that the
implementation of the Paris Agreement is underway,
and launched the Marrakech Partnership for Global
Climate Action.

2017

The 2017 UN Climate Change Conference COP 23 is
the first COP presided over by a small island
developing state, Fiji.

In COP 23, nations agreed the next steps towards
higher climate action ambition before 2020. Delegates
launched the ‘Talanoa Dialogue’ to help set the stage
for the revising upwards of national climate action
plans needed to put the world on track to meet pre-
2020 ambition and the long-term goals of the Paris
Agreement.

One Planet Summit held in Paris resulted in Finance
Commitments. Financial flows are crucial for
countries’ national climate action plans under the
Paris Agreement.

2018

A special Global Warming of 1.5C report by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change confirms
the need to maintain the strongest commitment to
the Paris Agreement’s aims of limiting global
warming to stave off the worst impacts of climate
change, which include more frequent and more
severe droughts, floods and storms.

In Poland, governments adopted a robust set of
guidelines for implementing the landmark 2015 Paris
Climate Change Agreement. The agreed ‘Katowice
Climate Package’ operationalized the climate change
regime contained in the Paris Agreement, promotes
international cooperation and encourages greater
ambition.

2019

To boost ambition and to accelerate actions to
implement the Paris Agreement, UN Secretary-



--- PAGE 309 ---
~

ANKAR ~~ .

General hosted a UNSG’s Climate Action Summit in
New York. The Summit took place exactly one year
before countries are set to enhance their national
climate pledges under the Paris Agreement.

2020

The COP 26 UN climate change conference set to take
place in Glasgow in November has been postponed
due to COVID-19.

2021

The COP Bureau, in May 2020, decided for a
rescheduled conference which will take place in
November 2021, hosted in Glasgow by the UK in
partnership with Italy.

23.2. KYOTO PROTOCOL: COP-3.

e By 1995, countries realized that emission
reductions provisions in the Convention were
inadequate. They launched negotiations to
strengthen the global response to climate change,
and, two years later, adopted the Kyoto Protocol.

¢ The Kyoto Protocol was adopted in Kyoto, Japan,
on 11 December 1997. Due to a complex ratification
process, it entered into force on 16 February 2005.

¢ In short, the Kyoto Protocol is what
“operationalizes” the Convention. It commits
industrialized countries to stabilize greenhouse
gas emissions based on the principles of the
Convention.

¢ The major distinction between the Protocol and
the Convention is that while the Convention
encouraged industrialized countries to stabilize
GHG emissions, the Protocol commits them to do
so.

23.2.1. Targets

e KP, as it is referred to in short, sets binding
emission reduction targets for 37 industrialized
countries and the European community in its first
commitment period.

¢ It only binds developed countries because it

recognizes that they are largely responsible for the
current high levels of GHG emissions in the

ctmosphere, which are the result of more than 159
years of industrial activity.

e KP places a heavier burden on developed nations
under its central principle: that of “common but
differentiated responsibility”.

© Overall, these targets add up to an average five per
cent emissions reduction compared to 1990 levels
over the five-year period 2008 to 2012.

The architecture of the KP regime: What makes

KP tick?

¢ The Kyoto Protocol is made up of essential
architecture that has been built and shaped over
almost two decades of experience, hard work and
political will. The beating heart of KP is made up
of:

1. Reporting and verification procedures;

2. Flexible market-based mechanisms, which in
turn have their own governance procedures;
and

3. Acompliance system.

e So, two things make KP tick.

1. Emissions Reduction Commitments

¢ The first was binding emissions reduction
commitments for developed country parties. This
meant the space to pollute was limited.

¢ Greenhouse gas emissions, most prevalently
carbon dioxide, became a new commodity. KP now
began to internalize what was now recognized as
an unpriced externality,

Do you know?
Indian Water Monitor lizard is one 0:

Well as the heaviest species
fo the Komodo Monitors

2. Flexible Market Mechanisms

* This leads us to the second, the flexible market
mechanisms of the KP, based on the trade of
emissions permits. KP countries bound to targets
nave . meet them largely through domestic

on— that is, to reduce their emissions onshore.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or b
Y any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 310 ---
But they can meet part of their targets through
three “market-based mechanisms” that ideally
encourage GHG abatement to start where it is
most cost-effective-- for example, in the developing
world. Quite simply, it does not matter where
emissions are reduced, as long as they are
removed from the planct's atmosphere.

¢ The Kyoto Flexible Market Protocol mechanisms:
¢ Joint Implementation (JI)

® The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)

e Emission Trading

23.2.2. The objectives of Kyoto mechanisms:

¢ Its objective is to facilitate, promote and enforce
compliance with the commitments under the
Protocol.

¢ Stimulate sustainable development through
technology transfer and investment

¢ Help countries with Kyoto commitments to
meet their targets by reducing emissions or
removing carbon from the atmosphere in other
countries in a cost-effective way

e Encourage the private sector and developing
countries to contribute to emission reduction
efforts

Joint Implementation:
¢ The mechanism known as “joint implementation”,
allows a country with an emission reduction or
limitation commitment under the Kyoto Protocol
(Annex B Party - developed country) to earn
emission reduction units (ERUs) from an
emission-reduction or emission removal project
in another Annex B Party, each equivalent to one
tonne of CO2, which can be counted towards
meeting its Kyoto target.
© Joint implementation offers Parties a flexible
and cost-efficient means of fulfilling a part of
their Kyoto commitments, while the host Party
benefits from foreign investment and
technology transfer.
© Projects starting as from the year 2000 may be
eligible as JI projects, ERU issued from 2008

Clean Development mechanism:

The Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) allows
a country with an emission-reduction or emission-
limitation commitment under the Kyoto Protocol
(Annex B Party) to implement an emission-
reduction project in developing countries.

It is the first global, environmental investment
and credit scheme of its kind, providing
standardized emissions offset instrument, CERs

Such projects can earn saleable certitied emission
reduction (CER) credits, each equivalent to one
tonne of CO2, which can be counted towards
meeting Kyoto targets.

Example

A CDM project activity might involve, for example,
a rural electrification project using solar panels or
the installation of more energy-efficient boilers.
The mechanism stimulates sustainable
development and emission reductions, while
giving industrialized countries some flexibility in
how they meet their emission reduction or
limitation targets.

Most of the CDM projects were implemented in
China and India as climate in these countries is
favorable for implementing projects for almost all
the spheres such as Agriculture, Waste handling
and disposal, Afforestation and reforestation.
Such CDM projects are also to be supported by the
approval of Annex B countries - those which have
quantified obligations according Kyoto Protocol.

Carbon Trading:

Carbon trading is the name given to the exchange
of emission permits. This exchange may take place
within the economy or may take the form of
international transaction.

Two types of Carbon trading:
1. Emission trading and
2. Offset trading.

Emission trading/ ‘cap-and-trade’,

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without Permission in writing.

Emission permit is known alternatively as carbon
credit. For each Annex I country, the protocol has



--- PAGE 311 ---
ANKAR o 7

assigned a fixed amount of carbon emission in the

ment. This amount is actually the amount of
emission which is to be reduced by the concerned
country.

e Onthe other hand, it implies that the country was
permitted to emit the remaining amount. This
emission allowance is actually one kind of carbon
credit.

e The total amount of allowance is then subdivided
into certain units. The units are expressed in
terms of carbon-equivalent. Each unit gives the
owner the right to emit one metric tonne of carbon
dioxide or other equivalent green-house gases.

Offset Trading/ Carbon Project/ ‘baseline-and

credit’ trading:

e Another variant of carbon credit is to be earned
by a country by investing some amount of money
in such projects, known as carbon projects, which
will emit lesser amount of green-house gas in the
atmosphere.

e For example, suppose a thermal plant of 800
megawatt capacity emit 400 carbon-equivalent in
the atmosphere. Now a country builds up a 800
megawatt wind energy plant which does not
generate any amount of emission as an alternative
of the thermal plant. Then by investing in this
project the country will earn 400 carbon-
equivalent.

e According to an estimate made by the World
Bank’s Carbon Finance Unit, volume of carbon
trade through Emission Trading route alone had
shown a 240 percent increase in 2005 over the
previous year.

Benefits of Flexible Market Mechanisms

¢ This has the parallel benefits of stimulating green
investment in developing countries and of
including the private sector in this endeavour to
cut and hold steady GHG emissions at a safe level.
It also makes “leap-frogging” more economical
that is, the possibility to skip older, dirtier
technology for newer, cleaner infrastructure and
systems, with obvious longer-term benefits.

The Kyoto Protocol compliance mechanism is
designed to strengthen the Protocol’s

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in an
y form or by any means, with
, Out permission in writing.

environmental integrity, support the carbon
market’s credibility and ensure transparency of
accounting by Parties.

iid ea ls
One of the unique features of the Rock pytt
India is that they can raise their body
above the ambient level, through f
contractions. Rock python of India is ”
species. The reason for this is that it is kille
fine skin, meat and even for medicinal purpose

23.2.3. Non-Compliance of Kyoto And

Penalties

e Like most things in life, failure to comply with the
Protocol carries penalties.

e Ifa country does not meet the requirements for
measurements and reporting said country looses
the privilege of gaining credit through joint
implementation projects.

e Ifacountry goes above its emissions cap, and does
not try to make up the difference through any of
the mechanisms available, then said country must
make up the difference plus an additional thirty
percent during the next period.

e The country could also be banned from
participating in the ‘cap and trade’ program.

23.3. BALI MEET:

¢ Bali Meet was the meeting of 190 countries that

are party to a UN treaty on climate change held
in December 2007.

Objectives:

¢ The treaty’s aim was to push the world towards

taking action that reduces the greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere which cause climate change.

Bali was to discuss what happens after 2012—what

are countries expected to do after the first phase
of Kyoto ends in 2012.

As per developed countries, after 2012, even the
developing countries like India and China, which

are increasing their emissions as they grow
economically, also undertake some kind of


--- PAGE 312 ---
emission cuts. This meant a complete overhaul of
the existing UN treaty.
e In Bali, the nations have decided upon a new set

of principles that will, help the countries decide a
post-2012 deal.

23.3.1. Bali Roadmap

e The participating nations adopted the Bali Road
Map as a two-year process to finalizing a binding
agreement in 2009 in Copenhagen.

e The Bali Road Map includes;

e The Bali Action Plan (BAP)

e The Ad Hoc Working Group on Further
Commitments for Annex I Parties under the
Kyoto Protocol negotiations and their 2009
deadline,

e Launch of the Adaptation Fund,

e Decisions on technology transfer and

¢ On reducing emissions from deforestation.

23.3.2. Bali Action Plan

e The Conference of Parties decided to launch a
comprehensive process to enable the
implementation of the Convention through long-
term cooperative action up to and beyond 2012, by
addressing:

e A shared vision for long-term cooperative
action, including a long-term global goal for
emission reductions.

e Enhanced national/international action on
mitigation of climate change.

¢ Enhanced action on adaptation.

e Enhanced action on technology development

and transfer to support action on mitigation
and adaptation.

e Enhanced action on the provision of financial
resources and investment to support action on
mitigation and adaptation and technology

cooperation.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

_- oer w

SHANKAR
[ IAS ACADEMY te fy O
EF te he tey neh tie mart tae - RI

, havens Viper is sesponsible for the more “edlone

due to snakebite than any other venomous snake.
tis highly irritable and when threatened, coils

tightly, hisses, and strikes with a lightning speed.
Its hemotoxic venom is a very puient coagulant,

which damages tissue as well as blood cells.

23.4. COP 15 COPENHAGEN SUMMIT:

e A legally binding agreement could not be arrived
n CoP 15, Copenhagen mainly due to discord
between developing and developed nations.

e The summit concluded with the CoP taking a
note of Copenhagen Accord (a five nation accord-
BASIC and US).

e The Copenhagen Accord is a non-binding
agreement.

e The Accord states that deep international
emissions cuts are needed to hold the increase in
global temperature to under two degrees Celsius.

e Under the Accord, developed countries agree to set
targets for reductions in their greenhouse gas
emissions by 2020.

¢ Developing countries agree to pursue nationally
appropriate mitigation strategies to slow the
growth of their emissions, but are not committed
to reducing their carbon output.

e Recognizes the need to establish a mechanism
(including REDD-plus) to enable the
mobilization of financial resources from
developed countries to help achieve this

¢ Developing countries, specially these with low-
emitting economies should be provided
incentives to continue to develop on a low-
emission pathway

e Agrees that developed countries would raise
funds of $30 billion from 2010-2012 of new and
additional resources

e Agrees a “goal” for the world to raise $100
billion per year by 2020. New multilateral
funding for adaptation will be delivered, with
a governance structure.



--- PAGE 313 ---
SHANKAR
[ a’ IAS ACADEMY ~ eo, (\O

23.5. COP 16 CANCUN SUMMIT

e The Cancun Agreements include decisions under
both the Convention and Kyoto protocol
negotiating tracks.

e As per the Cancun Agreements, all Parties to the
Convention (including the developed and
developing countries) have agreed to report their
voluntary mitigation goals for implementation.

e These will be subject to measurement and
verification or international consultation, as
appropriate, in accordance with agreed
international guidelines.

2s
i. The male collects the: pellets, ‘swallows
ee ‘small saliva-cased building

iaterial ” is oe, te the female,

process oF sieabatton continues for 6-8 ieee The
female hornbill comes out only after she has molted
and fresh feathers have grown on her and her

young ones.

23.5.1. Cancun Agreements

¢ Industrialized country targets are officially
recognized under the multilateral process and
these countries are to develop low-carbon
development plans and strategies and assess how
best to meet them, including through market
mechanisms, and to report their inventories
annually.

* Developing country actions to reduce emissions
are officially recognized under the multilateral
process. A registry is to be set up to record and
match developing country mitigation actions to
finance and technology support from by
industrialized countries. Developing countries are
to publish progress reports every two years.

* A total of $30 billion in fast start finance from
industrialized countries to support climate action

All Rights Reserv

ed. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without Permission in writing

80) ENVIRONMENTS

in the developing world up to 2012 and the
intention to raise $100 billion in long-term funds
by 2020 are included in the decisions.

Do you know?
The only endemic genus in the Rotepot

Namadapha fiyiny squirrel which is criti
endangered and is described ony from a

23.5.2. Mechanism of COP 16

e Three mechanisms that are outcome of CoP 16 are
1. Technology mechanism
2. Green climate fund

3. Adaptation fund

Technology Mechanism

e A Technology Mechanism, under the guidance of
and accountable to the Conference of the Parties
(COP), was established by the 16th session of the
COP in Cancun 2010.

e The Technology Mechanism is expected to
facilitate the implementation of enhanced action
on technology development and transfer in order
to support action on mitigation and adaptation to
climate change.

Green Climate Fund

e At COP 16, Parties, established a Green Climate
Fund (GCF) as an operating entity of the financial
mechanism of the Convention under Article 11.

e The GCF will support projects, programmes,
policies and other activities in developing country
Parties. The Fund will be governed by the GCF
Board.

e The World Bank was invited by the COP to serve
as the interim trustee of the GCF, subject to a
review three years after operationalization of the
Fund.

e The COP also decided that an independent
secretariat will support the operations of the
Fund. The COP also decided that the GCF was to
be designed by the Transitional Committee (TC).



--- PAGE 314 ---
A

et | 895 ENVIRONMENT

Adaptation Fund

e The Adaptation Fund was established to finance
concrete adaptation projects and programmes {n
developing country Parties to the Kyoto Protocol

that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse
effects of climate change.

e The Adaptation Fund is financed from the share
of proceeds on the clean development mechanism
project activities and other sources of funding,
The share of proceeds amounts to 2% of certified
emission reductions (CERs) issued for a CDM
project activity.

e The Adaptation Fund is supervised and managed
by the Adaptation Fund Board (AFB). The AFB is
composed of 16 members and 16 alternates and
meets at least twice a year.

e Upon invitation from Parties, the Global
Environment Facility (GEF) provides secretariat
services to the AFB and the World Bank serves as
trustee of the Adaptation Fund, both on an interim
basis.

23.6. COP 17 DURBAN SUMMIT

New global climate change regime
e India had gone to Durban with two major
demands — that the principle of equity remain

intact in any new climate regime and that this
new global deal be launched after 2020.

Outcome

© New deal to be finalized by 2015 and launched by
2020

* Second phase of Kyoto Protocol secured

® Green Climate Fund launched, though empty as
yet Green tech development mechanism put in
place

* Equity finds place back in future climate talks

® Adaptation mechanism

* Transparency mechanism

© Secures 10 years of economic growth without

carbon containment Intellectual Property Rights
and technology not as well anchored in new deal

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

* Loopholes for developed world not fully blocked

* Agriculture brought in by developed nations under
climate change

23.7 DOHA OUTCOMES COP 18, 2012
Global Climate Change Agreement

Governments agreed to work towards a universal
climate change agreement by 2015 covering all
countries which will come into effect from 2020.

Amendment of the Kyoto Protocol

The Kyoto Protocol is the only existing and binding
agreement under which developed countries
undertake quantitative commitments to cut
greenhouse gases. It was amended so that it could
seamlessly continue.

¢ 8-year second commitment period, which started
on January 1st 2013.

e The Kyoto Protocol’s Market Mechanisms - the
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), Joint
Implementation (JI) and International Emissions
Trading (IET) - will continue.

e Access to the mechanisms remains uninterrupted
for all developed countries that have accepted
targets for the second commitment period.

e A key element was added to the measurement,
reporting and verification (MRV) framework for
developed countries with the adoption of the
tables for the biennial reports known as common
tabular format, thereby strengthening
transparency and the accountability regime.

e Surplus assigned amount units (AAUs) can be
carried over without limit from the first to the
second commitment period ot the Kyoto Protocol
by Parties included in Annex | that have a target
for the second commitment period. But there were
restrictions on the use of these carried-over AAUs
for the second commitment period and
quantitative limits on how many of these units
may be acquired from other Parties.


--- PAGE 315 ---
GHANK AR
[Oi x8 xavier

Completion of new infrastructure

e In Doha, governments advanced the completion of
new infrastructure to channel technology and
finance to developing nations and move toward
the full implementation of this infrastructure and
support.

e Songdo, the Republic of South Korea will be the
host of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the
work plan of the Standing Committee on Finance.

e UNEP-led consortium wil! be host of the Climate
Technology Center (CTC), for an initial term of
five years.

e The CTC, along with its associated Network, is the
implementing arm of the UNFCCC Technology
Mechanism. Governments also agreed the
constitution of the Climate Technology Center
Network (CTCN) Advisory Board.

Do you know?

Found only in Manipur’s Keibul Lamjao National
Park, the sangai is one of the four species that have

been included in the Centre sponsored endangered
species recovery programme. The other three are
the great Indian bustard, the Gangetic dolphin and
the dugong.

23.8 WARSAW OUTCOMES,COP 19, 2013
2015 Agreement

e Governments advanced the timeline for the
development of the 2015 agreement.

® Nationally determined contributions would be put
forward in a clear and transparent manner.

Closing the pre-2020 ambition gap

* Governments resolved to strengthen measures to
close the “ambition gap” - the gap between what
has been pledged to date and what is required to
keep the world below a maximum average 2
degrees Celsius temperature rise - before the new
agreement enters into force in 2020.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Cutting emissions from deforestation - “the

Warsaw Framework for REDD+”

¢ Governments agreed on a set of decisions on ways
to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation.

© Global deforestation accounts for some 20 percent
of the world’s CO2 emissions. The set of decisions
bolsters forest preservation and sustainable use of
forests with direct benefits for people who live in
and around forests.

It establishes the means for results-based
payments if developing countries can demonstrate
the protection of forests.

Progress towards accountability

e The framework for measuring, reporting and
verifying mitigation efforts, including by
developing countries, is now fully operational. It is
an important agreement because it means that the
mitigation, sustainability and support efforts of
countries can now be better measured.

Technology to boost action on climate change

e CTCN, established in Cancun in 2010, has now
moved to the operational stage to support action
by developing countries in response to their
requests for support through their national
designated entities.

e The CTCN is ready to respond to requests from
developing countries on issues related to the
development and transfer of technology.

23.9 LIMA OUTCOMES,COP 20, 2014

¢ The Lima Climate Conference achieved’firsts” in
the history of the international climate process.

e Pledges were iaade by both developed and
developing countries prior to and during the COP
that took the capitalization of the new Green

Climate Fund (GCF) past an initial $10 billion
target.

¢ The Lima Ministerial Declaration on Education

and Awareness-raising calls on governments to
put climate change into school curricula and


--- PAGE 316 ---
SHANKAR K
[a2 SS «0

climate awareness into national

development
plans.

Steps Forward on Adaptation

e Progress was made in Lima on elevating
adaptation onto the same level as the curbing and
cutting of curbing greenhouse gas emissions. This
will be done through National Adaptation Plans
(NAPs).

e A NAP Global Network was launched involving
Peru, the US, Germany, the Philippines, Togo, the
UK, Jamaica, and Japan.

e The Lima Adaptation Knowledge initiative--a pilot
project in the Andes under the Nairobi Work
Programme-- has underlined that establishing the
adaptive needs of communities can be successfully
captured.

e Countries supported the idea of replicating this in
Least Developed Countries, Small Island
Developing States and Africa.

More Countries Accept the Kyoto Protocol Doha
Amendment

e Nauru and Tuvalu submitted their instrument of
acceptance to the Doha amendment, bringing the
number of Parties to 21. Acceptance of 144

/ countries are required to bring it into force.

New climate action portal

¢ Peru launched a new portal, Nazca Climate Action
Portal, with support from the UNFCCC, to
increase the visibility of the wealth of climate
action among cities, regions, companies and
investors, including those under international
cooperative initiatives.

Lima Work Programme on Gender

* The Lima conference agreed a Lima Work
Programme on Gender to advance gender balance
and to promote gender sensitivity in developing
and implementing climate policy.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

| SOQ VTRENV RONMENT,

UNFCCC NAMA Day
© A special event took place on actions to reduce
emissions with the help of so-called “nationally

appropriate mitigation actions” (NAMAs).

¢ NAMAs are plans of developing countries to
reduce emissions and to develop sustainably which
can be supported by developed countries. The
UNFCCC secretariat has established a registry to
match requests for and offers of support.

Climate action on the ground celebrated

by the UN

e The UNFCCC secretariat’s Momentum for Change
Initiative presented awards to representatives of
some of the best examples of climate solutions in
the world which inspire increased climate action.

® The Momentum for Change initiative this year for
the first time included the category of Information
and Communication technology.

23.10 PARIS CLIMATE CHANGE
CONFERENCE COP 21, 2015

Objectives of the Paris Agreement

© To hold the increase in global average temperature
to well below 2 °C above pre industrial levels and

e To pursue efforts to limit temperature increase to
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that
this would significantly reduce the risks and
impacts of climate change.

e The Agreement also talks about reaching the
global peaking of emissions by the second half of
the century, recognizing that peaking will take
longer for developing country Parties.

Nationally determined contributions

The Paris Agreement requires all Parties to put
forward their best efforts through “nationally
determined contributions” (NDCs) and to strengthen
these efforts in the years ahead. This includes
requirements that all Parties report regularly on their
emissions and on their implementation efforts.


--- PAGE 317 ---
(ee ES os

In 2018, Parties will take stock of the collective efforts
in relation to progress towards the goal set in the
paris Agreement and to inform the preparation of
NDCs.

There will also be a global stock take every 5 years to
assess the collective progress towards achieving the
purpose of the Agreement and to inform further
individual actions by Parties.

The Paris Agreement entered into force on 4
November 2016. The first session of the Conference
of the Parties serving as the Meeting of the Parties to
the Paris Agreement (CMA 1) took place in Marrakech,
Morocco from 15-18 November 2016,

By the close of the Marrakech conference, it had been
ratified by 111 countries representing more than
three-fourths of global emissions.

The agreement defines parties’ basic obligations and
establishes new procedures and mechanisms. But
for these to be fully operational, their details must
be further elaborated. This requires the adoption by
parties of an extensive set of decisions known
loosely as the “Paris rulebook.”

23.11 MARRAKECH CLIMATE CHANGE
CONFERENCE -COP22, 2016
Beyond developing the Paris rulebook, parties took
actions and made announcements on a range of other

Finance

The Paris Agreement requires developed countries to
provide biennial reports on financial support
provided or mobilized through “public interventions,”
and on projected levels of future support. In
Marrakech, SBSTA began considering how to account
for public finance. Issues include whether the
accounting should apply only to flows from developed
to developing countries or to broader flows of public
finance.

Global Stocktake

In Marrakech, parties began discussing how to
structure the stocktake, including its format, inputs,

timeline, duration, and output, and its linkage to.
other elements of the Paris architecture. i

“Orphan” issues ee
One of the most contentious items in Marrakech wag
how to treat a set of so-called orphan issues that are
referenced in the Paris Agreement but not assig

to the APA or another body for further consider ;
These issues include whether to establish coma
timeframes for NDCs (parties adopted differeng

timeframes in the first round); any rules around the

adjustment by parties of their NDCs; and the

development of a new collective finance goal beyond

2025. Unable to agree on any specific direction,

parties simply asked the APA to continue its

consideration of “possible additional matters relating

to the implementation of the Paris Agreement.”

Adaptation Fund

One holdover issue from Paris was whether the
Adaptation Fund established under the Kyoto
Protocol, which provides adaptation support to
developing countries, would continue under the Paris
Agreement. Although developed countries would
prefer to channel support through the newly establish
Green Climate Fund, developing countries pushed
very hard to keep the Adaptation Fund alive. Parties
decided the fund “should serve the Paris Agreement,”
pending decisions on governance and other issues.

2018 Facilitative Dialogue

In Paris, anticipating that the Paris Agreement would
not be in force for several years, parties decided to
conduct an early stocktake through a “facilitative
dialogue” in 2018. (The next round of NDCs is due ia
2019/20.) In Marrakech, parties asked the
presidencies of COP 22 and COP 23 to jointly
undertake consultations on how to organize the
facilitative dialogue, and to report back at COP 23.

Mid-century Strategies :

The Paris Agreement encourages countries to prep: i
and submit “long-term low greenhouse gas emission



--- PAGE 318 ---
SHANKAR
[oe SD 0°,

development strategies” outlining the kinds of actions
needed to achieve much deeper emission reductions,
In Marrakech, Canada, Germany, Mexico, and the
United States became the first countries to submit
what have come to be known as mid-century
strategies. A new initiative called the 2050 Pathway
Platform was launched, with support from a broad
array of national governments, cities, states, and
companies, to help other countries develop their own
mid-century strategies.

Finance

Heading into Marrakech, developed countries
released a roadmap outlining how they foresee
meeting the goal of mobilizing $100 billion a year in
public and private finance for developing countries
by 2020. In Marrakech, the UNFCCC’s Standing
Committee on Finance released its second biennial
assessment, showing that total global climate finance
increased 15 percent in 2013-14, reaching a high-
bound estimate of $741 billion in 2014.

Countries and others announced a variety of
new financial pledges, including:

$23 million for the Climate Technology Centre and
Network (CTCN), which provides technical assistance
and capacity building for developing countries.

More than $50 million for the Capacity-building
Initiative for Transparency established in Paris to
help developing countries build the capacity to meet
new transparency requirements; and

A doubling of World Bank climate finance for the
Middle East-North Africa region to $1.5 billion by
2020.

Loss and Damage

Parties conducted the first review of the Warsaw
International Mechanism for Loss and Damage
associated with Climate Change Impacts (WIM). The
mechanism, established as an interim body at COP
19 and subsequently brought under the Paris
Agreement, is charged with developing approaches to
help vulnerable countries cope with unavoidable
climate impacts, including extreme weather events
and slow-onset events such as sea-level rise. The next

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

) tats
overs a ¢; an

review will take place in 2019, and further reviews
will be conducted on a five-year cycle, which could
align with the global stock takes.

23.12 BONN CLIMATE CHANGE
CONFERENCE - COP 23, 2017

Fiji presided over UNFCCC’'s COP23 in Bonn. COP23

took place in Bonn, Germany in November 2017.

Key outcomes agreed at the UN climate talks in
Bonn

The Koronivia Joint Work on Agriculture (KJWA) is a
decision that was reached at the COP 23, 2017 on next
steps for agriculture within the UNFCCC framework.
The decision officially acknowledges the significance
of the agriculture sectors in adapting to and
mitigating climate change. Under this landmark
decision, countries agreed to work together to make
sure that agricultural development ensures both
increased food security in the face of climate change
and a reduction in emissions. The joint work will
address six topics related to soils, nutrient use, water,
livestock, methods for assessing adaptation, and the
socio-economic and food security dimensions of
climate change across the agricultural sectors. KJWA
is a three-year programme which will finish in
Glasgow at COP 26.

Powering Past Coal Alliance

It is launched in COP 23, Bonn and led by UK and
Canada. It has more than 20 members aimed at
accelerating clean growth and achieving the rapid
phase-out of traditional coal power.

Alliance declares that the coal phase-out is required
in the OECD and EU 28 by 2030, and no later than
by 2050 in the rest of the world” to meet the Paris
Agreement. But it does not commit signatories to any
particular phase-out date. It also does not commit the
signatories to end the financing of unabated coal
power stations, rather just restricting it.


--- PAGE 319 ---
a.

SHANKAR
22, CSS’, TROT

Fiji’s COP

Fiji is the first small-island state to host the UNFCCC
climate talks.

The outcomes were the

e Gender Action Plan - highlights the role of women
in climate action and promotes gender equality in
the process.

e Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples
Platform - aims to support the exchange of
experience and sharing of best practices on
mitigation and adaptation.

e Ocean Pathway Partnership - two-track strategy
for 2020 supporting the goals of the Paris
Agreement that includes; 1. Increasing the role of
the ocean considerations in the UNFCCC process
and; 2. Significantly increasing action in priority
areas impacting or impacted by the ocean and
climate change. «

Talanoa Dialogue

“Talanoa is a traditional word used in Fiji and across
the Pacific to reflect a process of inclusive,
participatory and transparent dialogue.

Talanoa Dialogue is a process designed to help
countries implement and enhance their Nationally
Determined Contributions by 2020. The process of
Talanoa involves the sharing of ideas, skills,and
experience through storytelling.

It will be structured around three questions - Where
are we? Where do we want to go? How do we get
there? Originally called the facilitative dialogue, the
name was changed to Talanoa dialogue in Bonn
UNFCCC meeting under the Fijian COP presidency.

Insu Resilience Global Partnership

The InsuResilience Global Partnership for Climate
and Disaster Risk Finance and Insurance Solutions
was launched at the UN Climate Conference COP 23
in Bonn.

It brings together G2o countries in partnership with
the V20 nations, as well as civil society, international

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing

organizations, the private sector, and academia. The
V 20 is a group of 49 of the most vulnerable countries
including small islands

Its vision is to strengthen the resilience of developing
countries and to protect the lives and livelihoods of
poor and vulnerable people from the impacts of
disasters by enabling faster, more reliable and cost-
effective responses to disasters.

It aims to increase the number of poor and vulnerable
people in developing countries benefiting from direct
or indirect insurance by up to 400 million by 2020.

COP 24

COP 24 will take place in December 2018, in Katowice,
Poland. Poland will hold the Presidency of the Climate
Convention for the third time.

Do you know?

The Kelict Dragonfly is an endangered species
found here with the only other species in the genus

being found in Japan. The region is also home to
the Himalayan Newt the only salamander species
found within Indian limits.

COP 25, 2019

e The UN Climate Change Conference COP 25, 2019
took place in Madrid, Spain under the Presidency
of the Chile.

e The COP 24 was scheduled to be held at Chile
(South America) but due to violent mass movement
across the country, the cop 25 took place in
Madrid, Spain.

¢ The ambition of cop 25 was to complete the
rulebook to the 2015 Paris Agreement. The rule
boo k will
become effective in 2020 and replace the 1997
Kyoto Protocol which comes to an end in 2020.

¢ But Countries failed to agree on many of the

hoped-for outcomes, including rules to set up a
global carbon trading system and a system to
channel new finance (loss and damage) to

countries facing the impacts of climate change in
COP 2s.


--- PAGE 320 ---
SHANKAR
cictienpemenanaal C

e And it was planned to take forward in 2020 and
as due to covid 19 the COP 26 is postponed to 2021
November, completion rule book for Paris
agreement is expected to take place in 2021.

Major outcomes

e The Paris Agreement is clear on double counting
of carbon credits that a country that sells
emissions cuts via offsetting credits to another
country can not count those emissions cuts
towards its own climate targets. The agreement is
yet to be reached as Australia, brazil and few
others are not in agreement.

e A new five-year gender action plan (which was
originally agreed in COP 20 lima) intended to
“support the implementation of gender-related
decisions and mandates in the UNFCCC process”.

e Climate Ambition Alliance (CAA) is led by chile
which launched at climate action summit, New
York 2019. 73 countries joined the alliance at the
COP 25. The main purpose of the alliance is to
upscale 2020 targets of members of UN and to
achieve Net Zero Carbon Emissions by 2050.The
alliance will focus on resilience in infrastructure,
management of water and sustainability of cities.
The alliance will focus on Nationally Determined
Contributions in order to achieve Net Zero by
2050. EU agreed to a “climate neutral” target for
2050, joining CAA.

What to look closely for in COP 26?

¢ Agreements on Rule book for Paris agreement,
article 6 on global carbon market, double counting
of carbon, common metrics, periodic review,
response measures, fund for loss and damage, and
so on.

23.13. OTHER MECHANISMS OF
UNFCCC

1. Special Climate Change Fund (Sccf)

* The Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) was
established under the Convention in 2001 to
finance projects relating to: adaptation; technology
transfer and capacity building; energy, transport,

industry, agriculture, forestry and waste
management; and economic diversification.

The Global Environment Facility (GEF), as an
operating entity of the financial mechanism, has
been entrusted to operate the SCCF.

2. Finance Mechanism for Climate Change

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

The Financial resources that have been made
available to Non-Annex I Parties to the UNFCCC
consist of the following three modules:

e The “National Communications Module”:
This module presents information
communicated by Annex II Parties on the
provision of financial resources related to the
implementation of the Convention through
their fourth and fifth national communications.

Fast-Start Finance

e During the Conference of the Parties (COP15)
held in December 2009 in Copenhagen
developed countries pledged to provide new
and additional resources, including forestry
and investments, approaching USD 30 billion
for the period 2010 - 2012 and with balanced
allocation between mitigation and adaptation.
This collective commitment has come to be
known as ‘fast-start finance’.

e Following up on this pledge, the Conference
of the Parties (COP 16)in Canctin, in December
2010, took note of this collective commitment
by developed country Parties and reaffirmed
that funding for adaptation will be prioritized
for the most vulnerable developing countries,
such as the least developed countries, small
island developing States and Africa.

e At COP 17 Parties welcomed the fast-start
finance provided by developed countries as
part of their collective commitment to provide
new and additional resources approaching
USD 30 billion for the period 2010-2012, and
noted the information provided by developed
country Parties on the fast-start finance they
have provided and urged them to continue to
enhance the transparency of their reporting


--- PAGE 321 ---
on the fulfillment of their fast-start finance sustainable management of forests will be

commitments. entitled to receive funds and resources as
e The “Funds Managed by the GEF Module” incentives.
is a joint effort between the secretariat of the e¢ REDD+ approach incorporates important

UNFCCC and the secretariat of the Global
Environment Facility (GEF). This module
presents information on financial flows that
have been channelled, mobilized and
leveraged by the GEF in its role as an
operating entity of the Financial Mechanism
of the UNFCCC.

benefits of livelihoods improvement,
biodiversity conservation and food security
services,

Will India Benefit from REDD+?

India’s sustained efforts for conserving and
expanding its forest and tree resources have the
possibility of being rewarded for providing carbon
service to the international community in addition to
providing traditional goods and services to the local
The Andaman and Nicobar Islands is the first communities,

territory in the country to initiate a species © The incentives so received from REDD+ would be
recovery programme for the dugong and passed to the local communities involved in
restoration of sea grass meadows under the protection and management of the forests. This
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of the Central

Do you know?

Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change.

23.14. REDD & REDD+

e REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation

and Forest Degradation) is the global endeavour
to create an incentive for developing countries to
protect, better manage and save their forest
resources, thus contributing to the global fight
against climate change

e REDD+ goes beyond merely checking
deforestation and forest degradation, and
includes incentives for positive elements of
conservation, sustainable management of
forests and enhancement of forest carbon
stocks.

e REDD+ conceptualizes flow of positive
incentives for demonstrated reduction in
deforestation or for enhancing quality and
expanse of forest cover.

e It works on the basis of creating a financial
value for the carbon stored and enhanced in
biomass and soil of standing forests. Countries
that reduce emissions and undertake

2 af akin ceeactnl eau hae wanmadened 2.

will ensure sustained protection of our forests
against deforestation.

It is estimated that a REDD+ programme for India
could provide capture of more than 1 billion
tonnes of additional CO2 over the next 3 decades
and provide more than USD 3 billion as carbon
service incentives under REDD+.

India’s Position on Redd And Redd+

India believes REDD needs to be seen in the
broader context of REDD+, not in isolation or ina
truncated form since reduction of deforestation,
and conservation and improvement of forests are
two sides of the same coin, and so should be
treated at par.

India’s stand was finally accepted in 13th Meeting
of the Conference of the Parties (COP 13) at Bali
when elements of conservation, sustainable
management of forests and enhancement of forest
carbon stocks were added to the then existing text
of reducing deforestation and forest degradation
as part of Bali Action Plan.

It has presented an ambitious Green India Mission

programme under its National Action Plan on
Climate Change.


--- PAGE 322 ---
@ SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY

India initiatives related to REDD+
e India has made a submission to UNFCCC on

“REDD, Sustainable Management of Forest(SMF)
and Afforestation and Reforestation (A&R)” in
December 2008

A Technical Group has been set up to develop
methodologies and procedures to assess and
monitor contribution of REDD+ actions

A National REDD+ Coordinating Agency is being
established

A National Forest Carbon Accounting Programme
is being institutionalized

India is hosting the Conference of Parties (COP-11)
of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in
2012, to coincide with twenty years of Rio
convention.

Study on the impact of climate change on India’s
forests assigned to the Indian Network for Climate
Change Assessment (INCCA), has been released in
November 2010.

There is likely to be an increase in Net Primary
Productivity (NPP) ranging from 20 - 57 %.

India looks for Enhanced Implementation of the
Unfccc

India looks forward to enhanced international
cooperation under the UNFCCC. Overall, future
international cooperation on climate change should
address the following objectives:

Minimizing the negative impacts of climate
change through suitable adaptation measures in
the countries and communities affected and
mitigation at the global level

Provide fairness and equity in the actions and
measures

Uphold the principle of common but differentiated
responsibilities in actions to be taken, such as
concessional financial flows from the developed
countries, and access to technology on affordable
terms

India as a large democracy, with the major
challenge of achieving economic and social

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

development and eradicating poverty, will engage
in negotiations and other actions at the
international level in the coming months that
would lead to efficient and equitable solutions at
the global level.

23.15. THE GEF

e Article 11 of the UNFCCC creates a ‘financial
mechanism’ for convention implementation, which
is to function under the guidance of the UNFCCC
COP and be accountable to the COP.

e Under Article 11(1), the COP is to decide on the
financial mechanism’s policies, programme
priorities and eligibility criteria relating to the
convention.

e Article 21 names the GEF to serve as the financial
mechanism on an interim basis.

e The GEF was established in 1991 by the World
Bank in consultation with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), to
provide funding to protect the global environment.

e The GEF’s governance, operational, financial
and administrative oversight procedures are set
out in the Instrument for the Establishment of
the Restructured Global Environment Facility,
which was adopted in 1994 and subsequently
amended in 2002 (GEF Instrument).

e The GEF now has six focal areas:

=

biological diversity;
2. climate change;
3. international waters;
4

. land degradation, primarily desertification and
deforestation;

5. ozone layer depletion; and

6. persistent organic pollutants.

Do you know?

Nepal has a rhino population of 645 and there fence

been no cases of rhino poaching in 2014, and 2015.
Nepet $ zero poaching success is rooted ina
coordinated national response.



--- PAGE 323 ---
cee ee

a 2S ie °°: Tia,

23.16. CLIMATE-SMART AGRICULTURE

e While agriculture is the sector most vulnerable to
climate change, it is also a major cause, directly
accounting for about 14 percent of greenhouse gas
emissions (IPCC 2007).

e And yet, agriculture can be a part of the solution:
helping people to feed themselves and adapt to
changing conditions while mitigating climate
change.

e It is possible for agriculture to actually sequester
or absorb carbon into the soil rather than emitting
it. This can be done without the trade off with
productivity and yields.

e Itis possible to have higher yields, more carbon in

the soil and greater resilience to droughts and
heat.

e This is called the ‘triple win’: interventions that
would increase yields (poverty reduction and
food security), make yields more resilient in the
face of extremes (adaptation), and make the farm
a solution to the climate change problem rather
than part of the problem (mitigation).

e These triple wins are likely to require a package
of interventions and be country- and locality
specific in their application. This method of
practicing agriculture is called “Climate Smart
Agriculture’.

23.16.1 Climate-smart agriculture includes
proven practical techniques.

For example,

e by increasing the organic content of the soil
through conservation tillage, its water holding
capacity increases, making yields more resilient
and reducing erosion.

e Promoting soil carbon capture also helps mitigate
climate change. Another example is integrated soil
fertility management that can lower fertilizer
costs, increase soil carbon and improve yields.

¢ Climate-smart agriculture gives attention to
landscape approaches, for example, integrated

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

planning of land, agriculture, forests, fisheries ang
water to ensure synergies are captured.

e These can be further strengthened by adding
better weather forecasting, more resilient food
crops and risk insurance to cover losses when the
vagaries of weather strike.

e If yields increase through such practices and
become more stable, it results in improved farm
incomes. A more stable income helps enhance the
adaptive capacity of farmers.

¢ A good number of countries are now showing that
it can be done.

e China has been a leader in this, with programs
such as the Loess Plateau now internationally
famous.

e Brazil has also invested in good quality research
and extension and is demonstrating these triple
results.

e And small-holder farmers in Kenya are already
receiving cash payments on a pilot basis for new
farming techniques that will hold more carbon in
the soil, even while increasing soil fertility.

Do you know?

Karnataka will soon use an immuno-contraception
technique to control the elephant population in the
state. The technique involves injecting the female
elephant with a vaccine that triggers an immune
system response to block sperm reception. The
technique is reported to have been used successfully
in South Africa. The Karnataka forest Department
(FD) will first use this technique on captive female
elephants, before using it on elephants in the wild.

23.17. INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL
ON CLIMATE CHANGE (IPCC)

e The UN General Assembly adopted a resolution,
in December 1988, on the subject and endorsed
the UNEP/WMO proposal for the setting up of the
Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC).

* It was established by the United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World



--- PAGE 324 ---
Meteorological Organization (WMO) in 1988 to
provide the governments of the world with a clear
scientific view of what is happening to the world’s
climate.

The Secretariat coordinates all the IPCC work and
liaises with Governments. The secretariat is
supported by WMO and UNEP and hosted at WMO
headquarters in Geneva.

It is open to all member countries of the United
Nations (UN) and WMO. Currently 195 countries
are members of the IPCC.

The initial task for the IPCC as outlined in the UN
General Assembly Resolution 1988 was to prepare
a comprehensive review and recommendations
with respect to the state of knowledge of the
science of climate change; social and economic
impact of climate change, and possible response
strategies and elements for inclusion in a possible
future international convention on climate.

The IPCC is a scientific body. It reviews and
assesses the most recent scientific, technical and
socio-economic information produced worldwide
relevant to the understanding of climate change.

It does not conduct any research nor does it
monitor climate related data or parameters.

Thousands of scientists from all over the world
contribute to the work of the IPCC on a voluntary
basis.

Review is an essential part of the IPCC process, to
ensure an objective and complete assessment of
current information.

Governments participate in the review process
and the plenary Sessions, where main decisions
about the IPCC work programme are taken and
reports are accepted, adopted and approved.

By endorsing the IPCC reports, governments
acknowledge the authority of their scientific
content. The work of the organization is therefore
policy-relevant and yet policy-neutral, never
policy-prescriptive.

The IPCC has delivered on a regular basis the
most comprehensive scientific reports about

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

SHANKAR

climate change produced worldwide, the
Assessment Reports.

It has also responded to the need of the UNFCCC
for information on scientific and technical matters
through Special Reports, Technical Papers and
Methodology Reports.

It has also produced methodologies and guidelines

to help Parties to the UNFCCC prepare their
national greenhouse gas inventories.

23.17.1. Assessment Reports

e In accordance with its mandate and as reaffirmed

in various decisions by the Panel, the IPCC
prepares at regular intervals comprehensive
Assessment Reports of scientific, technical and
socio-economic information relevant for the
understanding of human induced climate change,
potential impacts of climate change and options
for mitigation and adaptation.

Assessment Reports are normally published in
several volumes, one for each of the Working
Groups of the IPCC and, subject to the decision by
the Panel, a Synthesis Report.

They are written in a non-technical style suitable
for policymakers. They are composed of a longer
report and a Summary for Policymakers.

Five Assessment Reports have been completed in
1990, 1995, 2001 and 2007, 2014.

ARs Contents
e Compared with previous reports, the AR5 has put

greater emphasis on assessing the socio-economic
aspects of climate change and implications for
sustainable development, risk management and

the framing of a response through both adaptation
and mitigation.

The ARs comprise the full reports prepared by the
Working Groups (I, II and III) as well as the
Synthesis Report.

Key ARs cross-cutting themes are:

* Water and the Earth System: Changes, Impacts
and Responses;


--- PAGE 325 ---
a ———————

ee

e Carbon Cycle including Ocean Acidification;

e Ice Sheets and Sea-Level Rise;

e Mitigation, Adaptation and Sustainable
Development; and

e Article 2 of the UNFCCC (see UNFCCC for
definition).

Special Reports

e Special Reports have been prepared on topics such
as aviation, regional impacts of climate change,
technology transfer, emissions scenarios, land use,
land use change and forestry, carbon dioxide
capture and storage and on the relationship
between safeguarding the ozone layer and the
global climate system.

Do you know?
The Madhya Pradesh Forest Department (FD) has

proposed to declare the Kathiwada forests as the
first conservation reserve (CR) in the State.

23.18. NATIONAL GREEN HOUSE GAS

INVENTORIES PROGRAMME (NGGIP)

© The IPCC established the national green house gas
Inventories Programme (NGGIP) to provide
methods for estimating national inventories of
greenhouse gas emissions to, and removals from,
the atmosphere.

© The guidance produced by the NGGIP is used by
countries that are Parties to the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to
estimate the emissions and removals that they
report to the UNFCCC.

® It may be used by others who want to produce
estimates consistent with national totals.
Internationally agreed guidance is needed so that
emission and removal estimates can be compared
between countries and over time.

e All the IPCC guidance has therefore been compiled
by an international range of authors and with an
extensive global review process.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing,

AR oa -
(@ 32~ BEEE ° « ©75 ENVIRONMENT”

Methodology

¢ The first methodologies were produced by the
IPCC in early 1990s and have been revised since
(Development of IPCC Guidelines and Good
Practice Guidance).

e The Revised 1996 Guidelines for National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories, the Good Practice
Guidance and Uncertainty Management in
National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (GPG2000)
and the Good Practice Guidance for Land Use,
Land-Use Change and Forestry (GPG-LULUCF) are
used by developed countries to estimate emissions
and removals, and are recommended by the
UNFCCC for use by all countries.

© The 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse
Gas Inventories (the 2006 Guidelines) are the
IPCC’s most recent guidance on methods and data
for developing estimates of emissions and
removals of greenhouse gases.

e They build on earlier guidance, over a decade of
experience and a world-wide scientific and
technical effort to produce guidelines, applicable
to all countries notwithstanding widely varying
levels of resources and expertise.

Mandate

e The current mandate of the National
Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme
(NGGIP) was approved by IPCC16 (Montreal,
May 2000). IPCC1g (Geneva, April 2002) decided
to maintain its Task Force on Inventories, co-
chaired by two members of the IPCC Bureau
(one from an industrialized country and one
from a developing country) with twelve
additional members on the Task Force Bureau
(two per IPCC/WMO region).

¢ The NGGIP is mandated to carry out the work,
as approved by the Panel, on inventory-related

methodologies and practices.



--- PAGE 326 ---
SHANKAR ;,
The Panel decided:

e That the IPCC is responsible for assessing and de-
veloping inventory methods and practices which
are scientifically sound and relevant to all

countries, noting particularly the lack of
information in developing countries.

Do you know?

A study by the non-governmental organization, has
found that the Suswa River which passes through

the Rajaji National Park is highly contaminated

with sewage and hence its water may no longer be
safe to drink. Two other seasonal rivers of
Dehradun, Rispana and Bindal, join Suswa in the
Dudhi valley.

e This includes

(a) developing methods for estimating emissions
of greenhouse gases (GHGs) by sources and
removals by sinks,

(b) assessing and developing methods to quantify
and to manage uncertainties in the estimates
of GHGs,

(c) assessing the scientific literature related to the
development of GHG emission factors and

¢ Accordingly, green economy in India is seen in the

context of sustainable development and inclusive
economic growth including poverty eradication.
The Government endeavors to address all the
three dimensions of sustainable development
(social, economic and environmental) in a
balanced manner.

Green economy focuses specifically on the
fundamental changes that are required to ensure
that economic systems are made more sustainable.
Green Economy focuses on the ways to overcome

the deeply rooted causes of unsustainable
economic development.

A Green Economy is one whose growth in income
and employment is driven by public and private
investments that reduce carbon emissions and
pollution, enhance energy and resource efficiency,
and prevent the loss of biodiversity and
ecosystems.

The Green Economy is about sustainable energy,
green jobs, low carbon economies, green policies,
green buildings, agriculture, fisheries, forestry,
industry, energy efficiency, sustainable tourism,
sustainable transport, waste management, water
efficiency and all other resource efficiency.

management of inventories, Transition to green economy
(d) disseminating information related to inventory —_ Three priorities in transition of economy to green
methods and practices, economy are

(e) identifying the implications of the different op-
tions in relation to inventory methods and
practices and

(f) assessing scientific issues related to independ-
ent verification.

23.19. GREEN ECONOMY

e decarbonizes the economy;

* commit the environmental community to
justice and equity; and

© conserve the biosphere.

A key step forward consists in changing our
conception of growth and prosperity - achieving

¢ The concept of green economy lacks an more with less and creating real wealth and quality
internationally agreed definition or universal of life.

principles. The Rio + 20 outcome document
identifies green economy in the context of
sustainable development and poverty eradication

Measures to adapt green economy

and it affirms that approach will be different in ° ey audit can reduce your building's climate

accordance with the national circumstances and
priorities for each country.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

footprint and lead to significant savings in energy
costs.


--- PAGE 327 ---
nao tay Sa apenas Ts SEY RS

ANK AR nd oO _—
NT Neng SE 7, ENVIRONMENT

e Overfishing in many parts of the world threatens
to deplete future fish stocks. We can avoid this by
working to promote sustainable fishing practices.

e Deforestation accounts for close to 20% of the
world’s greenhouse gas emissions.

e Sustainably managed forests can continue to
support communities and ecosystems without
damaging environment and climate.

e Use electronic files to reduce your demand for
paper products.

e When you support certified sustainable forest
products, you support a healthy environment and
sustainable livelihoods.

e Car-pooling or taking public transport reduces
environmental impacts and economic costs while
strengthening community.

e Walking or riding a bike for short trips is good for
your health - and the environment.

e Taking small steps towards wise water use can
help conserve this precious resource

e Resource efficiency is key to a Green Economy and
water is one of our most important resources.

e The development of clean, renewable energy by
using solar, wind, tidal,etc will contribute to green
economy.

e Recycling appropriate materials and composting
food waste reduces the demand on our natural
resources.

® Moving towards a green economy has the potential
to achieve sustainable development and eradicate
poverty on an unprecedented scale, with speed and
effectiveness.

Do you know?

The Uttarkhand Forest Department in
collaboration with the Wildlife Institute of India is
going to introduce a project in which female
monkeys will be given the oral immuno-
contraceptive drug, Porcine Zona Pellucida, in
order to help curtail their population.

23.20 THEECONOMICSOFECOSYSTEMS
AND BIODIVERSITY (TEEB)
The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity

(TEEB) was launched by Germany and the European
Commission in 2007. It is a study led by Pavan

Sukhdev.

It is an international initiative to dr:
the global economic benefits of biodiversity.

aw attention to

Objective

Highlight the growing cost of biodiversity loss and
ecosystem degradation and to draw together
expertise from the fields of science, economics and
policy to enable practical actions.

Aim

To assess, communicate and mainstream the urgency

of actions through its five deliverables—

1. Science and economic foundations, policy costs
and costs of inaction,

2. Policy opportunities for national and international
policy-makers,

3. Decision support for local administrators,
4. Business risks, opportunities and metrics and
5. Citizen and consumer ownership

The Ministry has launched the Economics of
Ecosystems and Biodiversity TEEB-India Initiative
(TID) to highlight the economic consequences of the
loss of biological diversity and the associated decline
in ecosystem services.

23.21 ECOLOGICAL FOOTPRINT

The “ecological footprint” is a measure of human
demand on the Earth’s ecosystems. It is a
standardized measure of demand for natural capital
that may be contrasted with the planet’s ecological
capacity to regenerate and represents the amount of
biologically productive land and sea area necessary
to supply the resources a human population
consumes, and to assimilate associated waste.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 328 ---
SHANK AR ;
IAS ACADEMY ™ “\O

Currently, humanity’s total ecological footprint is
estimated at 1.5 planet Earths—in other words
humanity uses ecological services 1.5 times as fact as
Earth can renew them.

The “carbon footprint” is the amount of carbon being
emitted by an activity or organization. The carbon
component of the ecological footprint converts the
amount of carbon dioxide being released into the
amount of productive land and sea area of carbon
dioxide being released into the amount of productive
land and sea area required to sequester it and tells
the demand on the Earth that results from burning
fossil fuels.

The carbon footprint is 54% of the ecological
footprint and its most rapidly-growing component
having increased 11-fold since 1961.

Global Footprint Network (GFN) every year presents
a report on ecological footprint which maps
consumption and requirement of natural resources
to sustain it. Lifestyle adopted in developed countries
is unsustainable and it will require five Earths to
fulfil their lifestyle demands.

On the other hand, Indian lifestyle is sustainable
where one earth is sufficient. The Earth Overshoot
Report has indicated that the Ecological Footprint of
developed countries ranges from 8 to 4 whereas India
is at 0.9.

Do you know?
The Global Positioning System (GPS) will be used
to count and map elephants in the elephant census
9 be held in April-May 2017. Forest officials will
also use the line transect method as well as the
dung decay rate assessment for the purpose.

23.22. GLOBAL CLIMATE FINANCE
ARCHITECTURE

The global climate finance architecture is channeled
through multilateral funds such as the Global
Environment Facility and the Climate Investment
Funds and as well as increasingly through bilateral

channels.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

45 2 Ss
ae

Strategic Climate Fund

¢ Administered by the World Bank

° Area of focus - Adaptation, Mitigation - general,
Mitigation - REDD

e Date operational - 2008

e The Strategic Climate Fund (SCF), one of two
multi-donor Trust Funds within the Climate
Investment Funds (CIFs), serves as an overarching
framework for three targeted programs piloting
new approaches and scaled-up, transformational
action on climate change:

1. Forest Investment Program (FIP);

2. Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR); and

3. Scaling Up Renewable Energy in Low Income
Countries Program (SREP).

Forest Investment Program

e Administered by The World Bank
e Area of focus - Mitigation - REDD
e Date operational - 2009

The Forest Investment Program (FIP) is a targeted
program of the Strategic Climate Fund (SCF) within
the Climate Investment Funds (CIF).

The FIP supports developing countries’ efforts to
reduce deforestation and forest degradation (REDD)
and promotes sustainable forest management that
leads to emission reductions and the protection of
carbon reservoirs.

It achieves this by providing scaled-up financing to
developing countries for readiness reforms and public
and private investments, identified through national
REDD readiness or equivalent strategies.

Pilot Program for Climate Resilience

e Administered by The World Bank

e Area of focus - Adaptation

e Date operational - 2008

The Pilot Program for Climate Resilience (PPCR) is a
targeted program of the Strategic Climate Fund

(SCF), which is one of two funds within the Climate
Investment Funds (CIF) framework.



--- PAGE 329 ---
do,

The PPCR aims to pilot and demonstrate ways in
which climate risk and resilience may be integrated
into core development planning and implementation
by providing incentives for scaled-up action and
initiating transformational change.

Scaling-Up Renewable Energy Program for
Low Income Countries

e Administered by The World Bank

e Area of focus - Mitigation - general

e Date operational - 2009

The Scaling-Up Renewable Energy Program in Low
Income Countries (SREP) is a targeted program of the
Strategic Climate Fund (SCF), which is one of two
funds within the Climate Investment Funds (CIF)
framework.
The SREP was designed to demonstrate the economic,
social and environmental viability of low carbon
development pathways in the energy sector in low-
income countries.
It aims to help low-income countries use new
economic opportunities to increase energy access
through renewable energy use.

Biocarbon Fund

e Administered by The World Bank

e Area of focus - Adaptation, Mitigation - general,
Mitigation - REDD

e Date operational - 2004

The BioCarbon Fund Initiative for Sustainable Forest
Landscapes supports developing countries’ efforts to
reduce emission through testing jurisdictional
approaches that integrate reducing deforestation and
degradation, sustainable forest management with the
climate smart agricultural practices to green supply
chains.

Clean Technology Fund

e Administered by The World Bank
e Area of focus - Mitigation - general
e Date operational - 2008

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

The Clean Technology Fund (CTF), one of two multj.
donor Trust Funds within the Climate Investmen,
Funds (CIFs), promotes scaled-up financing fo,
demonstration, deployment and transfer of low.
carbon technologies with significant potential for
long-term greenhouse gas emissions savings.
Channelled through the African Development Bank,
Asian Development Bank, European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development, Inter-American
Development Bank, and World Bank Group, the CTF
finances 12 country programmes and one regiona]
programme.

Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
e Administered by The World Bank

e Area of focus - Mitigation - REDD

¢ Date operational - 2008

The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) is a
World Bank programme and consists of a Readiness

Fund and a Carbon Fund.

The FCPF was created to assist developing countries
to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation, enhance and conserve forest carbon
stocks, and sustainably manage forests (REDD+).

Do you know?

The city of Guwahati has declared the Gangetic
dolphin as its official mascot. The move is aimed at

generating awareness and highlighting
conservation concerns for the urban biodiversity of

Guwahati.

Partnership for Market Readiness
Administered by The World Bank
Area of focus - Mitigation - general

e Date operational - 2011

It is a partnership of developed and developing
countries administered by the World Bank,
established to use market instruments to scale up
mitigation efforts in middle income countries.

Although initially geared towards promoting market



--- PAGE 330 ---
SHANKAR
[m2 SS «8

A

readiness for the anticipated emergence of
international carbon markets, this approach has
become more flexible, providing grants and technical
support for proposals for implementation of market
tools that contribute to mitigation efforts.

Special Climate Change Fund

e Administered by The Global Environment Facility
(GEF)

e Area of focus - Adaptation
e Date operational - 2002

The Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) was created
in 2001 to address the specific needs of developing
countries under the UNFCCC. It covers the
incremental costs of interventions to address climate
change relative to a development baseline.

Adaptation to climate change is the top priority of the
SCCF, although it can also support technology
transfer and its associated capacity building activities.
The SCCF is intended to catalyse and leverage
additional finance from bilateral and multilateral
sources, and is administered by the Global
Environment Facility.

Strategic Priority on Adaptation

e Administered by the Global Environment Facility
(GEF)

e Area of focus - Adaptation

¢ Date operational - 2004

The Strategic Priority on Adaptation (SPA) was a

3-year pilot programme aimed to show how

adaptation planning and assessment could be

practically translated into full-scale projects.

The Fund is now closed.

The SPA overall objective was to address local
adaptation needs and generate global environmental
benefits in the focal areas in which the GEF works:
biodiversity, climate change, international waters,
land degradation, and persistent organic pollutants.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

GEF Trust Fund - Climate Change focal area

¢ Administered by The Global Environment Facility
(GEF)

¢ Area of focus - Adaptation, Mitigation - general

e¢ Date operational ~ 1991 (tracked since 2010)

The Global Environment Facility Trust Fund supports
the implementation of multilateral environmental
agreements, and serves as a financial mechanism of
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change.

It is the longest standing dedicated public climate
change fund. Climate Change is one of the six focal
areas supported by the GEF Trust Fund.

The GEF also administers several funds established
under the UNFCCC including the Least Developed
Countries Trust Fund (LDCF), the Special Climate
Change Trust Fund (SCCF) and is interim secretariat
for the Adaptation Fund.

Least Developed Countries Fund

e Administered by The Global Environment Facility
(GEF)

e Area of focus - Adaptation

e Date operational - 2002

The Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF) was

established to meet the adaptation needs of least
developed countries (LDCs).

Specifically the LDCF has financed the preparation
and implementation of National Adaptation Programs
of Action (NAPAs) to identify priority adaptation
actions for a country based on existing information.

Do you know?

The Gandak river in Bihar has established itself as
the third breeding ground in the country for

gharials. This is the third breeding population of
gharials in the country after the Chambal and
Girwa rivers.

Green Climate Fund
e Administered by - to be confirmed



--- PAGE 331 ---
3

e Area of focus - Adaptation, Mitigation - general,
Mitigation - REDD

e Date operational - 2015

The Green Climate Fund (GCF) was adopted as a
financial mechanism of the UN Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) at the end
of 2011.

It aims to make an ambitious contribution to
attaining the mitigation and adaptation goals of the
international community.

Over time it is expected to become the main

multilateral financing mechanism to support climate
action in developing countries.

Adaptation Fund

e Administered by Adaptation Fund Board

e Area of focus - Adaptation

e Date operational - 2009

The Adaptation Fund is a financial instrument under
the UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol (KP) and has been
established to finance concrete adaptation projects
and programmes in developing country Parties to the
KP, in an effort to reduce the adverse effects of
climate change facing communities, countries and
sectors.

The Fund is financed with a share of proceeds from
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) project
activities as well as through voluntary pledges of
donor governments.
The share of proceeds from the CDM amounts to 2%
of Certified Emission Reductions (CERs) issued for a
CDM project activity.

Global Climate Change Alliance

¢ Administered by The European Commission

¢ Area of focus - Adaptation, Mitigation - general,
Mitigation - REDD

© Date operational - 2008

The Global Climate Change Alliance (GCCA) is an

initiative of the European Union.

Its overall objective is to build a new alliance on
climate change between the European Union and the
poor developing countries that are most affected and

that have the least capacity to deal with climate

change.

The GCCA does not intend to set up a new fund of
governance structure, but is working through the
European Commission’s established channels for
political dialogue and cooperation at national and

international level.

Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy Fund

e Administered by The European Commission

e Area of focus - Mitigation - general

e Date operational - 2008

The Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
Fund (GEEREF) is a Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
designed to maximise the private finance leveraged
through public funds funded by the European
Commission and managed by the European
Investment Bank.

GEERFF is structured as a fund of funds, and invests
in private equity sub-funds that specialise in
financing small and medium-sized project developers
and enterprises (SMEs) to implement energy
efficiency and renewable energy projects in
developing countries and economies in transition.

MDG Achievement Fund - Environment and
Climate Change thematic window

e Administered by UNDP

e Area of focus - Adaptation, Mitigation - general
e Date operational - 2007

The MDG Achievement Fund (MDG-F) was
established by the Government of Spain and the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) to

accelerate efforts to reach the Millennium
Development Goals.

Environment and Climate Change is one of eight
thematic areas supported by the MDG-F.

The objective of this part of the fund is to help reduce
poverty and vulnerability in eligible countries by
supporting interventions that improve environmental

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writi Z


--- PAGE 332 ---
SHANKAR

management and service delivery at the national and

, increase access to new f inancing
mechanisms and enhance capacity to adapt to climate

local level

change.

This part of the fund is now closed, although finance
for approved projects is still being disbursed and

monitored by CFU.

anounced the project of development
in Gautam Budh Nagar to: combat

UN-REDD Programme

e Administered by UNDP

e Area of focus - Mitigation - REDD
e Date operational - 2008

Three UN Agencies - United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) - have
collaborated in the establishment of the UN-REDD
programme, a multi-donor trust fund that allows
donors to pool resources and provide funding with
the aim of significantly reducing global emissions
from deforestation and forest degradation in
developing countries.
Through its nine initial country programme activities
in Africa, Asia and Latin America, the UN-REDD
Programme supports the capacity of national
governments to prepare and implement national

REDD strategies with the involvement of all
stakeholders.

Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture

Program

* Administered by the International Fund for
Agricultural Development

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

* Area of focus - Adaptation

¢ Date operational - 2012

To channel climate and environmental finance to
smallholder farmers, scale up climate change
adaptation in rural development programmes and
mainstream climate adaptation into IFAD’s work.

Amazon Fund (Fundo Amazonia)

¢ Administered by Brazilian Development Bank
(BNDES)

e Area of focus - Mitigation - REDD

e Date operational - 2009

The Amazon Fund was created to raise donations so
that investments can be made in efforts to prevent,
monitor and combat deforestation, as well as to
promote the conservation and sustainable use of
forests in the Amazon Biome.

Although the Amazon Fund was created by the

government and is managed by a public bank, it is a
private fund.

Do you know?

/A senior official of the Bangladesh Forest
Department has said that the Farakka barrage
constructed on the Indian part of the Ganga in
1975. has contributed in large measure to the
decline of gharial population in the Padma river

in angladesh. This was on account of the silting
“up of the river and the consequent destruction of
gharial habitat. Fishing nets, riverbank erosion,
‘sand mining from rivers, water pollution, scarcity
of fish species and poor water flow in rivers are
believed to be among the major threats to
gharials.

Congo Basin Forest Fund

e Administered by African Development Bank
e Area of focus - Mitigation - REDD

e Date operational - 2008


--- PAGE 333 ---
The Congo Basin Forest Fund (CBFF) is a multi-donor
fund set up in June 2008 to take early action to
protect the forests in the Congo Basin region.

It aims to support transformative and innovative
projects to be complemented to existing activities,
which will develop the capacity of people and
institutions of the Congo Basin to enable them to
preserve and manage their forests.

It provides a source of accessible funding, and
encourages governments, civil society, NGOs and the
private sector to work together to share specific
expertise.

Do you know?

Earth Overshoot Day is the Calendar date on
which human resource consumption for that
particular year exceeds Earth’s capacity to

regenerate those resources required for the
human consumption for the entire year. It is
calculated by Global Footprint Network, an
independent think tank.

Indonesia Climate Change Trust Fund

e Administered by Indonesia’s National Development
Planning Agency

e Area of focus - Adaptation, Mitigation - general,
Mitigation - REDD

¢ Date operational - 2010

The Indonesia Climate Change Trust Fund (ICCTF) is

a national funding entity which aims to develop

innovative ways to link international finance sources

with national investment strategies.

Created by the Government of Indonesia (GOD), it acts
as a Catalyst to attract investment and to implement
a range of alternative financing mechanisms for
climate change mitigation and adaptation
programmes.

The ICCTF receives non-refundable contributions
from bilateral and multilateral donors.

eo, oM» o%
“% “° “2°

NK AR J =

The main funding mechanism of the ICCTF ig m,
‘Innovation Fund’, which provides grants to Jip,
ministries to support climate change related projecs,
within the GOI.

One Planet Summit

e At least 50 countries committed to protecting
30% of the planet, including land and sea, Over
the next decade to halt species ae and
address climate change issues, aimed a

protecting the world’s biodiversity.

The summit launched a program called
PREZODE an international initiative to prevent
the emergence of zoonotic diseases and

pandemics.

Petersberg Climate Dialogue

Petersberg Climate Dialogue which has been hosted
by Germany since 2010 to provide a forum for
informal high-level political discussions, focusing
both on international climate negotiations and the
advancement of climate action.

The virtual XI Petersberg Climate Dialogue was co-
chaired by Germany and United Kingdom, the
incoming Presidency of 26th Conference of Parties
(COP 26) to United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The dialogue saw
participation from Ministers and representatives of
about 30 countries.

This year’s dialogue came at a crucial juncture when
countries are tackling the COVID-19 pandemic to save
lives, overcoming social and economic consequences
of the pandemic while also preparing to move into
the implementation phase of Paris Agreement undef
UNFCCC in post-2020 period. The key agenda of the
dialogue was to discuss how we can jointly tackle the
challenge of reinvigorating our economies and
societies after COVID-19, while enhancing our
resilience and catalyzing climate action while alse
supporting in particular those most vulnerable.

Oe &
~° “ 9°


--- PAGE 335 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 336 ---
| CHAPTER - 24 |

QW

AGRICULTURE

“A man without food

For three days will quarrel,

For a week will fight and

For a month or so will die”

24.1 AGRICULTURE

The term agriculture is derived from two Latin words
ager or agri meaning soil and cultura meaning cultiva-
tion. Agriculture is a broad term encompassing all as-
pects of crop production, livestock farming, fisheries,
forestry etc.

Silviculture is the art of cultivating forest trees.

Sericulture is the rearing of silkworms for the produc-
tion of raw silk.

Apiculture is the maintenance of honey bee colonies,
commonly in hives, by humans

Olericulture is the science of vegetable growing, dealing
with the culture of non-woody (herbaceous) plants for
food.

Viticulture is the science, production and study of
grapes

Floriculture is a discipline of horticulture concerned
with the cultivation of flowering and ornamental plants
for gardens

Arboriculture is the cultivation, management, and study
of individual trees, shrubs, vines, and other perennial
woody plants

Pomology is a branch of horticulture which focuses
on the cultivation, production, harvest, and storage of
fruit, etc.

Aeroponics is the process of growing plants in an air or
mist environment without the use of soil or an aggre-
gate medium

Hydroponics is a method of growing plants using min-
eral nutrient solutions, in water, without soil.

Terrestrial plants may also be grown with their roots
in the mineral nutrient solution only or in an inert me-
dium, such as perlite, gravel, mineral wool, expanded
clay or coconut husk.

Geoponic in farming practice, refers to growing plants
in normal soil

Scope and Importance of Agriculture

With a 17.2 per cent contribution to the gross domestic
product (GDP), agriculture provides livelihood support
to about two-thirds of country’s population.

The sector provides employment to 56.7 per cent of
country’s work force and is the single largest private
sector occupation.

Agriculture accounts for about 14.7 per cent of the total
export earnings and provides raw material to a large
number of Industries (textiles, silk, sugar, rice, flour
mills, milk products).

The agriculture sector acts as a bulwark in maintaining
food security and, in the process, national security as
well.

The allied sectors like horticulture, animal husbandry,
dairy and fisheries, have an important role in improving
the overall economic conditions and health and nutri-
tion of the rural masses.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 337 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Problems of Indian Agriculture

e Fragmentation of land holding.

e Existence of small and marginal farmers.

e Regional variation.

e Dependence of seasonal rainfall.

e Low productivity of land.

e Increasing of disguised unemployment.

e Disorder in marketing of Agricultural products.

e Weak land reformation.

Revolutions in Agriculture

Revolution
Green
Golden
Grey

Blue Fish Production
Petroleum Production

Black
Pink

Yellow

Do you know?

The Rajasthan government has decided not to set up
any windmills for wind power projects in the areas
inhabited by the Great Indian Bustard (GIB). A major-
ity of wind power projects in Rajasthan have come up
in and around the desert town of Jaisalmer which is
also one of the main areas for these birds.

24.2 CROP AND ITS CLASSIFICATIONS

e Agronomy is a Greek word derived from agros meaning
‘field’ and nomos meaning management. It is a special-
ized branch in agriculture dealing with crop production
and soil management. Crops refer to plants that are
grown on a large scale for food, clothing, and other
human uses.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Classification based on climate

1. Tropical: Crops grow well in warm & hot climate. E.g.
Rice, sugarcane, Jowar etc

2. Temperate: Crops grow well in cool climate. E.g. Wheat,
Oats, Gram, Potato etc.

Classification Based on growing season

1. Kharif/Rainy/Monsoon crops: The crops grown in
monsoon months from June to Oct-Nov, Require warm,
wet weather at major period of crop growth, also re-
quired short day length for flowering. E.g. Cotton, Rice,
Jowar, bajara.

2. Rabi/winter/cold seasons crops: The crops grown in
winter season from Oct to March month. Crops grow
well in cold and dry weather. Require longer day length
for flowering. E.g. Wheat, gram, sunflower etc.

3. Summer/Zaid crops: crops grown in summer month
from March to June. Require warm dry weather for
major growth period and longer day length for flower-
ing. E.g. Groundnuts, Watermelon, Pumpkins, Gourds.

Agronomic Classification of Crops

Cereals

e Cereals are cultivated grasses grown for their edible
starchy grains. Larger grains used as staple food are
cereals. Rice, wheat, maize, barley and oats. The impor-
tant cereal of world is rice.

Bread wheat
Macaroni wheat
Emmer wheat

Dwarf wheat

Millets

e They are also annual grasses of the group cereals. But
they are grown in less area or less important area
whose productivity and economics are also less.

e These are staple food of poor people. In India pearl mil-
let is a staple food in Rajasthan

e 1) Major millets and 2) Minor millets

e It is based on area production and productivity and
grain size.

Major millets

1. Sorghum /Jowar

2. Pearl Millet /Bajra/cumbu

3. Finger millet or ragi

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 338 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Minor millets

1. Fox tail millet
Little millet
Common millet
Barnyard millet
Kodomillet

oP WN

Pulses or Grain Legumes

e Pulses are major source of protein in Indian diet and
providing most of the essential amino acids to a certain
degree. Economically, pulses are cheapest source of pro-
tein.

e It is cultivated to enrich the soil, to utilize the residual
moisture and to give revenue in a shorter period.

Red gram

Black gram

Green gram
Cowpea
Bengalgram
Horsegram
Dewgram
Soyabean

Peas or gardenpea

Garden bean

Oil Seed Crops

e These crops are cultivated for the production of oil.
Either for edible on industrial or medicinal purpose.
They contain more of fat.

Groundnut or peanut
Sesamum or gingelly
Sunflower

Castor

Linseed or flax

Niger

Safflower

Rapeseed & Mustard

e 45 - 50% oil content is present in these seeds.

Sugar Crops
Juice extracted from
1. Sugar stem used for jaggery or sugar

e Number of by products like Molasses, bagasse,
pressmud

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Molasses used for alcohol and yeast formation
e Bagasse for paper making and fuel
e Pressmud used for soil amendment

e Trash (green leaf + dry foliage) - the waste is used
for cattle feed

2. Sugar beet - Tuber for extraction of sugar

e Tubers and tops are used as a fodder for cattle feed

Starch Crops or Tuber Crops
1. Potato
2. Tapioca or cassava

3. Sweet potato

Fibre Crops

e Epidermal hairs of seed coats is the economic portion

e Lint (cappas - seed) has industrial value (fibre)

e Stalk is of fuel nature, garment purpose, seed for cattle
feed and Oil is edible

Cotton

e Karunganni

e Uppam cotton

e American cotton or Cambodium cotton

e Egyptian cotton or Sea island cotton

Stem Fibres

a) Jute
b) Mesta
c) Sun hemp

d) Sisal hemp

Narcotics

e Stimulates Nervous System
i) Tobacco
ii) Betelvine

iii) Arecanut

Do you know?

Special measures are being initiated in the keoladeo
National Park (NP) to eradicate the African catfish
known locally as the Mangur, this invasive species has
rapidly come to dominate the park’s water bodies and
is threatening aquatic and avian fauna here.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 339 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Forage and Fodder Crops

Forage Crops
e The entire vegetative part is used as green fodder

e the stalks and leaves are the major economic portion
for hay making

e Hay is cut into pieces and mixed with concentrated
animal feed and is fed to animals

Grasses

e Napier grass

e Para grass

e Bermuda grass

e Guinea grass

e Rhodes grass

Legumes
Lucerne (Alfalfa)
Egyptian clover (Bersemm)
Indian clover (Fodder senji)
Sirato
Stylo
Subabul

Velvet bean

Plantation Crops

e Plants and its wi. eee

e 1) Tea - leaf; 2) Coffee - seed; 3) Rubber - milk exuda-
tion; 4) Cocoa - seed

Spices and Condiments

Do you know?

The Madhya Pradesh (MP) government’s decision to
develop Kuno-Palpur as a tiger reserve has brought
relief to officials of the forest department (FD) in Gu-
jarat, who had been fighting a long battle in the apex
court over the issue of translocation of lions to Kuno-
Palpur.

e Products of crop plants are used to flavor taste and
sometime color the fresh preserved food. E.g. ginger,
garlic, chili, cumin onion, coriander, cardamom, pepper,
turmeric etc.

e Medicinal plants includes cinchona, isabgoli, opium
poppy, senna, belladonna, rauwolfra, iycorice.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Aromatic plants such as lemon grass, citronella grass,
palmorsa, Japanese mint, peppermint, rose, jasmine,
henna etc.

Classification based on life of crops/duration of
crops:

1. Seasonal crops: A crop completes its life cycle in one
season. E.g. rice, Jowar, wheat etc.

2. Two seasonal crops: crops complete its life cycle in two
seasons. E.g. Cotton, turmeric, ginger.

3. Annual crops: Crops require one full year to complete
its life cycle. E.g. sugarcane.

4. Biennial crops: Crops requires two year to complete its
life cycle E.g. Banana, Papaya.

5. Perennial crops: crops live for several years. E.g. Fruit
crops, mango, guava etc.
Classification based on cultural method/water:

1. Rain fed: Cultivation of crop mainly based on the avail-
ability of rain water. E.g. Jowar, Bajara, Mung etc.

2. Irrigated crops: Crops cultivated with the help of irriga-
tion water. E.g. Chili, sugarcane, Banana, papaya etc.
Classification based on root system

1. Tap root system: The main root goes deep into the soil.
E.g. Tur, Grape, Cotton etc.

2. Fiber rooted: The crops whose roots are fibrous shal-
low & spreading into the soil. E.g. Cereal crops, wheat,
rice etc.

Classification based on economic importance

1. Cash crop: Grown for earning money. E.g. Sugarcane,
cotton.

2. Food crops: Grown for raising food grain for the popu-
lation and & fodder for cattle. E.g. Jowar, wheat, rice etc.
Classification based on No. of cotyledons

1. Monocots or monocotyledons: Having one cotyledon in
the seed. E.g. all cereals & Millets.

2. Dicots or dicotyledonous: Crops having two cotyledons

in the seed. E.g. all legumes & pulses and almost all the
trees.

Classification based on length of photoperiod
required for floral initiation

e Most plants are influenced by relative length of the day
& night, especially for floral initiation, the effect on

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 340 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

plant is known as photoperiodism depending on the
length of photoperiod required for floral ignition, plants
are classified as:

Short-day plants: Flower initiation takes place when

days are short less then ten hours. E.g. rice, Jowar,
green gram, black gram etc.

. Long day’s plants: require long days are more than ten

hours for floral initiation. E.g. Wheat, Barley, etc.

. Day neutral plants: Photoperiod does not have much

influence for phase change for these plants. E.g. Cotton,
sunflower, etc.

Do you know?

The Maharashtra government has proposed setting
up a tiger research institute in the state. The proposal
was submitted to the central government during the
‘Third Asia Ministerial Conference on Tiger Conserva-
tion’ that was held recently in New Delhi. The location
proposed is Nagpur or Chandrapur, as there are 13
tiger reserves with 350 tigers located within a 300-km
radius of either of these two places.

24.3 TILLAGE

Tillage is the mechanical manipulation of soil with tools
and implements for obtaining conditions ideal for seed
germination, seedling establishment and growth of
crops.

Tilth: It is the physical 1 condition of soil obtained out
of tillage (or) it is the result of tillage. The tilth may be
a coarse tilth, fine tilth or moderate tilth. Based on the
requirement of crops being grown and the soil where
we are cultivating.

Types of tillage: Tillage operations may be grouped
into
1. On season tillage 2. Off-season tillage

On-season tillage: Tillage operations that are done for
raising crops in the same season or at the onset of the
crop season are known as on season tillage.

Preparatory tillage: This refers to tillage operations
that are done to prepare the field for raising crops. It
consists of deep opening and loosening of the soil to
bring about a desirable tilth as well as to incorporate or
uproot weeds and crop stubble when the soil is in a
workable condition.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Types of preparatory tillage

1.

2.

Primary tillage
Secondary tillage

Primary tillage: The tillage operation that is done after
the harvest of crop to bring the land under cultivation
is known as primary tillage. Ploughing is the opening
of compact soil with the help of different ploughs. Coun-
try plough, mould board plough, bose plough, tractor
and power tiller are used for primary tillage.

Secondary tillage: The tillage operations that are per-
formed on the soil after primary tillage to bring a good
soil tilth are known as secondary tillage. Secondary
tillage consists of lighter or finer operation which is
done to clean the soil, break the clods and incorporate
the manure and fertilizers. Harrowing and planking is
done to serve those purposes

Dry tillage: Dry tillage is practiced for crops that are
sown or planted in dry land condition having sufficient
moisture for germination of seeds. This is suitable for
crops like broadcasted paddy, jute, wheat, oilseed crops,
pulses, potato and vegetable crops.

Wet or puddling tillage: The tillage operation that is
done in a land with standing water is called wet or pud-
dling tillage. Puddling operation consists of ploughing
repeatedly in standing water until the soil becomes soft
and muddy. Puddling creates an impervious layer below
the surface to reduce deep percolation losses of water
and to provide soft seed bed for planting rice.

Off-season tillage: Tillage operations done for condi-
tioning the soil suitably for the forthcoming main sea-
son crop are called off-season tillage. Off season tillage
may be

1. Post harvest tillage

2.
3.
4.
Special purpose tillage: Tillage operations intended to
serve special purposes are said to be special purpose

tillage. They are, 1) sub soiling, 2) levelling, 3) clean
tillage, 4) blind tillage, 5) wet tillage and 6) zero tillage.

Summer tillage
Winter tillage
Fallow tillage

Sub soiling: To break the hard pan beneath the plough
layer special tillage operations (chiselling) are per-
formed to reduce compaction. Sub soiling is essential
once in four to five years where heavy machineries are
used for field operations, seeding, harvesting, trans-
porting etc.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 341 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Advantages

greater volume of soil may be obtained for cultivation
of crops

excess water may percolate downward to recharge the
permanent water table

reduce runoff and soil erosion

roots of crop plants can penetrate deeper to extract
moisture from the water table

Clean tillage: It refers to working of the soil of the
entire field in such a way no living plant is left undis-
turbed. It is practiced to control weeds, soil borne path-
ogen and pests.

Blind tillage: It refers to tillage done after seeding or
planting the crop (in a sterile soil) either at the pre -
emergence stage of the crop plants or while they are in
the early stages of growth so that crop plants (cereals,
tuber crops etc.) do not get damaged, but extra plants
and broad leaved weeds are uprooted.

Zero tillage (No tillage): In this, new crop is planted
in the residues of the previous crop without any prior
soil tillage or seed bed preparation and it is possible
when all the weeds are controlled by the use of herbi-
cides.

Advantages of Zero tillage

1.

3.

Zero tilled soils are homogenous in structure with more
number of earthworms

Organic matter content increases due to less minerali-
zation

Surface runoff is reduced due to presence of mulch

Disadvantages

1.

Higher amount of nitrogen has to be applied for min-
eralization of organic matter in zero tillage

Perennial weeds may be a problem

High number of volunteer plants and buildup of pests

Do you know?

The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has constituted a
high-powered committee of government officials to
prepare guidelines for the restoration of the environ-
ment and ecology destroyed as a result of coal mining
in Meghalaya.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

24.3 CROPPING

Cropping intensity: Number of crops cultivated in a
piece of land per annum is cropping intensity. In Punjab
and Tamil Nadu the cropping intensity is more than 100
per cent i.e. around 140-150%. In Rajasthan the crop-
ping intensity is less.

Cropping pattern

The yearly sequence and spatial arrangement of crops
and fallow on a given area is called cropping pattern

Cropping system

The cropping pattern used on a farm and its interac-
tions with farm resources, other farm enterprises, and
available technology which determine their makeup.

Multiple cropping: Growing more than two crops ina
piece of land in a year in orderly succession. It is also
called as intensive cropping. It is used to intensify the
production. It is possible only when assured resources
are available (land, labour, capital and water)

Double cropping: Growing two crops a year in se-
quence. Example: Rice - Pulse

Triple cropping: Growing three crops a year in se-
quence. Example: Rice - Rice - Pulse
Quadruple cropping: Growing four crops in a year in
sequence

Monoculture: Repetitive growing of the same sole crop
in the same land.

Mono cropping: Continuous production of one and the
same crop year after year or season after season is
called mono cropping.

Sole cropping: One crop variety grown alone in a pure
stand at normal density.

Sequential cropping

Growing of two or more crops in sequence on the same
field in a year. The succeeding crop is planted after the
preceeding crop has been harvested

e The crop intensification is done in time dimension
e Ex: Rice-rice-cotton

Relay cropping Growing the succeeding crop when pre-
vious crop attend its maturity stage-or-sowing of the
next crop immediately before the harvest of the stand-
ing crops.

E.g. 1) Paddy-Lucerne.

2) Rice-Cauliflower-Onion-summer gourds.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 342 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Ratoon cropping
e Raising a crop with regrowth coming out of roots or
stocks of the harvested crop
e Ex: Sugarcane (8 ratoons in Cuba)
e Banana - one plant crop followed by two ratoon
crops normally
e Sorghum and Lucerne fodder- many ratoons Ist cut-
ting 70 DAS and thereafter every 35-40 days.

e Pineapple crop is extensively ratooned.

Intercropping

e Growing two or more crops simultaneously with dis-
tinct row arrangement on the same field at the same
time.

e Base crop: primary crop which is planted/ sown at
its optimum sole crop population in an intercropping
situation.

e Intercrop: This is a second crop planted in between
rows of base crop with a view to obtain extra yields
with intercrop without compromise in the main crop
yields

Do you know?

Hi-tech patrolling is set to be introduced in the Simili-
pal tiger Reserve (STR) ahead of Maha Vishuva Sank-
ranti, a religious function when tribals indulge in a
ritual of mass killing of wild animals in the forests
here.

Advantages of Intercropping

e Better use of growth resources including light, nutrients
and water

e Suppression of weeds

e Yield & stability - even if one crop fails due to unfore-
seen situations, another crop will yield and provides
some secured income

e Successful intercropping gives higher equivalent yields
(yield of base crop + yield of intercrop), higher cropping
intensity

e Reduced pest and disease incidences

e Improvement of soil health and agro-eco system
Examples of Inter cropping
e Ex: Maize + Cowpea = 111

e Sorghum + Redgram = 2:2

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Groundnut + Redgram = 61
e Potato + Mustard 311
e Wheat + Mustard 8:1

Types of intercropping

e Strip intercropping

e Parellel cropping

e Synergistic cropping
e Additive Series (Paired row intercropping)
e Replacement Series

e Multi storey cropping

e Relay intercropping

e Alley cropping

Strip intercropping

e Growing of two or more crops simultaneously in strips
wide enough to permit independent cultivation but nar-
row enough for the crops to interact each other.

e Ex:6 rows of groundnut and 4 rows of redgram in strips

Parellel cropping

¢ Growing of two crops simultaneously which have dif-
ferent growth habits and no competion among them-
selves

e Ex: Blackgram with maize
e Soybean with cotton
Synergestic Cropping

e Yields of both crops are higher than of their pure crops
on unit area basis

e Ex: Sugarcane + Potato

Multi storey cropping

¢ Cultivation of more than two crops of different heights
simultaneously on a piece of land in any certain period

e Ex: Coconut + Pepper + cocoa + pineapple

Relay intercropping

e Ina long duration base crop, growing two sets of inter-
crops one after another is called relay intercropping

e Ex; Redgram - base crop 180 days

e Groundnut/onion/coriander-I set of intercrops

e Samai/ thenai/panivaragu- 2nd set of intercrops
Alley cropping

e Alley cropping is a system in which food crops are
grown in alleys formed by hedge rows of trees or
shrubs. The essential feature of the system is that hedge

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 343 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

rows are cut back at planting and kept pruned during
cropping to prevent shading and to reduce competition
with food crops.

e Ex: Subabul raised at 6 m row spacing
e The space between two rows called alleys
e The intercrops are raised in the alley space

e E.g. cotton, sorghum, blackgram

Mixed cropping

Growing of two or more crops simultaneously intermin-
gled without row arrangement is known as mixed crop-
ping

It is a common practice in most of dryland tracts in
India

Seeds of different crops are mixed in certain proportion
and are sown

The objective is to meet the family requirement of cere-
als, pulses and vegetables, it is a subsistence farming

Ex: Sorghum, Bajra and cowpea are mixed and broad-
casted in rainfed conditions (with low rainfall situa-
tions) to avoid complete crop failures and with

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Inter cropping Mixed cropping

Main and inter crops are
sown in definite row
arrangement

There is no specific row
arrangement. Generally
crop seeds are mixed and
broadcasted

The sowing time of
component crops is same.

The sowing time of both
the crops may or may
not be the same.
Sometimes the main
crops is sown earlier
than the inter crop

Do you know?

The Union Ministry of Ganga Rejuvenation has en-
trusted a pilot project to the Wildlife Institute of India
(WID to work towards the restoration of select aquatic
species that thrive in the Ganga. The three year pro-
ject will cost Rs. 25 crore and a Ganga Aqualife Con-
servation Monitoring Centre will also be set up at the

ascertaining the minimum yields

Difference between inter cropping and mixed

cropping

Inter cropping Mixed cropping

The main objective of
inter cropping is to
utilise the space between
rows of main crop and to
produce more grain per
unit area

There is no competition
between main and inter
crop (subsidiary crop)

In inter cropping, the
main crop may bea
long duration one and
the inter crop may be a
short duration/early
maturing one

The main objective of
mixed cropping is
insurance against crop
failure.

There is competition
between component crops.
Here all crops are given
equal importance and care.
Hence, there is no
difference between
component crops

Crops may or may not
be of same duration

WIL as part of it.

24.4 FARMING SYSTEMS

Definitions

Farm - is a piece of land with specific boundaries,
where crop and livestock enterprises are taken up under
common management

Farming - is the process of harnessing solar energy in
the form of economic plant and animal products

System - a set of components which are interdependent
and interacting

Wetland farming

Wet land - soils flooded or irrigated through lake, pond
or canal and land is always in submerged condition

Wetland farming: is the practice of growing crops in
soils flooded through natural flow of water for most
part of the year

Garden land/ irrigated Dry land farming

Garden land - soils irrigated with ground water sources

Garden land farming: Growing crops with supplemen-
tal irrigation by lifting water from underground
sources.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 344 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Dry land farming
e Dry land - soils purely depends rainfall for moisture

e Dryland farming: is the practice of crop production en-
tirely depending upon rainfall and the moisture con-
served in the soil

e This is practiced in areas where annual rainfall is less
than 750mm.The crops may face moisture stress fre-
quently due to erratic distribution or failure of monsoon

Rain fed farming

e Crop production in areas where rainfall is more than
750mm (i.e assured rainfall areas). Here moisture stress
will be minimum. Soil conservation is given more im-
portance

Mixed Farming

e Mixed farming is defined as a system of farming on a
particular farm which includes crop production, raising
live stock, poultry, fisheries, bee keeping etc. to sustain
and satisfy as many needs of the farmer as possible.
Subsistence is important objective of mixed farming.
While higher profitability without altering ecological
balance is important in farming system.

Advantages:

1. It offers highest return on farm business, as the by-
products of farm are properly utilized.

2. It provides work throughout year.

3. Efficient utilization of land, labour, equipment and
other resources.

4. The crop by-products such as straw, fodder etc. is used
for feeding of livestock and in return they provide milk.

5. Manures available from livestock to maintain soil fer-
tility.

6. It helps in supplying all the food needs of the family
members.

Specialized Farming

e The farm in which 50% or more income of total crop
production is derived from a single crop is called spe-
cialized farming

Diversified Farming

e A diversified farming has several production enterprises
or sources of income but no source of income equal as
much as 50% of the total income. It is also called as
general farming.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Do you know?

The Institute has selected a river stretch at Narora
near the Hastinapur Wildlife Sanctuary, Uttar
Pradesh, were by an ideal environment of lesser pol-
lution will be created and a healthy population of spe-
cies such as the gharial, turtle, otters, and fish species
will be rutured. The project will involve the local com-
munity along with related government departments
such as irrigation and tourism for its execution.

24.5 CROP ROTATION

¢ Growing of different crops on a piece of land is a pre-
planned succession. The principle of crop rotation is to
utilise the available resources to the fullest extent in
order to harvest the maximum in a unit land without
affecting the soil health.

e Ex- Rice-Red Gram -Banana

Principles of crop rotation

e Leguminous crops should be grown before non-legumi-
nous crops because legumes fix atmospheric N into the
soil and add organic matter to the soil.

Crops with tap roots (deep rooted like cotton) should
be followed by those which have fibrous (shallow
rooted crops like sorghum or maize) root system. This
facilitates proper and uniform use of nutrients from
the soil.

More exhaustive crops should be followed by less ex-
haustive crops because crops like potato, sugarcane,
maize etc. need more inputs such as better tillage, more
fertilizers, greater number of irrigation etc.

Selection of crop should be based on need or demand

Crops of same family should not be grown in succession
because they act as alternate hosts for insect pests and
diseases

The selection of crops should suit farmers financial con-
ditions

The crop selected should also suit to the soil and cli-
matic condition

24.6 SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE

e Itis a form of agriculture aimed at meeting the needs
of the present generation without endangering the re-
source base of the future generations. It is considered
as a system of cultivation with the use of manure, crop

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 345 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

rotation and minimal tillage and with minimum de-
pendence on synthetic fertilizers, pesticides and anti-
biotics. It is a balanced management system of
renewable resources including soil, wildlife, forests,
crops, fish, livestock, plant genetic resources and eco-
systems without degradation and to provide food, live-
lihood for current and future generations maintaining
or improving productivity and ecosystem services of
these resources.

Sustainable agriculture has to prevent land degradation
and soil erosion. It has to replenish nutrients and con-
trol weeds, pests and diseases through biological and
cultural methods.

Degradation of natural resources is the main issue
threatening sustainable development of agriculture.

24.7 ORGANIC FARMING

Organic farming is a production system where all kinds

of agricultural products are produced organically, in-
cluding grains, meat, dairy, eggs, fibers such as cotton,
flowers, and processed food products

Organic farming avoids or largely excludes the use of
synthetic fertilizers, pesticides, growth regulators and
livestock feed additives.

Components of organic farming

It largely rely upon crop rotations, crop residues, animal
manure, legumes, green manure, on/off farm organic
wastes, mechanical cultivation, mineral bearing rocks
and aspects of biological control of pests and diseases
to maintain soil productivity and tilth to supply plant
nutrients.

Scope

1.

A sustainable agricultural system which maintains and
improves soil fertility so as to guarantee for adequate
food security in the future.

2. It relies upon resources from its own area which is not
depended much on imported resources.

3. It helps in maintaining the stability of natural ecosys-
tem

Concepts

1. Building up of biological soil fertility

2. Control of pests, diseases and weeds through develop-
ment of an ecological balance within the system and by
use of bioagents and various cultural techniques.

3. It recycles all wastes and manure within the farm.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Eco-farming: Farming in relation to ecosystem.

Biological farming: Farming in relation to biologi-
cal diversity.

Biodynamic farming: Farming which is biologically
organic and ecologically sound and sustainable
farming.

Organic farming -Components:

The components of organic farming are
i) Organic manures
ii) Non- chemical weed control and

iii) Biological pest and disease management.

Principles:

The three interrelated principles are
i) Mixed farming
ii) Crop rotation

iii) Organic cycle optimization

Eco-farming:

It is the farming mutually reinforcing ecological ap-
proaches to food production. It aims at the maintenance
of soil chemically, biologically and physically the way
nature would do if left alone. Soil would then take proper
care of plants growing on it. Feed the soil, not the plant
is the watchword and slogan of ecological farming.

Organic Vs. Inorganic Fertilizers

Organic Fertilizers Inorganic Fertilizer

Three common forms:
animal manure, green
manure and compost.

Improves soil texture,
adds organic nitrogen,
and stimulates beneficial
bacterial and fungi.

Improves water-holding
capacity of soil.

Does not add humus to the
soil, resulting in less
ability to hold water and
support living organisms
(earthworms, beneficial
bacterial, and fungi, etc.)

Lowers oxygen content of
the soil thereby keeping
fertilizer from being taken
up efficiently.

Supplies only a limited
number of nutrients
(usually nitrogen and
phosphorus)

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 346 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Organic Fertilizers Inorganic Fertilizer

Helps to prevent erosion

Requires large amounts
of energy to produce,
transport, and apply.
Release nitrous

oxide (N20) —a
greenhouse gas.

Do you know?

The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWE) India, and
Ricoh India, a global technology company recently
signed the ‘Project Nature Watch’ partnership to sup-
port conservation activities in India. The project aims
at providing need-based infrastructure support to
frontline and field staff working in the forest and ma-
rine areas, for monitoring species such as the Red
panda, Snow leopard, tiger, elephant, rhino. Olive rid-
ley turtle and other threatened fish diversity, coral
reefs, cetaceans and marine mammals.

24.8 PERMACULTURE

Bill Mollison, an Australian ecologist, and one of his
students, David Holmgren, coined the word “permacul-
ture” in 1978. It is a contraction of “permanent agricul-
ture” or “permanent culture.”

It is defined as a design system for creating sustainable
human environments. It uses ecology as the basis for
designing integrated systems of food production, hous-
ing, appropriate technology, and community develop-
ment.

Permaculture is built upon an ethic of caring for the
earth and interacting with the environment in mutually
beneficial ways.

A central theme in Permaculture is the design of eco-
logical landscapes that produce food. Emphasis is placed
on multi-use plants, cultural practices such as sheet
mulching and trellising, and the integration of animals
to recycle nutrients and graze weeds.

Characteristics

It is one of the most holistic, integrated systems analy-
sis and design methodologies found in the world.
It can be applied to create productive ecosystems from

the human- use standpoint or to help degraded ecosys-
tems recover health and wildness.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

It can be applied in any ecosystem, no matter how de-
graded.

It values and validates traditional knowledge and expe-
rience.

Incorporates sustainable agriculture practices and land
management techniques and strategies from around the
world

It is a bridge between traditional cultures and emergent
earth-tuned cultures.

It promotes organic agriculture, which does not use
pesticides.

It aims to maximize symbiotic and synergistic relation-
ships between site components.

It’s design is site specific, client specific, and culture
specific

24.9 INTEGRATED FARMING SYSTEM

Integration of farm enterprises such as cropping sys-
tems, animal husbandry, fisheries, forestry etc. for op-
timal utilisation of resources bringing prosperity to the
farmer. According to the availability of land, type of
land, water, capital, resources, technical skill of the
farmer, market facilities etc., and the components of
farming system are to be chosen and adopted for better
results.

Benefits of Integrated Farming System

Steady income other than income from regular crop-
ping

Risk coverage due to subsidiary allocation in the event
of unexpected crop failures

Employment opportunity

Higher productivity

Augmented returns and recycling of organics

Easily adopted by marginal and submarginal farmers
General uplift of farm activities

Better utilisation of land, labour, time and available
manures in the farm.

24.10 ELEMENTS REQUIRED IN PLANT

GROWTH

1. Macronutrients:

Based on the relative abundance in plants, viz., Nitro-
gen (N); Phosphorous (P), Potassium (K), Sulfur (S),
Calcium (Ca) and Magnesium (Mg)

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 347 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

. Micronutrients:

Their concentration is very small. They are also referred
to as minor elements.

Iron (Fe); Zinc (Zn); Manganese (Mg),Copper (Cu),Boron
(B), Chlorine (Cl) and Molybdenum (Mo) .In some
plants, other than the above, Sodium (Na), Cobalt (Co),
Vanadium (Va), Nickel (Ni) and Silicon (Si) are consid-
ered as essential micronutrients

Nitrogen (N)

al

b]

cl

N is an essential constituent of proteins and is present
in many other compounds of great physiological impor-
tance in plant metabolism

N is an integral part of chlorophyll, which is primary
observer of light energy needed for photosynthesis.

N also imparts vigorous vegetative growth and dark
green colour to plants.

Phosphorus (P) is an essential part of the enzymes
which help the crop to fix light energy. It forms an in-
tegral part of nucleic acids, the carriers of genetic infor-
mation, and is important in stimulating root growth

Potassium (K) is involved in processes which ensure
carbon assimilation and the transportation of photo-
synthates throughout the plant for growth and the
storage of sugars and proteins. The potassium ion is
also important for water regulation and uptake. Fur-
thermore, the presence of potassium in sufficient
amounts ensures resistance to frost, drought and cer-
tain diseases

Magnesium occurs in chlorophyll and is also an activa-
tor of enzymes,

Sulphur forms part of two essential amino acids which
are among the many building blocks of protein. It
is also found in vitamin Bi and in several important
enzymes.

Calcium is required for plant growth, cell division and
enlargement. The growth of root and shoot tips and
storage organs is also affected by calcium as it is a com-
ponent of cell membranes. Calcium is also vital for pol-
len growth and to prevent leaf fall

Do you know?

India’s National air-carrier Air India and two other
Indian transportation companies, Jet Airways and Ap-
eejay Shipping, recently signed the Buckingham Palace
Declaration to fight criminal wildlife trafficking.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

24.11 Manures

Manures are plant and animal wastes that are used
as source of plant nutrients They release nutrients
after their decomposition .Manures can be grouped
into bulky organic manures and concentrated organic
manures

Fertilizers

Fertilizers are industrially manufactured chemical con-
taining plant nutrients Nutrient content is higher in
fertilizers than organic manures and nutrients are re-
leased almost immediately

Role of manures

1.

Organic manures bind the sandy soil and improve its
water holding capacity.

They open the clayey soil and help in aeration better
root growth.

They add plant nutrients in small percentage and also
add micro nutrients which are essential for plant
growth the microbial activity is increased which helps
in releasing plant nutrients in available for e.g. bulky
organic manures- FYM, compost from organic waste,
night soil, sludge, sewage, sheep folding, green ma-
nures, concentrated organic manures- oilcakes (edible,
non-edible), blood meal, fish meal, bone meal.

Organic manures should be incorporated before the
sowing or planting because of slow release of nutrients

Classification of Organic manures

Farm Yard Manure

This is the traditional manure and is mostly readily
available to the farmers. Farm yard manure is a decom-
posed mixture of Cattle dung and urine with straw and
litter used as bedding material and residues from the
fodder fed to the cattle..

Compost Manure

Compost is well rotted organic manure prepared by
decomposition of organic matter. Composting is largely
a biological process in which micro-organisms of both
types, aerobic (require oxygen for deep development)
and anaerobic (functions in absence of air or free oxy-
gen), decompose the organic matter and lower down the
C:N ratio of refuse. The final product of composting is
well rotted manure known as compost

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 348 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Sheep and Goat droppings

e It is also valuable organic manure. It contains about 0.5
to 0.7 %N, 0.4 to 0.6% P205 and 0.3 -1.0% K20O. It is
effective to all types of crops

Concentrated organic manures
Oil cakes

e There are many varieties of oil cakes which contains
not only nitrogen but also some P and K along with
large percentage of organic matter. These oil cakes are
of two types.

i. Edible oil cakes- suitable for feeding cattle.
ii. Non-edible oil cakes-not suitable for feeding cattle.

e Oil cakes are quick acting organic manure. Though they
are insoluble in water, their nitrogen became quickly
available to plants in about a week or in 10 days after
application.

Bone Meal

e Bones from slaughter houses, carcasses of all animals
and from meat industry constitute bone meal, which is
the oldest phosphatic fertilizer used. It also contains
some N.

Fish meal

e Fish manure or meal is processed by drying non-edible
fish, carcasses of fish and wastes from fish industry. It
contains 4.0-10.0 % nitrogen, 3.0-9.0 % P and 0.3 to
1.5 % K. Fishmeal is quick acting organic manure and
is suitable for application to all crops on all soils.

Green Manuring

e It isa practice of ploughing in the green plant grown in
the field or adding green plants from outside and incor-
porating them into the soil for improving the physical
structure as well as fertility of the soil. E.g.: Sannhemp,
Dhaicha, Pillipesara, Shervi, Urd, Mung, Cowpea, Ber-
seem, Senji, etc.

Green leaf Manuring

e Green leaf manuring refers to adding the green leaf and
green twigs from legume plants or trees to a field and
then incorporating them into the soil by ploughing. E.g.:
Glyricidia, wild Dhaicha, Karanj (pongamia), leucaena.

Bio-fertilizers

e Bio-fertilizers are the preparations containing live or
latent cells of efficient strains of nitrogen fixing, phos-
phate solubilizing or cellulolyotic micro-organisms used
for application to seed or composting areas with the

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

objective of increasing the numbers of such micro-or-
ganisms and accelerating those microbial processes
which augment the availability of nutrients that can be
easily assimilated by plants. Bio-fertilizers harness at-
mospheric nitrogen with the help of specialized micro-
organisms which may be free living in soil or symbiotic
with plants.
Nitrogen fixers
1. Symbiotic: - Rhizobium, inoculants for legumes.
2. Non-symbiotic: - For cereals, millets and vegetables.
a) Bacteria:-
i) Aerobic:-Azatobacter, Azomonas, Azospirillum.
ii) Anaerobic:- Closteridium, chlorobium
iii) Facultative anaerobes- Bacillus, Eisherichia
b) Blue green algae- Anabaena, Anabaenopsis, Nostoe
A. Phosphate solubilizing micro-organisms.
B. Cellulolytic and lignolytic micro organisms.
C. Sulphur dissolving bacteria.
D. Azolla.

Integrated Nutrient Management (INM)

e Judicious combination of organic, inorganic and biofer-
tilizers which replenishes the soil nutrients which are
removed by the crops is referred as Integrated Nutrient
Management system

e To sustain the productivity of different crops and crop-
ping systems, efficient nutrient management is vital.
There is a need to develop more efficient, economic and
integrated system of nutrient management for realiz-
ing high crop productivity without diminishing soil
fertility

Do you know?

The Buckingham Palace Declaration has been devel-
oped by the United for Wildlife International Taskforce
on the Transportation of Illegal Wildlife Products.

24.12 WEEDS

e Weeds are unwanted and undesirable plant that inter-
fere with utilization of land and water resources and
thus adversely affect crop production and human wel-
fare

e They are gregarious in nature compared to crop
plants.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 349 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Harmful effects of weeds
1. Weeds compete with main crop for space, light, mois-
tire and soil nutrients thus causing reduction in yield.

2. Affect quality of farm produce, livestock products such
as milk and skin

3. Act as alternate host for pests and pathogens

4. Cause health problems to human beings eg; Parthe-
nium causes allergy

5. Increase cost of cultivation due to weeding problem

6. Aquatic weeds transpire large quantity of water, ob-
struct flow of water

7. Reduce the land value (if cynodon, parthenium are
present in the land )

8. Some weeds are poisonous to livestock.
Beneficial effects of weeds

Weed as soil binders

BR

as manure
as human food
as fodder
Weed as fuel

Weed as mats and screens

Wag wD

Weed as medicine: Many weeds have great therapeutic
properties and used as medicine. Eg.

Jaundice

Scorpion sting

Improves memory
Asthma, piles

Stimulates milk secretion

Phyllanthus niruri -
Eclipta alba -
Centella asiatica -
Cynodon dactylon -
Cyperus rotundus -

8. Weed as indicators: Weeds are useful as indicators of
good and bad soils. Colonum occurs in rich soils while
Cymbopogon denotes poor light soil and Sedges are
found in ill-drained soils

e Genetically modified crops (GM crops, or biotech crops)
are plants, the DNA of which has been modified using
genetic engineering techniques, which are then used in
agriculture.

Watershed Management

e A watershed is an area of land and water bounded by a
drainage divide within which the surface runoff collects
and flows out of the watershed through a single outlet
into a lager river (or) lake.

Micro Irrigation

e Micro irrigation is defined as the methods in which low
volume of water is applied at low pressure & high fre-

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

quency. The system has extensive network of pipes at
operated at low pressure. At pre-determined spacing
outlets are provided for emission water generally known
as emitters.

Sprinkler Irrigation

e In the sprinkler method of irrigation, water is sprayed
into the air and allowed to fall on the ground surface
somewhat resembling rainfall. The spray is developed
by the flow of water under pressure through small ori-
fices or nozzles.

Drip irrigation:

e Drip irrigation is also called trickle irrigation and in-
volves dripping water onto the soil at very low rates
from a system of small diameter plastic pipes fitted with
outlets called emitters.

e Water is applied close to plants so that only part of the
soil in which the roots grow is wetted, unlike surface
and sprinkler irrigation, which involves wetting the
whole soil profile.

Terracing:

e “A terrace is an embankment or ridge of earth con-
structed across a slope to control runoff and minimize
soil erosion”.

e It reduces the length of the hill side slope, thereby re-
ducing sheet and rill erosion and prevents formation of
gullies.

Do you know?
The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has suspended

the environment clearance (EC) given to the 780 MW
Nyamjang Chhu hydel power project in Arunachal
Pradesh.

24.13 SOIL

Soils are a thin layer on top of most of Earth’s land surface.
This thin layer is a basic natural resource and deeply af-
fects every other part of the ecosystem. Soils are composed
of three main ingredients: minerals of different sizes, or-
ganic materials from the remains of dead plants and ani-
mals, and open space that can be filled with water or air.
A good soil for growing most plants should have about 45%
minerals (with a mixture of sand, silt, and clay), 5% or-
ganic matter, 25% air, and 25% water.

288

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 350 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Soils develop in response to several factors:

1. Parent material: This refers to the rock and minerals
from which the soil derives. The natural of the parent
rock, which can be either native to the area or trans-
ported to the area by wind, water, or glacier, has a di-
rect effect on the ultimate soil profile.

2. Climate: This is measured by precipitation and tem-
perature. It results in partial weathering of the parent
material, which forms the substrate for soil.

3. Living organisms: These include the nitrogen-fixing
bacterial Rbizobium, fungi, insects, worms, snails, etc.,
that help to decompose litter and recycle nutrients.

4. Topography: This refers to the physical characteristics
of the location where the soil is formed. Topographic
factors that affect a soil’s profile include drainage, slope
direction, elevation and wind exposure.

With sufficient time, a mature soil profile reaches a state
of equilbrium. Feedback mechanisms involving both abiotic
and biotic factors work to preserve the mature soil profile.
The relative abundance of sand, silt, and clay is called the
soil texture.

Soil Components

Clay: very find particles. Compacts easily. Forms large,
dense clumps when wet. Low permeability to water; there-
fore, upper layers become waterlogged.

Gravel: Coarse particles. Consists of rock fragments.

Loam: About equal mixtures of clay, sand, slit, and humus.
Rich in nutrients. Holds water but does not become water-
logged.

Sand: Sedimentary material coarser than slit. Water flows
through too quickly for most crops. Good for crops and
plants requiring low amounts of water.

Slit: Sedimentary material consisting of very fine particles
between the size of sand and clay. Easily transported by
water.

e Soil is a natural body of mineral and organic constitu-
ents differentiated into horizons usually unconsolidated,
of variable depth which differs among themselves as
well as from the underlying parent material in morphol-
ogy, physical makeup, chemical properties and compo-
sition and biological characteristics.

e Soil profile: The vertical section of the soil showing the
various layers from the surface to the unaffected parent
material is known as a soil profile. The various layers
are known as horizons.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

There are 5 master horizons in the soil profile. Not all
soil profiles contain all 5 horizons; and so, soil profiles
differ from one location to another.

A horizon

E horizon

B horizon

C horizon

R horizon

Soil Profile

The 5 master horizons are represented by the letters:
O, A, E, B, and C.

O: The O horizon is a surface horizon that is comprised
of organic material at various stages of decomposition.
It is most prominent in forested areas where there is
the accumulation of debris fallen from trees.

A: The A horizon is a surface horizon that largely con-
sists of minerals (sand, silt, and clay) and with appreci-
able amounts of organic matter. This horizon is
predominantly the surface layer of many soils in grass-
lands and agricultural lands.

E: The E horizon is a subsurface horizon that has been
heavily leached. Leaching is the process in which soluble
nutrients are lost from the soil due to precipitation or
irrigation. The horizon is typically light in color. It is
generally found beneath the O horizon.

B: The B horizon is a subsurface horizon that has ac-
cumulated from the layer(s) above. It is a site of deposi-
tion of certain minerals that have leached from the
layer(s) above.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.
