--- PAGE 080 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Based on light penetration and plant distribution they
are classified as photic and aphotic zones

Photic zone:

e It is the upper layer of the aquatic ecosystems, up to
which light penetrates and within which photosynthetic
activity is confined.

e The depth of this zone depends on the transparency of
water.

e Both photosynthesis and respiration activity takes
place.

e photic (or “euphotic”) zone is the lighted and usually
well-mixed portion that extends from the lake sur-
face down to where the light level is 1% of that at the
surface.

Aphotic zone:

e The lower layers of the aquatic ecosystems, where light
penetration and plant growth are restricted forms the
aphotic zone.

¢ Only respiration activity takes place.

e aphotic zone is positioned below the littoral and photic
zones to bottom of the lake where light levels are too low
for photosynthesis. Respiration occurs at all depths so the
aphotic zone is a region of oxygen consumption. This deep,
unlit region is also known as the profundal zone.

Winterkill

Snow cover of ice on water body can effectively cut off
light, plunging the waters into darkness. Hence pho-

tosynthesis stops but respiration continues. Thus in
shallow lakes, the oxygen get depleted. Fish die, but
we won't know it until the ice melts and we find float-
ing fish. This condition is known as winterkill.

Dissolved oxygen:

e In aquatic ecosystems oxygen is dissolved in water,
where its concentration varies constantly depending on
factors that influence the input and output of oxygen in
water.

e In fresh water the average concentration of dissolved oxygen
is 0.0010 per cent (also expressed as 10 parts per million or
10 ppm) by weight, which is 150 times lower than the con-
centration of oxygen in an equivalent volume of air.

e Oxygen enters the aquatic ecosystem through the air
water interface and by the photosynthetic activities of
aquatic plants.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Therefore, the quantity of dissolved oxygen present in
an ecosystem depends on the rate at which the aforesaid
two processes occur.

e Dissolved oxygen escapes the water body through air-
water interface and through respiration of organisms
(fish, decomposers, zooplanktons, etc).

e The amount of dissolved oxygen retained in water is
also influenced by temperature. Oxygen is less soluble
in warm water. Warm water also enhances decomposer
activity. Therefore, increasing the temperature of a wa-
terbody increases the rate at which oxygen is depleted
from water.

e When the dissolved oxygen level falls below 3-5 ppm,
many aquatic organisms are likely to die.

Other limiting factors which influence on aquatic produc-
tivity are

Transparency:

e Transparency affects the extent of light penetration.

e Suspended particulate matters such as clay, silt, phyto-
plankton, etc make the water turbid.

¢ Consequently it limits the extent of light penetration
and the photosynthetic activity in a significant way.

Temperature:

e The water temperature changes less rapidly than the
temperature of air because water has a considerably
higher specific heat than air, i.e. larger amounts of heat
energy must be added to or taken away from water to
raise or lower its temperature.

e Since water temperatures are less subject to change, the
aquatic organisms have narrow temperature tolerance
limit.

e Asaresult, even small changes in water temperature are
a great threat to the survival of aquatic organisms when
compared to the changes in air temperatures in the ter-
restrial organisms.

The classification of organisms and limiting factors dis-
cussed here apply in general to all aquatic ecosystems -
lakes,Ponds, Rivers, Streams, Estuaries, oceans and seas.

Do you know?

Bats are social animals. They hang UPSIDE DOWN
when they sleep. They feed at night (they are “noctur-

nal”) and spend the day sleeping in caves or in tree
tops. They are the second largest group of mammals
after rodents.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 081 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY Q@, 0° A Do ENVIRONMENT

4.2. LAKE ECOLOGY known as Freshwater, Brackish or Saline lakes (similar

Any - body of standing water, generally large enough in to that of classification of aquatic ecosystem).

area and depth, irrespective of its hydrology , ecology, and e On the basis of their nutrient content, they are catego-
other characteristics is generally known as lake. rized as Oligotrophic (very low nutrients), Mesotrophic

. (moderate nutrients) and Eutrophic (highly nutrient rich).
4.2.1. Ageing of Lakes , . . : .
e Vast majority of lakes in India are either eutrophic or

mesotrophic because of the nutrients derived from their
surroundings or organic wastes entering them.

e Like any organism, lakes are born as they originate by
various geological and geomorphic events, and ‘grow’
with time to change in their various morphological and
functional characteristics and eventually die. 4.2.3. General Characteristics of Oligotrophic

° They receive their water from surface runoff (some- 4d eutrophic Lakes
times also groundwater discharge) and along with it

Type of lake

various chemical substances and mineral matter eroded .
from the land | Parameter _ Parameter _| Oligotrophie Eutrophic

¢ Over periods spanning millennia, ‘ageing’ occurs as the . Aquatic plant Eliminated
lakes accumulate mineral and organic matter and grad- production due to
ually, get filled up. Eutrophication

. Aquatic Eliminated
The nutrient-enrichment of the lakes promotes the growth =— due to
of algae, aquatic plants and various fauna. This process is production Eutrophication
known as natural eutrophication. 3. Aquatic plant High
Similar nutrient enrichment of lakes at an accelerated ae eee ee
rate is caused by human activities (discharge of waste- 1. Oxygen in the | Present Absent
waters or agricultural runoff) and the consequent age- 7 hypolimnion ie
ing phenomenon is known as ‘cultural eutrophication’.
(bottom layer)

5. Depth Tend to be Tend to be

Do you know? deeper shallower

forest. Because of their size, from 2 to 2 inches long, they
are hard to see. Poison frogs warn predators with bril-

7. Total salts or | Usually lower | Sometimes
liant colors and patterns. There are many species of poi- conductance higher
son frogs that can be found in every color under the sun! Number of Many Fewer
They prey on invertebrates, especially certain ant species, plant and
which build up really strong poisons in the frog. animal species

4.2.2. In India 4.2.4. Removal of the nutrients from a lake

Poison Dart frogs live in rainforest habitats in Central Water quality | Good Poor
and South America. They can be found in trees, as well for domestic &
as under leaves and logs and rocks on the floor of the industrial uses

e In India, natural lakes (relatively few) mostly lie in the e Flushing with nutrient-poor waters.
Himalayan region , the floodplains of Indus, Ganga and e

Deep water abstraction.
Brahmaputra.

¢ On-site P-elimination by flocculation/flotation with water

e In the semi-arid and arid regions of western and pen- backflow, or floating Plant NESSIE with adsorbents.

insular India, tens of thousands of water bodies have . .
been constructed over millennia e On-site algae removal by filters and P-adsorbers.

© Lake ‘Sudarshan’ in Gujarat’s Girnar area was perhaps e On-site algae skimming and separator thickening.

the oldest man-made lake in India, dating back to e Artificial mixing / Destratification (permanent or inter-
300 BC. mittent).

e Lakes are also classified on the basis of their water e Harvest of fishes and macrophytes.
chemistry. Based on the levels of salinity, they are © Sludge removal.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 082 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Ameenpur Lake - First Biodiversity Heritage Site

Ameenpur Lake gets the status of the first Biodiversity
Heritage Site in the country under the biodiversity act,
2002. it is an ancient man-made lake in a western part of
Telangana. Biodiversity Heritage Site is areas of biodiver-
sity importance, which harbor rich biodiversity, wild rela-
tives of crops, or areas, which lie outside the protected area
network. Biodiversity Heritage sites are managed by a lo-
cally constituted Biodiversity Management Committee and
get funding for its protection.

Do you know?

Under Green India Mission (GIM), perspective plans and
annual plans of operations of six States have been ap-
proved in the first sitting of the National Executive Coun-
cil held in May 2015.

4.3. EUTROPHICATION

e Greek word - Eutrophia means adequate & healthy nu-
trition.

e Eutrophication is a syndrome of ecosystem, response to
the addition of artificial or natural nutrients such as
nitrates and phosphates through fertilizer, sewage, etc
that fertilize the aquatic ecosystem.

e It is primarily caused by the leaching of phosphate and
- or nitrate containing fertilisers from agricultural
lands into lakes or rivers.

these pollutants cause
aquatic plant growth of
algae, duckweed and other plants.

QJ O°@ 875 ENVIRONMENT

The growth of green algae which we see in the lake
surface layer is the physical identification of an Eu-
trophication.

Some algae and blue-green bacteria thrive on the excess
ions and a population explosion covers almost entire
surface layer is known as algal bloom. This growth is
unsustainable, however.

As Algal Bloom covers the surface layer, it restricts the
penetration of sunlight. Diffusion of gas from atom

Oxygen is required by all respiring animals in the water
and it is replenished by diffusion and photosynthesis of
green plants.

The oxygen level is already low because of the popula-
tion explosion and further oxygen is taken up by micro-
organisms which feed off the dead algae during
decomposition process.

Due to reduced oxygen level, fishes and other aquatic
organism suffocate and they die.

The anaerobic conditions can promote growth of bac-
teria which produces toxins deadly to aquatic organ-
isms, birds and mammals.

All this eventually leads to degradation of aquatic eco-
system and death of its organisms.

It often leads to change in animal and plant population
& degradation of water & habitat quality.

5. Death of the ecosystem:
oxygen levels reach a point
where no life is possible.
Fish and other organisms die.

depletes oxygen:

dead plants are broken down by
bacteria decomposers), using up
even more oxygen in the water.

Process of Eutrophication

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 083 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

4.3.1. Types
1. Natural

e Deposition of nutrients [such as depositional environ-
ments. When the nutrients flow into the system on tem-
poral basics.

e It Occurs over centuries

e Eg. Seasonally inundated tropical flood plains
2. Manmade

e Occurs in decades

e These inputs may come from untreated sewage dis-
charges, runoff of fertilizer from farm fields, golf
courses, park , etc. & from animal wastes.

e Combustion of fossil fuel [produces gases - nitrogen
oxides

e Growing urban population in the coastal areas

4.3.2. Sources

1. Point sources
e Directly attributable to one influence

e In point source nutrient waste travels directly from
source to water.

e Point sources are easy to regulate.

Trees
T - Timber, the first and the foremost use of trees

R - Restoration, reclamation and rejuvenation of denuded
and disturbed soils by using trees to control soil ero-
sion and desertification, protect watersheds, improve
soil nutrient status (by growing nitrogen-fixing trees)
and retain moisture in the soil

E - Ecological, eco-developmental and environmental use
of trees for effective and efficient purification of the

environment because trees act as oxygen banks and
eliminate air pollutants; for abating or moderating
temperature, noise and wind by planting trees as
environmental screens, thus affecting the microcli-
mate; for harboring wildlife; for maintaining biodi-
versity; and for conserving energy

E - Educational and recreational value in gardening,
landscaping, art, culture and religion

S - Source of sustenance; i.e., food, fuel, fodder, fertilizer,
fiber, medicine, tannin, dyes, oils, etc.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

2. Non-point source
e Is from various ill-defined and diffuse sources

e Vary spatially and temporarily and are difficult to
regulate.

FLOW CHART

Agricultural runoff, untreated sewage, etc
Transportation to the aquatic ecosystem

Nutrient accumulation and enrichment
Overgrowth of Algae

Algal Bloom
Algae covering the aquatic surface layer

Restricts the sunlight penetration,
Diffusion of D.O.

Underground aquatic Algae, plant’s die
Bacterial Decomposition consumes the available
oxygen in the aquatic ecosystem

Anoxia condition (Devoid of oxygen)
All aquatic organism die due to lack of D.O

Degradation of aquatic ecosystem

4.3.2. Effects

Change in ecosystem:

e Eutrophication eventually create detritus layer in the
ponds & lakes and produces successively shallower
depth of surface water.

e Eventually the water body is reduced into marsh whose
plant community is transformed from an aquatic envi-
ronment to recognizable terrestrial ecosystem.

Decreased biodiversity

e Algal blooms restrict the sunlight to penetrate & affects
the photosynthesizing plants. It causes death of plants.

e Bacteria consumes all the oxygen on decomposition &
results in devoid of oxygen. Eventually it leads to death
of all living organism in aquatic ecosystem.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 084 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

New species invasion

Eutrophication may cause the ecosystem competitive by
transforming the normal limiting nutrient to abundant
level. This cause shifting in species composition of eco-
system

Toxicity

Some algal blooms when die or eaten, release neuro &
hepatotoxins which can kill aquatic organism & pose
threat to humans. (e.g) Shellfish poisoning.

Depletion of dissolved oxygen level.

Increased incidences of fish kills & loss of desirable fish
species & reduction in harvesting

Loss of coral reefs.
Decrease in water transparency and increased turbidity.
Affects navigation due to increased turbidity.

Colour (yellow, green, red), smell and water treatment
problems.

Increased biomass of inedible toxic phytoplankton
Increase in bloom of gelatinous zooplankton
Increased biomass of benthic and epiphytic algae

Unsuitable for aesthetic recreation, and reduction in
value of water body

Do you know?

The world’s tallest tree is a coast redwood in Califor-
nia, measuring more than 360 ft or 110 m.

Mitigation

Riparian buffer

Interfaces between a flowing body of water and land
created near the waterways, farms, roads, etc. in an
attempt to filter pollution.

Sediments and nutrients are deposited in the buffer
zones instead of deposition in water.

Minimizing the non-point pollution.
Nitrogen testing & modeling

N-Testing is a technique to find the optimum amount of
fertilizer required for crop plants. It will reduce the
amount of nitrogen lost to the surrounding area.

Treatment of Industrial effluents
Organic farming & Integrated Farming System.
Reduction in livestock densities

Improving the efficiency of use of fertilizer

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Treatment of runoff from street & storm drains

Reduction in nitrogen emission from vehicles and power
plants

Increase in efficiency of nitrogen & phosphorous re-
moval from municipal waste water

Policies

Multi dimensional in Nature should include
Education & awareness

Research, monitoring & evaluation
Regulations.

Fiscal & economic incentives

Ecosystem preservation & restoration

4.4. HARMFUL ALGAL BLOOMS

Algae or phytoplankton are microscopic organisms that
can be found naturally in coastal waters. They are
major producers of oxygen and food for many of the
animals that live in these waters.

When environmental conditions are favorable for their
development, these cells may multiply rapidly and form
high numbers of cells and this is called an algal bloom.

A bloom often results in a color change in the water.
Algal blooms can be any color, but the most common
ones are red or brown. These blooms are commonly
referred to as red or brown tides.

Most algal blooms are not harmful but some produce
toxins and do affect fish, birds, marine mammals and
humans. The toxins may also make the surrounding air
difficult to breathe. These are known as Harmful Algal
Blooms (HABs).

4.4.2. Why Red Tide is a misnomer?

“Red Tide” is a common name for such a phenomenon
where certain phytoplankton species contain pigments
and “bloom” such that the human eye perceives the
water to be discolored.

Blooms can appear greenish, brown, and even reddish
orange depending upon the type of organism, the type
of water, and the concentration of the organisms.

The term “red tide” is thus a misnomer because blooms
are not always red, they are not associated with tides,
they are usually not harmful, and some species can be
harmful or dangerous at low cell concentrations that do
not discolor the water.

They are scientifically referred as Harmful Algal Blooms
(HABs).

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 085 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

4.4.3. What are the causes of these blooms?

e Blooms occur when several colonies start combining
rapidly when conditions such as nutrient concentra-
tions, salinity and temperature are optimal.

e Blooms can be due to a number of reasons. Two com-
mon causes are nutrient enrichment and warm waters.

e Nutrient enrichment of water, especially phosphates and
nitrogen, is often the result of pollution and can cause
algal blooms.

e Water temperature has also been related to the occur-
rence of algal blooms, with unusually warm water being
conducive to blooms.

4.4.4. How are HABs dangerous to fish and
humans?

e HABs can deplete oxygen in water and lead to low dis-
solved oxygen levels.

¢ How it depletes oxygen? When masses of algae die and
decompose, the decaying process can deplete oxygen
in the water, causing the water to become so low in
oxygen.

e When oxygen levels become too low, fish suffocate
and die.

e Some algae species in blooms produce potent neurotox-
ins that can be transferred through the food web where
they affect and even kill the higher forms of life such as
zooplankton, shellfish, fish, birds, marine mammals,
and even humans that feed either directly or indirectly
on them.

Do you know?

Elephants live in a social hierarchy dominated by older
females. Females travel in long-lasting social units of
about half a dozen adult females and their offspring,
with the unit being led by a single older female, the
matriarch.

4.4.5. Is HAB’s an environmental hazard?

e Yes, it is because these events can make people sick
when contaminated shellfish are eaten, or when people
breathe aerosolized HAB toxins near the beach.

e In addition, HAB events can result in the closure of
shellfish beds, massive fish kills, death of marine mam-
mals and seabirds, and alteration of marine habitats.

e Asa consequence, HAB events adversely affect com-
mercial and recreational fishing, tourism, and valued

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

habitats, creating a significant impact on local econo-
mies and the livelihood of coastal residents.

4.4.6. How do we get exposed to HAB toxins?

¢ Most illness associated with HAB exposure is the result
of consuming toxins that are present in shellfish or
finfish.

e Some HAB toxins can become airborne during a bloom
and people can become ill by inhaling toxins.

4.4.7. Is it safe to eat seafood?
e In general, it is safe to eat seafood.

e However, consuming shellfish that have been harvested
from waters with high levels of harmful algae and con-
suming fish that have lesions or that were caught in an
area during an algal bloom can result in illness.

4.4.8. HABs and Climate Change

e Because the growth, toxicity, and distribution of harm-
ful algal bloom (HAB) species are all tied to the environ-
ment, changes in climate can change the occurrence,
severity, and impacts of HAB events.

4.5. WET LAND ECOSYSTEM

e Wetlands are areas intermediate in character between
deepwater and terrestrial habitats, also transitional in
nature, and often located between them.

e These habitats experience periodic flooding from adja-
cent deepwater habitats and therefore supports plants
and animals specifically adapted to such shallow flood-
ing or water logging of the substrate, were designated
as wetlands.

e They included lake littorals (marginal areas between
highest and lowest water level of the lakes), flood-
plains (areas lying adjacent to the river channels be-
yond the natural levees and periodically flooded
during high discharge in the river) and other marshy
or Swampy areas where water gets stagnated due to
poor drainage or relatively impervious substrata &
Bogs, fens and mangroves due to similar ecological
characteristics

4.5.1. Definition

e Areas of marsh, fen, peatland/water, whether natural
(or) artificial, permanent (or) temporary with water that
is static (or) flowing, fresh, brackish (or) salt, including
areas of marine water the depth of which at low tide
does not exceed 6 mtrs.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 086 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY Q@, 0° A Do ENVIRONMENT

4.5.2. Characteristics
© Covered by water (or) has waterlogged soil for atleast seven days during the growing season.
e Adopted plant life (hydrophytes)

e Hydric soils (not enough O2 available for some plants)

4.5.3. Wetlands Classification

WETLAND

|

INLAND COASTAL
WETLAND WETLAND

-———_ >—_—+—_,

Natural Man made Natural Man made

L L L tL

Lakes / Ponds Reservoirs Estuary e Salt pans
Ox-bow Lakes Tanks Lagoon e Aquculture
Waterlogged Waterlogged Creek
Seasonal Ash pond Backwater
Swamp/marsh Bay

Coral reef

Tidal flat

Mangroves

Salt marsh

4.5.4. Functions of Wetlands ¢ Comprise an important resource for sustainable tour-
e Habitat to aquatic flora and fauna, as well as numerous ism, recreation and cultural heritage

species of birds, including migratory species. e Stabilization of local climate
e Filtration of sediments and nutrients from surface e Source of livelihood to local people

water e Genetic reservoir for various species of plants (espe-
e Nutrients recycling cially rice)
e Water purification e Supporting specific diversity

* Floods mitigation 4.5.5. Reasons for depletion

e Maintenance of stream flow . .
e Conversion of lands for agriculture

e Ground water recharging © Overgrazing

e Provide drinking water, fish, fodder, fuel, etc e Removal of sand from beds
e Control rate of runoff in urban areas e Aqua culture
e Buffer shorelines against erosion e Habitat Destruction and Deforestation

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 087 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Pollution

e Domestic waste

e Agricultural runoff
e Industrial effluents
e Climate change

4.5.6. Mitigation

e Survey and demarcation

e Protection of natural regeneration

e Artificial regeneration

e Protective measures

e Afforestation (percentage survival to be indicated)
e Weed control

e Soil conservation measures & afforestation
e Wildlife conservation

e Removal of encroachments

e Eutrophication abatement

e Environmental awareness

4.5.7. Distinction from Lakes

e Although the Ministry of Environment and Forests has
not adopted a clear distinction between lakes and wet-
lands, the National Lake Conservation Programme
(NLCP) considers lakes as standing water bodies which
have a minimum water depth of 3 m, generally cover a
water spread of more than ten hectares, and have no or
very little aquatic vegetation (macrophytes).

e These water bodies are used primarily for drinking
water supplies, irrigation and/or recreation.

e Excessive growth of macrophytes (both submerged and
free-floating) generally present in wetland, affects the
water quality adversely and interfere with the utiliza-
tion of the water body.

e However, marginal aquatic vegetation (wetlands), par-
ticularly comprising of emergent plants and those in-
habiting waterlogged soils, is not only desirable but is
to be promoted because it checks erosion, serves habitat
for wildlife and helps improve water quality.

e Wetlands (generally less than 3 m deep over most of
their area) are usually rich in nutrients (derived from
surroundings and their sediments) and have abundant
growth of aquatic macrophytes.

e They support high densities and diversity of fauna, par-
ticularly birds, fish and macro invertebrates, and there-
fore, have high value for biodiversity conservation. These
shallow lakes are rightfully categorized as wetlands.

Qd O°@ Wo ENVIRONMENT

e lakes are generally less important when compared to
wetland from the viewpoint of ecosystem and biodiver-
sity conservation.

4.5.8. Comparison between Lake and Wetlands

Sl. | Characteristic Lake Wetland
no (shallow lake)

various process | Fluvial/
Geomorphic
processes

2. |Water turnover |Permanent Permanent or
Temporary

3. |Water level relatively small | Relatively Large
changes

4. |Littoral: Small Large
Pelagial ratio
5. |Thermal Yes No
stratification
6. |Vertical mixing |Thermally Wind regulated
regulated

7. |Dominant Phyto plankton | Macrophytes
Producer

8. |Food chain Detritus
Pathway

g. |Nutrient Cycles |Microbial loops | Microbial loop
less important |dominant
10. |Productivity Low High

11. |Trophic status |Oligo trophic |Mostly Eutrophic
(Except desirable
in bogs)

12. |Biodiversity Generally low |Generally high
13. |Functions- Less Significant
Flood control | Significant

14. |Groundwater |Negligible/low |Low-high

recharge

15. |Waste No Yes
treatment

16. |Management [Control of Biodiversity
objectives eutrophication |conservation

High Specific
Water quality |Functions

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 088 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

4.5.9. India’s Wetlands

e Wetlands are areas of critical ecological significance: as
they support biodiversity, support millions of people
directly and indirectly, protect from storms, flood con-
trol, improve water quality, supply food, fiber and raw
materials.

e India has totally 27,403 wetlands, of which 23,444 are
inland wetlands and 3,959 are coastal wetlands. Wet-
lands occupy 18.4% of the country’s area of which 70%
are under paddy cultivation.

e Natural wetlands in India range from high altitude wet-
lands in Himalayas; flood plains of the major river sys-
tems; saline and temporary wetlands of the arid and
semi-arid regions; coastal wetlands such as lagoons,
backwaters, estuaries, mangroves, swamps and coral
reefs, and so on.

Do you know?

Kannimara teak is one of the largest living teak tree
in the world. It has an amazing girth of 6.48m and a
crown height of 48.75m It is believed to be around 400
years old.

According to the local tribal belief here when this tree
was tried to cut down, the blood spurted out from the
place of cut. This tree was being since then wor-
shipped by the local tribes in Parambikulam as “Vir-
gin tree”. Kannimara - ‘ Kanni’ means ‘Virgin’. This
tree has been awarded ‘Mahavriksha Puraskar’ by the
Government of India.

4.5.10. National Wetlands Conservation
Programme (NWCP)
e NWCP was implemented in the year 1985-86.

e Under the programme, 115 wetlands (Annexure) have
been identified by the Ministry which require urgent
conservation and management interventions.

Aim

e Conservation of wetlands to prevent their further deg-
radation and ensuring their wise use for the benefit
of local communities and overall conservation of bio-
diversity.

Objectives

e to lay down policy guidelines for conservation and man-
agement of wetlands in the country.

e to provide financial assistance for undertaking intensive
conservation measures in the identified wetlands.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e to monitor implementation of the programme; and to
prepare an inventory of Indian wetlands.

e The Central Government is responsible for overall co-
ordination of wetland conservation programmes and
initiatives at the international and national levels. It also
provides guidelines, financial & technical assistance to
state govt.

e Since the land resources belong to them, the State Gov-
ernments/UT Administration are responsible for man-
agement of wetlands and implementation of the NWCP
for ensuring their wise-use.

4.5.11. Criteria for Identification of Wetlands of
National Importance

e Criteria for identification of wetlands of national impor-
tance under NWCP are same as those prescribed under
the ‘Ramsar Convention on Wetlands’ and are as given
below:

e Sites containing representative, rare or unique wetland
types

(i) If it contains a representative, rare, or unique example

of a natural or near-natural wetland type found within
the appropriate biogeographic region.

¢ Criteria based on species and ecological communities

(ii) If it supports vulnerable, endangered, or critically en-
dangered species; or threatened ecological communities.

(iii) If it supports populations of plant and/or animal spe-
cies important for maintaining the biological diversity
of a particular biogeographic region.

(iv) If it supports plant and/or animal species at a critical
stage in their life cycles, or provides refuge during
adverse conditions.

e Specific criteria based on water birds
(v) If it regularly supports 20,000 or more water birds.

(vi) If it regularly supports 1% of the individuals in a pop-
ulation of one species or subspecies of waterbirds.

e Specific criteria based on fish

(vii) If it supports a significant proportion of indigenous
fish subspecies, species or families, life-history stages,
species interactions and/or populations that are rep-
resentative of wetland benefits and/or values and
thereby contributes to global biological diversity.

(viii) If it is an important source of food for fishes, spawn-
ing ground, nursery and/or migration path on which
fish stocks, either within the wetland or elsewhere,
depend. Specific criteria based on water/life and
culture

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 089 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(ix) If it is an important source of food and water resource,
increased possibilities for recreation and eco-tourism,
improved scenic values, educational opportunities, con-
servation of cultural heritage (historic or religious sites).

4.5.12. Montreux Record

Montreux Record is the principal tool under the Ramsar
Convention, is a register of wetland sites on the List of
Wetlands of International Importance

It highlights those sites where adverse changes in ecologi-
cal character have occurred, are occurring, or are likely to
occur as a result of technological developments, pollution
or other human interference and which are therefore in
need of priority conservation attention. It is maintained as
part of the Ramsar List.

Montreux Record are employed to identify priority sites
for positive national and international conservation atten-
tion. Sites may be added to and removed from the Record
only with the approval of the Contracting Parties in which
they lie.

Montreux Record sites in India

Chilika lake, Orissa was placed on the Montreux Record in
1993 due to siltation, which was choking the mouth of the
lake. Following the rehabilitation efforts of the government,
it was removed from the Record in 2002. For this achieve-
ment, the Chilika Development Authority received the
Ramsar Wetland Conservation Award for 2002.

Loktak lake, Manipur was included on the Montreux Re-
cord in 1993 (signifying habitat degradation), as a result of
ecological problems such as deforestation in the catchment
area, infestation of water hyacinth and pollution. The con-
struction a hydroelectric power plant has caused the local
extinction of several native fish species.

Keoladeo national park, Rajasthan was placed on the
Montreux Record in 1990 due to water shortage and un-
balanced grazing regime around it. The invasive growth
of the grass Paspalum distichum has changed the eco-
logical character of large areas of the site, reducing its
suitability for certain waterbird species, notably the Sibe-
rian crane.

Loktak lake and keoladeo national park are the two Mon-
treux Record sites in India

Neknampur Lake - First FTW Lake

The Neknampur Lake, Hyderabad is the largest floating
treatment wetland in the country. Floating treatment wet-
land workson the basis of hydroponics technique. Hydro-
ponics permits plants to grow on the water with the help

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

of sunlight (no need of soil). A floating island unit is es-
sentially a platform designed using styrofoam, bamboo,
gunny bags and coirand it performs the function of a wet-
land.

4.6. ESTUARY ECOSYSTEM

e Estuaries are located where river meets the sea. Estu-
aries are water bodies where the flow of freshwater
from river mixes with salt water transported, by tide,
from the ocean. Estuaries are the most productive
water bodies in the world. They are located at the lower
end of a river and are subject to tidal fluctuations.

e Estuaries are either once or twice, daily washed by the
seawater.

4.6.1. Characters

e An Estuary is a semi enclosed coastal body of water
with one or more rivers or streams flowing into it.

e It has a free connection with open sea.

e The complete salinity range from 0-35 ppt is seen
from the head (river end) to the mouth (sea end) of an
estuary.

e Anestuary has very little wave action, so it provides a
calm refuge from the open sea. It provides the shelter
for some of the animals.

e It is the most productive region as it receives the high
amount of nutrients from fresh and marine water.

e Estuaries are most heavily populated areas throughout
the world, with about 60% of the world’s population
living along estuaries and the coast.

Coastal lakes which have their connection with the sea
through small openings are better known as lagoons or
backwaters. They exhibit a gradient in salinity from
freshwater to marine depending upon the extent of in-
fluence of the sea water.

Estuary Formation:

Most estuaries can be grouped into four geomorphic
categories based on the physical processes responsible
for their formation:

(1) rising sea level; (2) movement of sand and sandbars;
(3) glacial processes; and (4) tectonic processes.

e Estuaries are typically classified by their geomorpho-
logical features or by water circulation patterns and can
be referred to by many different names, such as bays,
harbors, lagoons, inlets, etc.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 090 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

The banks of estuarine channels form a favoured loca-
tion for human settlements, which use the estuaries for
fishing and commerce, but nowadays also for dumping
civic and industrial waste.

Estuaries are usually biologically highly productive
zones.

They also act as a filter for some dissolved constituents
in river water; these precipitate in the zone where river
water meets seawater.

More important is the trapping of suspended mud and

sand carried by rivers which leads to delta formations
around estuaries.

4.6.2. A Healthy Estuary

A healthy estuary supports a host of plants and animals.
It stores and recycles Nutrients, traps sediment and
forms a buffer between coastal catchments and the ma-
rine environment. It also absorbs traps and detoxifies
pollutants, acting as a natural water filter. When all
such processes remain functional an estuary is consid-
ered to be healthy state.

Estuaries support diverse habitats, such as mangroves,
salt marshes, sea-grass, mudflats etc.

4.6.3. Life in Estuary

Only certain types of plants and animals specially
adapted to the “brackish” estuarine waters flourish in
the estuaries. Factors influencing the growth and dis-
tribution of organism in an estuary are its salinity and
the amount of flooding.

Estuaries are homes to all kind of terrestrial or land-
based plants and animals, such as wood storks, peli-
cans, coniferous and deciduous trees and butterflies.
Estuaries are also homes to unique aquatic plants and
animals, such as sea turtles and sea lions, sea catfish,
saltworts, eelgrass, saltgrasses, cordgrasses, sea grass,
sedge and bulrush.

Predators are important to the estuary because of their
end position in most consumer food chains.

4.6.4. Benefits of Estuarine Ecosystem

Environmental Benefits

Water quality regulation and groundwater recharge

Habitat, breeding and nursery grounds for plants and
animals

Biological productivity

Social Benefits

QF 6° go

4.

4.

Ty

ENVIRONMENT

Community values

Indigenous values

Recreation values
Knowledge/Research values

Economic Benefits

Commercial fishing

Ports and harbours

Navigation

Tourism

Agriculture, aquaculture and industry

Storm and erosion protection

6.5. India Estuarine Ecosystem

The Country has 14 major, 44 medium and 162 minor
rivers drains into the sea through various estuaries.

Estuaries are an important and distinct component of
the coastal landscape with highly complex ecosystems,
varying physical - chemical properties and having
highly diverse flora and fauna.

Major estuaries occur in the Bay of Bengal. Many estu-
aries are locations of some of the major seaports.

Most of the India’s major estuaries occur on the east
coast. In contrast, the estuaries on the west coast are
smaller.

6.6. Issues of Indian Estuarine Ecosystem

The specific issues which have affected the estuarine
environment in the country are:

. Water flow

Changes in water flow in various estuaries, either far
in excess or much lower than required (e.g., Hooghly,
Narmada, Krishna, Godavari, Pulicat etc.)

Modifications of the estuarine catchments (e.g Most of
the Indian estuaries)

. Pollution & Water Quality

Pollution through industries and combined city sewage
(e.g., all the Indian estuaries)

. Recreation And Tourism

Recreational boating (e g., Hooghly WB; Chilika, Orissa)
Recreational fishing kg., Chilika)
Navigation (e g., Hooghly)

. Ports & Shipping

Dredging (e.g., Hooghly)

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 091 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY ENVIRONMENT

QF 6° go

e Shipping (r g., Hooghly)

Do you know?

5. Land-use Snakes generally lay eggs, some snakes, such as boas,

rattlesnakes and garter snakes, give birth to live
young.

e Expansion of urban and rural settlements (e.g, Hooghly,
Krishna, Cauvery, Pulicat)

Marinas, groynes, land reclamation and other struc-
tures (e.g., Hooghly, Pulicat)

Mining & Industries (e.g., Hooghly, Zuari, Goa)
Agriculture (e.g., all the Estuaries)

Dumping of solid wastes (eg. all the Indian estuaries)

. Commercial Fishing & Aquaculture
Over exploitation of target fish stock due to increased
demand (e.g., all the Indian estuaries)
Reclaiming the fringed areas for intensive aquaculture
in pens ,
obstructing the migratory routes of fish and prawn re-
cruitment (e.g., Chilika, Pulicat)
Polluting the environment through feeding of stocked
fish and prawn in pens (Chilika)
Destruction of biodiversity through prawn seed collec-
tion and operation of small-meshed nets (¢.g., Hooghly,
Chilika, Pulicat)

. Climate Change

Submergence of catchment areas due to rise in water
level (¢.g., all the major Indian estuaries)

Change in biodiversity profile, affecting the production
and productivity (e.g., all the major Indian estuary)

Mangrove tree

4.7. MANGROVES

Mangroves are the characteristic littoral plant forma-
tion of tropical and subtropical sheltered coastlines.
Mangroves are trees and bushes growing below the
high water level of spring tides which exhibits remark-
able capacity for salt water tolerance. - FAO .

4.7.1. Characteristics of mangroves

They are basically evergreen land plants growing on
sheltered shores, typically on tidal flats, deltas, estuar-
ies, bays, creeks and the barrier islands.

The best locations are where abundant silt is brought
down by rivers or on the backshore of accreting sandy
beaches.

Their physiological adaptation to salinity stress and to
water logged anaerobic mud is high.

They require high solar radiation and have the ability
to absorb fresh water from saline/brackish water.

It produces pneumatophores (blind roots) to overcome
respiration problem in the anaerobic soil conditions.

Pneumatophores

Mangroves occur in variety of configurations. Some
species (e.g. Rhizophora) send arching prop roots down
into the water. While other (e.g. Avicennia) send vertical
“Pneumatophores” or air roots up from the mud.

Most mangrove vegetation has lenticellated bank which
facilitates more water loss, produces coppices. Leaves
are thick and contain salt secreting glands.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 092 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Mangroves exhibit Viviparity mode of reproduction. ie.
seeds germinate in the tree itself (before falling to the
ground). This is an adaptative mechanism to overcome
the problem of germination in saline water.

Some secrete excess salt through their leaves as if you
look closely, you can see crystals of salt on the back of
the leaves; others block absorption of salt at their roots.

Adventitious roots which emerged from the main trunk

Do you know?

The word amphibian means two-lives. Amphibians
spend their lives in the water and on land. All amphib-
ians begin their life in water with gills and tails. As
they grow, they develop lungs and legs for their life on
land. Members of this animal class are frogs, toads,
salamanders, newts, and caecilians or blindworms.
Amphibians shed their skin as they grow. Usually the
shed skin is eaten.

4.7.2. Mangrove profile in India

The mangroves of Sundarbans are the largest single
block of tidal holophytic mangroves of the world. The
major species of this dense mangrove forest include
Herritiera fames, Rhizophora spp., Bruguiera spp., Ce-
riops decandra, Sonneratia spp. and Avicennia spp.,
Nypa fruticans are found along the creeks. This man-
grove forest is famous for the Royal Bengal Tiger and
crocodiles. Mangrove areas are being cleared for agri-
cultural use.

The mangroves of Bhitarkanika (Orissa), which is the
second largest in the Indian sub continent, harbour high

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

concentration of typical mangrove species and high ge-
netic diversity.

Mangrove swamps occur in profusion in the intertidal
mudflats on both side of the creeks in the Godavari-
Krishna deltaic regions of Andhra Pradesh.

Mangroves of Pichavaram and Vedaranyam are de-
graded mainly due to construction of aquaculture ponds
and salt pans.

Indian Mangrove Profile

On the west coast of India, mangroves, mostly scrubby
and degraded occur along the intertidal region of estu-
aries and creeks in Maharashtra, Goa and Karnataka.

The mangrove vegetation in the coastal zone of Kerala
is very sparse and thin.

In Gujarat (north-west coast) mangroves Avicennia ma-
rine, Avicennia officinalis and Rhizophora mucronata
are found mainly in Gulf of Kachchh and the Kori
creek.

Mangroves are of scrubby type with stunted growth,
forming narrow, discontinuous patches on soft clayey
mud.

The condition of the mangroves is improving especially
in the Kori creek region, which is a paleodelta of the
Indus river.

In size, mangroves range from bushy stands of dwarf

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 093 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

mangroves found in Gulf of Kuchchh, to taller stands
found in the Sunderbans.

On the Andaman & Nicobar Islands, the small tidal
estuaries, neritic inlets and the lagoons support a dense
and diverse undisturbed mangrove flora.

4.7.3. Role of mangroves

Mangrove plants have (additional) special roots such as
prop roots, pneumatophores which help to impede
water flow and thereby enhance the deposition of sedi-
ment in areas (where it is already occurring), stabilize
the coastal shores, provide breeding ground for fishes.

Mangroves moderate monsoonal tidal floods and re-
duce inundation of coastal lowlands.

It prevents coastal soil erosion.

It protects coastal lands from tsunami, hurricanes and
floods.

Mangroves enhance natural recycling of nutrients.

Mangrove supports numerous flora, avifauna and wild
life.

Provide a safe and favorable environment for breeding,
spawning, rearing of several fishes.

It protects coastal inland from adverse climatic ele-
ments.

It supplies woods, fire wood, medicinal plants and ed-
ible plants to local people.

It provides numerous employment opportunities to local
communities and augments their livelihood.

Do you know?

The King Cobra is not only an excellent climber but a
super swimmer as well. They live in forests near
streams.

Fine, anoxic sediments deposited under mangroves act
as sinks for a variety of heavy (trace) metals which are
scavenged from the overlying seawater by colloidal
particles in the sediments. By cleaning our air, they
taking in carbon dioxide, storing the carbon in their
roots, leaves, branches and in its surrounding silt, and
release oxygen back to the atmosphere, along with a
little methane gas.

4.7.4. Threat

They are destroyed for conversion of area for agricul-
tural purpose, fuel, fodder and, salinization, minig, oil

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

spills, aquacultural (shrimp farming), use of chemical
pesticides & fertilizers, industrial purposes.

4.8. CORAL REEFS

© Coral is actually a living animal. Coral has a symbiotic
relationship (each gives something to the other and gets
something back in return) with ‘zooxanthellae’ micro-
scopic algae which live on coral [i.e. instead of living on
the sea floor, the algae lives up on the coral which is
closer to the ocean surface and so that the algae gets
adequate light].

Zooxanthellae assist the coral in nutrient production
through its photosynthetic activities. These activities
provide the coral with fixed carbon compounds for en-
ergy, enhance calcification ,and mediate elemental nu-
trient flux.

The tissues of corals themselves are actually not the
beautiful colors of the coral reef, but are instead clear
(white). The corals receive their coloration from the
zooxanthellae living within their tissues.

The host coral polyp in return provides its zooxanthel-
lae with a protected environment to live within, and a
steady supply of carbon dioxide for its photosynthetic
processes.

There are two types of corals: hard corals and soft cor-
als, such as sea fans and gorgonians. Only hard corals
build reefs.

The builders of coral reefs are tiny animals called pol-
yps. As these polyps thrive, grow, then die, they leave
their limestone (calcium carbonate) skeletons behind.
The limestone is colonized by new polyps. Therefore, a
coral reef is built up of layers of these skeletons covered
ultimately by living polyps.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 094 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

The reef-building, or hermatypic corals can form a wide
range of shapes. Coral reefs may be branched, table-like,
or look like massive cups, boulders or knobs.

e While the majority of coral reefs are found in tropical

and sub-tropical water, there are also deep water corals

in colder regions.

4.8.1. Cold Water Corals:
e Cold-water corals inhabit deep, cold (39-55 degrees

F), water. The United Nations Environment Pro-
gramme reports that there are more cold-water coral
reefs worldwide than tropical reefs.

There are only about 6 different coral species associ-
ated in building with these reefs. The largest cold-
water coral reef is the Rost Reef off Norway.

4.8.2. Features

They occur in shallow tropical areas where the sea
water is clean, clear and warm.

The coral reef cover in Indian waters is roughly esti-
mated upto 19,000 sq. Km.

Coral reefs are one of the most productive and complex
coastal ecosystems with high biological diversity.

The high productivity is owing to the combination of its
own primary production and support from its sur-
rounding habitat.

Reef building corals are a symbolic association of polyps
(coral animals) and ‘zooxanthellae’ (the microscopic
algae)

The corals are generally slow growing colonies of ani-
mals while zooxanthellae are fast growing plants.

Even though corals live in nutrient poor waters, their
capability to recycle the scarce nutrients (by the whole
nutrient community) is enormous.

In coral reef ecosystem, many invertebrates, verte-
brates, and plants live in close association to the corals,
with tight resource coupling and recycling, allowing
coral reefs to have extremely high productivity and
biodiversity, such that they are referred to as ‘the Trop-
ical Rainforests of the Oceans’.

4.8.3. Classification and their location

The coral reefs are classified depending on their loca-
tions into fringing, patch, barrier and atoll.

The fringing reefs are contiguous with the shore and
they are the most common - by occurring reef form,
found in Andamans.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Patch reefs are isolated and discontinuous patches, lying
shoreward of offshore reef structures as seen in the Palk
bay, Gulf of Mannar and Gulf of Katchchh.

Barrier reefs are linear offshore reef structures that run
parallel to coastlines and arise from submerged shelf
platforms. The water body between the reef and the
shore is termed as lagoon. Barrier reefs are seen in
Nicobar and Lakshadweep.

Atolls are circular or semi circular reefs that arise from
subsiding sea floor platforms as coral reef building
keeps ahead of subsidence. The examples are the atolls
of Lakshadweep and Nicobar.

When the reef building do not keep pace with subsid-
ence, reefs become submerged banks as seen in Lak-
shadweep.

Sea grasses grow on Kavaratti atoll, mangroves are
prevalent on Andaman and Nicobar coral reefs.

Among the four major reef areas of India, Andaman and
Nicobar Islands are found to be very rich in species
diversity followed by the Lakshadweep Islands, the Gulf
of Mannar and finally the Gulf of Kachchh.

4.8.4. Functions of Coral Reefs

Coral reefs are natural protective barriers against ero-
sion and storm surge.

The coral animals are highly adapted for capturing
plankton from the water, thereby capturing nutrients

Largest biogenic calcium carbonate producer
They provide substrate for mangroves

Coral reefs provide habitat for a large variety of animals
and plants including avifauna.

4.8.5. Threat

1.

Natural causes may be due to the outbreak of reef de-
stroying mechanisms, “bleaching” and depletion of es-
sential symbiotants.

Anthrogenic causes —- may be due to chemical pollution
(pesticides, cosmetics, etc), industrial pollution, me-
chanical damage, nutrient loading or sediment loading,
Dredging, shipping, tourism, mining or collection, ther-
mal pollution, intensive fishimg,etc.

Coral reef ecosystems world-wide have been subject to
unprecedented degradation over the past few decades.
Disturbances affecting coral reefs include anthropogenic
and natural events. Recent accelerated coral reef decline
seems to be related mostly to anthropogenic impacts
(overexploitation, overfishing, increased sedimentation

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 095 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY Q@, 0° A Do ENVIRONMENT

and nutrient overloading. Natural disturbances which
cause damage to coral reefs include violent storms,
flooding, high and low temperature extremes, Fl Nino
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events, subaerial expo-
sures, predatory outbreaks and epizootics.

e Coral reef bleaching is a common stress response of
corals to many of the various disturbances mentioned
above.

4.8.6. Coral Bleaching
e Bleaching, or the paling of coral colour occurs when
(i) the densities of zooxanthellae decline and / or

(ii) the concentration of photosynthetic pigments within
the zooxanthellae fall.

Healthy coral - Bleached coral Dead coral -
zooxanthellae zooxanthellae expelled skeleton covered in
in coral tissue from tissue filamentous algae

*22 Zooxanthellae
> Coral polyp

Coral Bleaching

e When corals bleach they commonly lose 60-90% of
their zooxanthellae and each zooxanthella may lose 50-
80% of its photosynthetic pigments.

e Ifthe stress-causing bleaching is not too severe and if it
decreases in time, the affected corals usually regain their
symbiotic algae within several weeks or a few months.

e If zooxanthellae loss is prolonged, i.e. if the stress con-
tinues and depleted zooxanthellae populations do not
recover, the coral host eventually dies.

e High temperature and irradiance stressors have
been implicated in the disruption of enzyme systems
in zooxanthellae that offer protection against oxygen
toxicity.

e Photosynthesis pathways in zooxanthallae are impaired
at temperatures above 30 degrees C, this effect could
activate the disassociation of coral / algal symbiosis.

e Low- or high-temperature shocks results in zooxanthel-
lae low as a result of cell adhesion dysfunction.

e This involves the detachment of cnidarian endodermal
cells with their zooxanthellae and the eventual expul-
sion of both cell types.

4.8.7. Ecological causes of coral bleaching

As coral reef bleaching is a general response to stress,
it can be induced by a variety of factors, alone or in
combination. It is therefore difficult to unequivocally
identify the causes for bleaching events. The following
stressors have been implicated in coral reef bleaching
events.

Temperature (Major Cause)

Coral species live within a relatively narrow tempera-
ture margin, and anomalously low and high sea tem-
peratures can induce coral bleaching. Bleaching is much
more frequently reported from elevated sea water tem-
perature. Bleaching events also occur during sudden
temperature drops accompanying intense upwelling
episodes, seasonal cold-air outbreaks.

Do you know?

All spiders produce silk but not all spiders spin webs.
Silk is used for climbing, to create webs, to build
smooth walls in burrows, build egg sacs, and wrap

prey.

Solar Irradiance

Bleaching during the summer months, during seasonal
temperature and irradiance maxima often occurs dis-
proportionately in shallow-living corals and on the ex-
posed summits of colonies. Solar radiation has been
suspected to play a role in coral bleaching. Both photo-
syntheticaly active radiation (PAR, 400-700nm) and
ultraviolet radiation (UVR, 280-400nm) have been im-
plicated in bleaching.

Subaerial Exposure

Sudden exposure of reef flat corals to the atmosphere
during events such as extreme low tides, ENSO-related
sea level drops or tectonic uplift can potentially induce
bleaching.

Sedimentation

Relatively few instances of coral bleaching have been
linked solely to sediment. It is possible, but has not been
demonstrated, that sediment loading could make zoox-
anthellate species more likely to bleach.

Fresh Water Dilution

Rapid dilution of reef waters from storm-generated pre-
cipitation and runoff has been demonstrated to cause
coral reef bleaching. Generally, such bleaching events

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 096 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

are rare and confined to relatively small, nearshore
areas.

Inorganic Nutrients

e Rather than causing coral reef bleaching, an increase
in ambient elemental nutrient concentrations (e.g. am-
monia and nitrate) actually increases zooxanthellae
densities 2-3 times. Although eutrophication is not di-
rectly involved in zooxanthellae loss, it could cause sec-
ondary adverse affects such as lowering of coral
resistance and greater susceptibility to diseases.

Xenobiotics

e Zooxanthellae loss occurs during exposure of coral to
elevated concentrations of various chemical contami-
nants, such as Cu, herbicides and oil. Because high con-
centrations of xenobiotics are required to induce
zooxanthellae loss, bleaching from such sources is usu-
ally extremely localized and / or transitory .

Epizootics

e Pathogen induced bleaching is different from other sorts
of bleaching. Most coral diseases cause patchy or whole
colony death and sloughing of soft tissues, resulting in
a white skeleton (not to be confused with bleached cor-
als). A few pathogens have been identified the cause
translucent white tissues, a protozoan.

Do you know?

India updated its National Biodiversity Action Plan
(NBAP) and also developed 12 National Biodiversity
Targets in 2014in line with 20 global Aichi biodiversity
targets.

4.9 GOVERNMENT MEASURES TO
PROTECT MANGROVE FOREST
AND CORAL REEFS (OR COASTAL
ECOSYSTEM)

e The Government seeks to protect, sustain and augment
mangroves and coral reef in the country by both regu-
latory and promotional measures.

e Under the regulatory measures, the Coastal Regulation
Zone (CRZ) Notification (2011) and the Island Protection
Zone (IPZ) Notification 2011 regulates the development
activities along the Sea coast and tidal influenced water
bodies.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e The mangroves and coral reefs areas are categorized as
ecological sensitive areas (CRZ-I) where no new con-
structions are permitted except projects relating to De-
partment of Atomic Energy; pipelines, conveying
systems including transmission lines; installation of
weather radar for monitoring of cyclones movement and
prediction by Indian Meteorological Department and
construction of trans harbour sea link and without af-
fecting the tidal flow of water.

e To enforce and implement the CRZ and IPZ Notifica-
tions, the Ministry of Environment and Forests has
constituted the National and State/UT level Coastal
Zone Management Authorities.

Do you know?

The Ministry has partnered with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in a global project
on Biodiversity Finance Initiative (BIOFIN).

The Ministry of Environment & Forests also provides
financial assistance to Coastal States/Union Territories,
who so request, under its Centrally Sponsored Scheme
for conservation and management of mangroves and
coral reef.

e In addition Coral reef is included in Schedule I of the
Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 which affords it the high-
est degree of protection.

e Further Protected Areas, viz.4 National Parks, 96 Sanc-
tuaries and 3 Marine Biosphere Reserve have been cre-
ated all over the country under the provisions of the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 to conserve marine life
including coral reef.

e The Wildlife Crime Control Bureau has also been set up
to strengthen the enforcement of law for control of
poaching and illegal trade in wildlife and its products.

4.10. KEY INITIATIVES TO PROTECT
MARINE AND COASTAL
ENVIRONMENTS

4.10.1. Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction
System (COMAPS)

e Being implemented from 1991.

e Assesses the health of coastal waters and facilitates
management of pollution-related issues

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 097 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Programme was restructured and modified in 2000-
2001 to include pollution monitoring; liaison, regulation
and legislation; and consultancy services.

4.10.2. Land Ocean Interactions in the Coastal
Zone (LOICZ)

e Launched in 1995

e Investigates the effects of global change on the coastal
zone

e Aims to develop, on a scientific basis, the integrated
management of coastal environments

Do you know?

Male snakes will try to attract a female by doing a type
of ‘play fighting’ with other males to gain female atten-
tion. They do not try to kill each other. just win the fight!

4.10.3. Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Man-
agement (ICMAM)

e Launched in 1998

e Aims at integrated management of coastal and marine
areas.

¢ Model plans for Chennai, Goa and Gulf of Kutch being
prepared

4.10.4. Society of Integrated Coastal
Management (SICOM)

Launched in 2010

e Major national initiative to protect coastal ecosystems

A professional body with experts in various aspects of
coastal science and management

4.10.5. Institutions for Coastal Management

e The Notification on Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ), 1991
(as amended from time to time) aims at protecting
coastal stretches in India.

e India has created institutional mechanisms such as
National Coastal Zone Management Authority (NCZMA)
and State Coastal Zone Management Authority
(SCZMA) for enforcement and monitoring of the CRZ
Notification.

e These authorities have been delegated powers under
Section 5 of the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

to take various measures for protecting and improving
the quality of the coastal environment and preventing,
abating and controlling environmental pollution in
coastal areas.

4.11. GANGA ACTION PLAN

The Ganga Action Plan was launched on 14th January 1986
with the main objective of pollution abatement, to improve
water quality by interception, diversion and treatment of
domestic sewage and toxic and industrial chemical wastes
present, from identified grossly polluting units entering in
to the river.

After reviewing the effectiveness of the “Ganga Action
Plan”, the Government announced the “Mission Clean
Ganga” project on 31st December, 2009 with the objective
that by 2020, no municipal sewage and industrial waste
would be released in the river without treatment, with the
total budget of around Rs.15,000 crore.

The Government also established the National Ganga River
Basin Authority (NGRBA), chaired by the Prime Minister,
with the objective to ensure effective abatement of pollu-
tion and conservation of the river Ganga, by adopting a
river basin approach for comprehensive planning and man-
agement.

4.12. NAMAMI GANGA PROGRAM

Accordingly, an Integrated Ganga Conservation Mission
called “NamamiGange” has been proposed to be set up and
asum of Rs. 2,037 crores has been set aside for the purpose
of conservation and improvement of the Ganga.

In addition a sum of Rs. 100 crores has been allocated for
developments of Ghats and beautification of River Fronts
at Kedarnath, Haridwar, Kanpur, Varanasi, Allahabad,
Patna and Delhi in the current financial year.

Accordingly, NamamiGange approaches Ganga Rejuvena-
tion by consolidating the existing ongoing efforts and plan-
ning for a concrete action plan for future.

The interventions at Ghats and River fronts will facilitate

better citizen connect and set the tone for river centric
urban planning process.

Following are proposed to be taken up under
NamamiGange program:

(i) Nirmal Dhara- ensuring sustainable municipal sewage
management

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 098 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Project prioritization in coordination with Ministry
of Urban Development.

e Incentive for states to take up projects on Ganga
Main-stem by providing an additional share of cen-
tral grants for sewerage infrastructure.

e Uniform standards for both MoUD scheme and
NamamiGangeprogramme, 10 years mandatory
O&M by the same service provider at par with
NGRBA programme and PPP, Mandatory reuse of
treated water

e Expanding coverage of sewerage infrastructure in
118 urban habitations on banks of Ganga- estimated
cost by MoUD is Rs 51000 Crores

(ii) Nirmal Dhara- managing sewage from Rural Areas

e Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation scheme
for all Ganga bank Gram Panchayts (1632) free from
open defecation by 2022, at a cost of Rs 1700 Crores
as central share

(iii) NirmalDhara- managing Industrial discharge

e Making Zero Liquid Discharge mandatory

e Rationalized water tariff to encourage reuse

e Real time water quality monitoring

(iv) AviralDhara
e Enforcing River Regulatory Zones on Ganga Banks

e Rational agricultural practices, efficient irrigation
methods

e Restoration and conservation of wetlands

(v) Ensuring ecological rejuvenation by conservation of
aquatic life and biodiversity

(vi) Promotion of Tourism and Shipping in a rational and
sustainable manner

(vii) Knowledge Management on Ganga through Ganga
Knowledge Centre leading to a Ganga University of
River Sciences

NRI Ganga Fund

NRIs have been a very important contributor to the devel-
opment process in India, in areas such as education, health
and preservation of culture. In this context, to harness
their enthusiasm to contribute towards the conservation
of the river Ganga, NRI Fund for Ganga will be set up
which will finance special projects. NRI Ganga Fund could
be setup under the aegis of Ministry of Overseas Indian

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

Affairs or Ministry of Finance with focus on funds sourcing
and corpus management.

4.13 CLEAN GANGA FUND
The main features of “Clean Ganga Fund (CGF)” are:

Considering that there is a need to increase people’s par-
ticipation from across the country and abroad, it is pro-
posed to set up a “Clean Ganga Fund (CGF)” with voluntary
contributions.

e CGF will have the objective of contributing to the na-
tional effort of improving the cleanliness of the river
Ganga with the contributions received from the resi-
dents of the country, NRIs/ PIO and others.

¢ CGF will be operated through a bank account by a Trust
to be headed by the finance minister. The secretariat of
the Trust will be set up in Ministry of Water Resources,
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation under the
Mission Director, Clean Ganga.

¢ Domestic donors to the fund shall be eligible for tax
benefits as in the case of “Swachch Bharat Kosh”. For-
eign donors could get suitable tax exemptions in domes-
tic law, wherever permissible.

¢ CGF will explore the possibility of setting up daugh-
ter funds in other jurisdictions/countries of high
donor interest such as USA, UK, Singapore, UAE, etc.
to enable tax benefits to donors in their respective
jurisdictions.

e CGF will be catalytic in nature and will identify and
fund specific projects which could be pilot projects,
R&D projects, innovative projects or other focused pro-
jects. The Fund will define specific and measurable
objectives to form the basis for planning, funding, and
evaluation.

Broad activities that will be financed from the
Clean Ganga Fund (CGF) Fund are:

e Activities outlined under the ‘NamamiGange’ pro-
gramme for cleaning of river Ganga.

¢ Control of non-point pollution from agricultural runoff,
human defecation, cattle wallowing, etc.

e Setting up of waste treatment and disposal plants along
the river around the cities.

¢ Conservation of the biotic diversity of the river.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 099 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY ENVIRONMENT

QF 6° go

Recent Measures

¢ Community based activities to reduce polluting human

interface with the river.

Development of public amenities including activities
such as Ghat redevelopment.

Research and Development and innovative projects.

Research and Development projects and innovative pro-
jects for new technology and processes for cleaning the

river.

Independent oversight through intensive monitoring

and real time reporting.

Any other activity as approved by the Trust.

Union Environment Ministry has taken up a new strat-
egy for conservation and rejuvenation of major river
water systems. The new strategy takes into account the
entire river basin, which is contributing its flow to the
particular river stretch for conservation.

The present strategy for conservation of rivers is limited
only to tackling pollution load from domestic wastewa-
ter and regulation of industrial pollution. The new ap-
proach is a holistic one for rejuvenation of rivers,
wherein water management and environment manage-
ment are taken together for implementation to restore
the lost ecology of the polluted stretches of the rivers.

>, 9% o% of of o%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 100 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 101 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

QF 6° g Go

| CHAPTER - 5 |

ENVIRONMENT

QW

ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION

tion of certain materials to the physical environ-
ment (water, air and lands), making it less fit or
unfit for life’.

Pp ollution is defined as ‘an addition or excessive addi-

5.1. POLLUTANTS

e Pollutants are the materials or factors, which cause ad-
verse effect on the natural quality of any component of
the environment.

e For example, smoke from industries and automobiles,
chemicals from factories, radioactive substances from
nuclear plants, sewage of houses and discarded house-
hold articles are the common pollutants.

5.1.1. Classifications

(i) According to the form in which they persist after re-
lease into the environment.

e Primary pollutants: These persist in the form in which
they are added to the environment e.g. DDT, plastic.

e Secondary Pollutants: These are formed by interaction
among the primary pollutants.

e For example, peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN) is formed by
the interaction of nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons.

(ii) According to their existence in nature.

e¢ Quantitative Pollutants: These occur in nature and be-
come pollutant when their concentration reaches beyond
a threshold level. E.g. carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxide.

© Qualitative Pollutants: These do not occur in nature and
are man-made. E.g. fungicides, herbicides, DDT etc.

(iii) According to their nature of disposal.

e Biodegradable Pollutants: Waste products, which are
degraded by microbial action. E.g. sewage.

¢ Non-biodegradable Pollutants: Pollutants, which are not
decomposed by microbial action. E.g. plastics, glass,
DDT, salts of heavy metals, radioactive substances etc.,)

(iv) According to origin
e Natural

e Anthropogenic

5.1.2. Causes of pollution

¢ Uncontrolled growth in human population
e Rapid industrialization

e Urbanization

e Uncontrolled exploitation of nature.

e Forest fires, radioactivity, volcanic eruptions, strong
winds etc.,

5.2. AIR POLLUTION

e Air pollution is aggravated because of four develop-
ments: increasing traffic, growing cities, rapid economic
development, and industrialization.

e ‘The presence in the atmosphere of one or more con-
taminants in such quality and for such duration as it is
injurious, or tends to be injurious, to human health or
welfare, animal or plant life.’

e It is the contamination of air by the discharge of harm-
ful substances.

e Air pollution can cause health problems, damage the
environment, property and climate change.

5.2.1. Major air pollutants and their sources

Carbon monoxide (CO)

e It is a colourless, odourless gas that is produced by the
incomplete burning of carbon-based fuels including pet-
rol, diesel, and wood.

e Itis also produced from the combustion of natural and
synthetic products such as cigarettes.

e It lowers the amount of oxygen that enters our blood.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 102 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e It can slow our reflexes and make us confused and
sleepy.

Carbon dioxide (CO2)

e It isthe principle greenhouse gas emitted as a result of
human activities such as the burning of coal, oil, and
natural gases.

Chloroflorocarbons (CFC)

e These are gases that are released mainly from air-con-
ditioning systems and refrigeration.

e When released into the air, CFCs rise to the strato-
sphere, where they come in contact with few other
gases, which lead to a reduction of the ozone layer that
protects the earth from the harmful ultraviolet rays of
the sun.

Lead

e It is present in petrol, diesel, lead batteries, paints, hair
dye products, etc. Lead affects children in particular.

e Itcan cause nervous system damage and digestive prob-
lems and, in some cases, cause cancer.
Ozone

e It occurs naturally in the upper layers of the atmos-
phere.

e This important gas shields the earth from the harmful
ultraviolet rays of the sun.

e However, at the ground level, it is a pollutant with
highly toxic effects.

e Vehicles and industries are the major source of ground-
level ozone emissions.

e Ozone makes our eyes itch, burn, and water. It lowers
our resistance to cold and pneumonia.

e Nitrogen oxide (Nox)

e It causes smog and acid rain. It is produced from burn-
ing fuels including petrol, diesel, and coal.

e Nitrogen oxide can make children susceptible to res-
piratory diseases in winters.

Suspended particulate matter (SPM)

e It consists of solids in the air in the form of smoke, dust,
and vapour that can remain suspended for extended
periods and is also the main source of haze which re-
duces visibility.

e The finer of these particles, when breathed in can lodge
in our lungs and cause lung damage and respiratory
problems.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Sulphur dioxide (SO2)

e It is agas produced from burning coal, mainly in ther-
mal power plants.

¢ Some industrial processes, such as production of paper
and smelting of metals, produce sulphur dioxide.

e It is a major contributor to smog and acid rain. Sulfur
dioxide can lead to lung diseases.

5.2.2. Smog
e The term smog was first used (1905) by Dr H A Des Voeux

e Smog has been coined from a combination of the words
fog and smoke. Smog is a condition of fog that had soot
or smoke in it.

The Formation of Smog

e Photochemical smog (smog) is a term used to describe
air pollution that is a result of the interaction of sunlight
with certain chemicals in the atmosphere.

¢ One of the primary components of photochemical smog
is ozone.

e While ozone in the stratosphere protects earth from
harmful UV radiation, ozone on the ground is hazard-
ous to human health.

e Ground-level ozone is formed when vehicle emissions
containing nitrogen oxides (primarily from vehicle ex-
haust) and volatile organic compounds (from paints,
solvents, printing inks, petroleum products, vehicles,
etc.) interact in the presence of sunlight.

Mator Vehacles.
Power Plants,
Industrial Activeties. ec.

Nitrogen Oxides (NOx)

"0s

Motor Vehicies,
VOC-Containing Products, etc.

Ground-level Ozone, Fine Particulates
(Smog)

e Smog refers to hazy air that causes difficult breathing
conditions. It is a combination of various gases with
water vapour and dust.

e Its occurrences are often linked to heavy traffic, high
temperatures, and calm winds. During the winter, wind

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 103 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

speeds are low and cause the smoke and fog to stagnate
near the ground; hence pollution levels can increase
near ground level.

e Smoke particles trapped in the fog gives it a yellow/
black colour and this smog often settled over cities for
many days.

Ground-level ozone is formed through a com-
plex reaction involving hydrocarbons, nitro-
gen oxides, and sunlight. It is formed when

pollutants released from gasoline, diesel-
powered vehicles and oil-based solvents react
with heat and sunlight.

The effects of smog

e Jt hampers visibility and harms the environment.
e respiratory problems

e deaths relating to bronchial diseases.

e Heavy smog greatly decreases ultraviolet radiation.

e Heavy smog results in the decrease of natural vitamin
D production leading to a rise in the cases of rickets.

5.2.3. Indoor air pollution

e It refers to the physical, chemical, and biological char-
acteristics of air in the indoor environment within a
home, or an institution or commercial facility.

e Indoor air pollution is a concern where energy efficiency
improvements sometimes make houses relatively air-
tight, reducing ventilation and raising pollutant levels.

e Indoor air problems can be subtle and do not always
produce easily recognized impacts on health.

e Different conditions are responsible for indoor air pol-
lution in the rural areas and the urban areas.

(a) Rural

e It is the rural areas that face the greatest threat from
indoor pollution, where people rely on traditional fuels
such as firewood, charcoal, and cowdung for cooking
and heating.

e Burning such fuels produces large amount of smoke and
other air pollutants in the confined space of the home,
resulting in high exposure. Women and children are the
groups most vulnerable as they spend more time in-
doors and are exposed to the smoke.

e Although many hundreds of separate chemical agents
have been identified in the smoke from biofuels, the four

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

most serious pollutants are particulates, carbon mon-
oxide, polycyclic organic matter, and formaldehyde.

(b) Urban

e In urban areas, exposure to indoor air pollution has
increased due to a variety of reasons, such as

¢ construction of more tightly sealed buildings,

e reduced ventilation,

e the use of synthetic materials for building and furnish-
ing and

e the use of chemical products, pesticides, and household
care products.

e Indoor air pollution can begin within the building or
drawn in from outdoors.

e Other than nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide, and
lead, there are a number of other pollutants that affect
the air quality.

Pollutants
i) Volatile organic compounds

e The main indoor sources are perfumes, hair sprays,
furniture polish, glues, air fresheners, moth repellents,
wood preservatives, and other products.

e Health effect - irritation of the eye, nose and throat,
headaches, nausea and loss of coordination.

e long term - suspected to damage the liver and other
parts of the body.

ii) Tobacco

e Smoke generates a wide range of harmful chemicals and
is carcinogenic.

e Health effect - burning eyes, nose, and throat irritation
to cancer, bronchitis, severe asthma, and a decrease in
lung function.

iii) Biological pollutants

e It includes pollen from plants, mite, and hair from pets,
fungi, parasites, and some bacteria. Most of them are
allergens and can cause asthma, hay fever, and other
allergic diseases.

iv) Formaldehyde

e Mainly from carpets, particle boards, and insulation
foam. It causes irritation to the eyes and nose and al-
lergies.

v) Radon

e It is a gas that is emitted naturally by the soil. Due to

modern houses having poor ventilation, it is confined
inside the house and causes lung cancers.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 104 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Do you know?

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Trees are an important part of our world. They provide wood for building and pulp for making paper. They pro-

vide habitats (homes) for all sorts of insects, birds and other animals. Many types of fruits and nuts come from

trees -- including apples, oranges, walnuts, pears and peaches. Even the sap of trees is useful as food for insects

and for making maple syrup -- yum!

Trees also help to keep our air clean and our ecosystems healthy. We breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon

dioxide. Trees breathe in carbon dioxide and breathe out oxygen. We're perfect partners!

Trees do lots for us, our environment and other plants and animals in nature but we don’t just love trees for

practical reasons.

vi) Asbestos

vii) Pesticides

5.2.4. Fly Ash

Ash is produced whenever combustion of solid material
takes place.

Fly ash is one such residue which rises with the gases
into the atmosphere. Fly ash is a very fine powder and
tends to travel far in the air. The ash which does not
rise is termed as bottom ash.

Nearly 73% of India’s total installed power generation
capacity is thermal, of which 90% is coal-based gen-
eration, with diesel, wind, gas, and steam making up
the rest.

Composition

1.

ew np

Aluminium silicate (in large amounts)

. Silicon dioxide (SiO2) and
. Calcium oxide (CaO).

Fly ash particles are oxide rich and consist of silica,
alumina, oxides of iron, calcium, and magnesium and
toxic heavy metals like lead, arsenic, cobalt, and copper.

How it is collected?

Fly ash is generally captured by electrostatic precipita-
tors or other particle filtration equipments before the
flue gases reach the chimneys of coal-fired power
plants.

Environmental effects?

If fly ash is not captured and disposed off properly, it
can pollute air and water considerably.
It causes respiratory problems.

Fly ash in the air slowly settles on leaves and crops in
fields in areas near to thermal power plants and lowers
the plant yield.

Advantages:

Cement can be replaced by fly ash upto 35%, thus re-
ducing the cost of construction, making roads, etc.

Fly ash bricks are light in weight and offer high strength
and durability.

Fly ash is a better fill material for road embankments
and in concrete roads.

Fly ash can be used in reclamation of wastelands.
Abandoned mines can be filled up with fly ash.

Fly ash can increase the crop yield and it also enhances
water holding capacity of the land .

Policy measures of MoEF:

The Ministry of Environment and Forests vide its noti-
fication in 2009, has made it mandatory to use Fly Ash
based products in all construction projects, road em-
bankment works and low lying land filling works within
100 kms radius of Thermal Power Station.

To use Fly Ash in mine filling activities within 50 kms
radius of Thermal Power Stations.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 105 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa B72 6 ENVIRONMENT

5.2.5. Effects of air pollution
1. Health effect

Name Of Pollutant Health Effects

Sulphur Oxides Thermal power plants and Eye and throat irritation, cough, allergies, impairs enzyme
industries function in respiratory system. Reduces exchange of gases
from lung surface.

Nitrogen Oxides Thermal power plant, Irritation and inflammation of lungs, breathlessness,
industries and vehicles impairs enzyme function in respiratory system and causes
bronchitis and asthma.

Suspended Particulate | Vehicular emissions and Lung irritation reduces development of RBC and cause
Matter (SOM) burning of fossil fuels pulmonary malfunctioning.
Carbon Monoxide Vehicular emissions and Difficulty in breathing, severe headaches, irritation to
burning of fossil fuels mucous membrane, unconsciousness and death
Carbon Dioxide Burning of fossil fuels Impairs reflexes, judgment and vision, severe headaches
and heart strain.
Smog Industries and vehicular Respiratory problems and intense irritation to the eyes.
pollution
Ozone Automobile emissions Breathlessness, asthma, wheezing, chest pain, emphysema
and chronic bronchitis.
Chlorofluorocarbons Refrigerators, sprays, Depletion of stratospheric ozone layer, global warming.
emissions from jets

Hydrocarbons Burning of fossil fuels Carcinogenic effect on lungs, kidney damage,
hypertension, respiratory distress, irritation of eyes, nose
and throat, asthma, bronchitis and impairs enzyme
function in respiratory system.

Tobacco Smoke Cigarettes, cigars etc. Chronic bronchitis, asthma and lung cancer, irritation of
eyes, nose and throat.

Mercury Industries Nervous disorders, insomnia, memory loss, excitability,
irritation, tremor, gingivitis and minamata disease.

Leaded petrol emissions Damage to brain and central nervous system, kidneys and
brains, impaired intelligence and interference with
development of RBCs.

Cotton dust Cotton textile factories Byssinosis involves destruction of lung tissues, chronic
cough, bronchitis and emphysema.
Asbestos dust Asbestos mining, asbestos Asbestosis which involves severe respiratory problems and
sheet manufacturing may lead to cancer.

Radioactive pollutants | Cosmic rays, x-rays, beta rays, | Destroy living tissues and blood cells; affect cell membrane
radon and radium and cell enzyme functions, leukemia, and permanent
genetic changes.

Coal dust and particles | Coal mines Black lung cancer, pulmonary fibrosis which lead to
respiratory failure.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 106 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Il. Effects on Vegetation
e retard photosynthesis.

e Sulphur dioxide causes chlorosis, plasmolysis, mem-
brane damage and metabolic inhibition.

e Hydrocarbons such as ethylene cause premature leaf
fall, fruit drop, shedding of floral buds, curling of petals
and discoloration of sepals.

e Ozone damage chlorenchyma and thus destructs the
foliage in large number of plants.

Ill. Effects on Animals
IV. Detoriation of materials

V. Aesthetic Loss

5.2.6. Control Measures
1. Policy measures
2. Preventive measures:

e Selection of suitable fuel (e.g.fuel with low sulphur con-
tent) and its efficient utilization

e Modifications in industrial processes and/or equipments
to reduce emission.

e Selection of suitable manufacturing site and zoning. e.g.
setting of industries at a distance of residential areas,
installation of tall chimneys.

Control measures:

(i) destroying the pollutants by thermal or catalytic com-
bustion

(ii) conversion of the pollutants to a less toxic form
(iii) collection of the pollutant

e Different types of air pollutants can be eliminated /
minimised by following methods:

a) Control of particulate matter: Two types of devices -
arresters and scrubbers are used to remove particulate
pollutants from air. These are arresters and scrubbers.

i. Arresters: These are used to separate particulate mat-
ters from contaminated air.

ii. Scrubbers: These are used to clean air for both dusts
and gases by passing it through a dry or wet packing
material.

b) Control of Gaseous Pollutants:

The gaseous pollutants can be controlled through the tech-
niques of Combustion, absorption and adsorption.

c) Control of Automobile Exhaust

i. use of efficient engines (e.g. multipoint fuel injection
engine).

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

ii. Catalytic converter filters in the vehicles can convert
nitrogen oxide to nitrogen and reduce the potential
hazards of NOx.

iii. use of good quality automobile fuels

iv. use of lead free petrol.

v. Use of compressed natural gas (CNG).

5.2.7. Government Initiatives

(a) National Air Quality Monitoring Programme

e In India, the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has
been executing a nationwide programme of ambient air
quality monitoring known as National Air Quality Mon-
itoring Programme (NAMP).

e The National Air Quality Monitoring Programme
(NAMP) is undertaken in India

(i) to determine status and trends of ambient air quality;

(ii) to ascertain the compliance of NAAQS;

(iii) to identify non-attainment cities;

(iv) to understand the natural process of cleaning in the

atmosphere; and

(v) to undertake preventive and corrective measures.

e Annual average concentration of SOx levels are within
the prescribed National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS).

e This reduction from earlier levels is due to various
measures taken, including the use of CNG in public
transport in Delhi, the reduction of sulphur in diesel
and use of LPG instead of coal as a domestic fuel.

e A mixed trend is observed in NO2 levels due to various
measures taken for vehicular pollution control, such as
stricter vehicular emission norms being partially offset
by increased NOx levels due to the use of CNG in urban
transport.

e Total suspended particulates, however, are still a matter
of concern in several urban and semi urban areas.

(b) National Ambient Air Quality Standards
(NAAQS)
e National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) were

notified in the year 1982, duly revised in 1994 based on
health criteria and land uses.

e The NAAQS have been revisited and revised in Novem-
ber 2009 for 12 pollutants, which include

1. sulphur dioxide (SO2),
2. nitrogen dioxide (NO2),

3. particulate matter having size less than 10 micron
(PM1o),

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 107 ---
y SHANKAR
A IAS ACADEMY "a

bo ena hein SMRCE 20H

‘
y

7. carbon monoxide (CO),

g. arsenic,
9. nickel,
10. benzene,

11. ammonia, and

12. benzopyrene.

( National Air Quality Index

e National Air Quality Index was launched by the
Prime Minister in April, 2015 starting with 14
cities to disseminate air quality information. The
AQI has six categories of air quality, viz Good,
Satisfactory, Moderately Polluted, Poor, Very Poor
and Severe with distinct colour scheme. Each of
these categories is associated with likely health
impacts. AQI considers eight pollutants (PM1o, PM
2.5, NO2, SO2, CO, 03, NH3 and Pb) for which (up
to 24-hourly averaging period) National Ambient
Air Quality Standards are prescribed.

(d) National Clean Air Programme (NCAP)

e The NCAP will be a mid-term, five-year action
plan launched in 2019. However, the studies
indicate that significant outcome in terms of air
pollution initiatives are visible only in the long-
term, and hence the programme may be further
extended to a longer time horizon after a mid-
term review of the outcomes.

© Objective-Comprehensive mitigation actions for
prevention, control and abatement of air pollution
besides augmenting the air quality monitoring
network across the country and strengthening the
awareness and capacity building activities.

e Target - The tentative national level target of 20%-
30% reduction of PM 2.5 and PM 10 concentration
by 2024 is proposed under the NCAP taking 2017
as the base year in 122 non attainment cities in 23

states.

e The approach for NCAP includes collaborative,

multi- scale and cross-sectoral coordination between
the relevant central ministries, state governments
and local bodies and will partner with multilateral]
and bilateral international organizations, and
philanthropic foundations and leading technical

institutions to achieve its outcomes.

BSVI fuel reduces the NOx emission by 70% in
diesel cars, by 25% in petrol cars and reduces
particulate matter(PM) in vehicles by 80%.

5.2.8. Air Pollution in India

e India’s air pollution, ranked among the worst in
the world is adversely impacting the lifespan of its
citizens, reducing most Indian lives by over three
years - WHO.

e Over half of India’s population - 660 million
people - live in areas where fine particulate
matter pollution is above India’s standards for
what is considered safe - ‘Economic & Political
Weekly’

e Of the world’s top 20 polluted cities, 13 are in
India. Air pollution slashes life expectancy by 3.2
years for the 660 million Indians who live in cities.

e 2014 global analysis of how nations tackle
environmental challenges has ranked India 155
among 177 nations and labelled the country’s air
quality among the worst in the world.

India is placed as the “bottom performer” on
several indicators such as environmental health
impact, air quality, water and sanitation and
india’s environment health severly lags behind the
BRICS nations - Environmental Performance
Index 2014.

The Ganga and Yamuna are ranked among the
world’s 10 most polluted rivers.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without
; Ut Permission in writing


--- PAGE 108 ---
SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY”

e Despite the directives of the National Green

Tribunal, civic agencies continue to allow
concretisation in green belts. Booming real estate
and demand for housing units is leading to change
of land use and shrinkage of natural conservation
zones such as forests, water bodies, wastelands,

sanctuaries, groundwater rechargeable areas.

e Mindless concretisation of ground and green belts
and booming real estate has led to heat island
effect - short-wave radiations emanate from
concrete surfaces at night time. Concretisation
prevents ground water recharge thus depleting
green cover. Tall buildings also block winds
thereby reducing their cooling effect. Excessive
concretisation also leads to weakening of trees.

e The environmental crisis in India is many-sided
and multi-faceted which has to be addressed on
different fronts and by a variety of different actors.
We need to harness scientific and social-scientific
expertise to develop and promote eco-friendly
technologies in construction, energy, water
management, industrial production and

transportation. Scientific innovation needs to be

complemented by legislative change as well as by
changes in social behaviour.

Do you know?

Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) was established on
ist July 1916 to promote the survey, exploration,
research and documentation leading to the
advancement in our knowledge on various aspects
of animal taxonomy of the Indian subcontinent. ZSI

is a premier institution on animal taxonomy in
India under the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change. ZSI has been declared as the
designated repository for the National Zoological
Collection as per Section 39 of the National
Biodiversity Act, 2002. tat art 7

at

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing

5.2.9. Measures to control/ mitigate Delhi
Air pollution

e The city needs an implementation strategy to

e Reduce traffic and vehicles,

e Cut dieselization,

e Scale up integrated public transport,

e Facilitate walking and cycling,

e Tax polluting modes,

e Decide to implement Bharat Stage IV nationwide
in 2015 and

e Euro VI in 2020 and

e Put controls on other pollution sources.

5.3. WATER POLLUTION

e ‘Addition of certain substances to the water such
as organic, inorganic, biological, radiological, heat,
which degrades the quality of water so that it
becomes unfit for use’. Water pollution is not only

confined to surface water, but it has also spread
to ground water, sea and ocean.

5.3.1. Sources
Types of sources
1. Point Sources

e It is directly attributable to one influence. Here
pollutant travels directly from source to water.
Point sources are easy to regulate.

2. Diffuse or non-point source.

e It is from various ill defined and diffuse sources.
They vary spatially and temporally and are difficult
to regulate.

e The main sources of water pollution are as follows:

1) Community waste water: Include discharges
from houses, commercial and _ industrial
establishments connected to public sewerage
system. The sewage contains human and animal
excreta, food residues, cleaning agents, detergents
and other wastes.


--- PAGE 109 ---
IAS ACADEMY re
Type of Industry Inorganic pollutants

~ Mine Wastes: Chlorides, various metals, ferrous

sulphate, sulphuric acid, hydrogen sulphide, ferric
Iron and Steel

Organic pollutant

Oil, phenol and neptha

hydroxide, surface wash offs, suspended solids,
chlorides and heavy metals.

Suspended solids, iron cyanide, thiocyanate,
sulphides, oxides of copper, chromium, cadmium,
and mercury.

Aromatic compounds solvents,
organic acids, nitro compound
dyes, etc.

Various acids and alkalies, chlorides, sulphates,
nitrates of metals, phosphorus, fluorine, silica and
suspended particles.

Chemical Plants

Proteins, carbohydrates, organic
solvent intermediate products,
drugs and antibiotics

Pharmaceutical
Flats and fatty acids, glycerol,
polyphosphates, sulphonated

Soap and Detergent | Tertiary ammonium compounds alkalies
hydrocarbons.
Food processing Highly putrescible organic
matter and pathogens
Paper and Pulp Sulphides, bleaching liquors. Cellulose fibres, bark, woods
sugars organic acids.

7 en 5 cdearaeerenl ce ih e They contain a wide range of chemicals such as
7 a ee Se een chlorinated hydrocarbons, organophosphates,

metallic salts, carbonates, thiocarbonates,
derivatives of acetic acid etc. Many of the pesticides
2) Industrial Wastes: The industries discharge sing non-degradable and their residues: have fons
several inorganic and organic pollutants, which =
may prove highly toxic to the living beings. e The animal excreta such as dung, wastes from
ne a poultry farms, piggeries and slaughter houses ett.

_ : reach the water though run off and surface
e Fertilizers contain major plant nutrients such as leaching during rainy season.
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium.

organic matter present in water by microorganisms
using oxygen.

_ 4) Thermal Pollution:
e Excess fertilizers may reach the ground water by .
leaching or may be mixed with surface water of e The main sources are the thermal and nuclea!
-ivers, lakes and ponds by runoff and drainage. power plants. The power plants use water 4§

coolant and release hot waters to the original
source. Sudden rise in temperature kills fishes and
other aquatic animals.

e Pesticides include insecticides, fungicides,
herbicides, nematicides, rodenticides and soil
fumigants.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writin8:



--- PAGE 110 ---
‘@ SHANKAR (6)
IAS ACADEMY” 7). CH

5) Underground water pollution:

In India at many places, the ground water is
threatened with contamination due to seepage
from industrial and municipal wastes and
effluents, sewage channels and agricultural runoff.

6) Marine pollution:

Oceans are the ultimate sink of all natural and
manmade pollutants. Rivers discharge their
pollutants into the sea. The sewerage and garbage
of coastal cities are also dumped into the sea. The
other sources of oceanic pollution are navigational
discharge of oil, grease, detergents, sewage,
garbage and radioactive wastes, off shore oil
mining, oil spills.

Oil Spills

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Oil spills is one of the most dangerous of all
water pollutants.

Oil spills from tankers at sea or leaks from
underground storage tanks on land are very
difficult to control as oil tends to spread very
fast, affecting a large area in a very short time.

On land crude is transported through pipelines
or tankers which can get damaged and spew out

crude oil over the land, thereby contaminating
it.

Since crude oil is lighter than water, it floats on
the surface and poses the threat of swift-
spreading fire.

Oil spills at sea decrease the oxygen level in the
water and cause harm to the organisms.

Oil spills are also a source of air and

groundwater pollution.

Do you know?

The Environmental Performance Index,
conducted and written by environmental research
centers at Yale and Columbia universities with
assistance from outside scientists.

Different parts of the tree grow at different times
of the year. A typical pattern is for most of the
foliage growth to occur in the spring, followed by
trunk growth in the summer and root growth in
the fall and winter. Not all the trees follow the same
pattern.

5-3-2. Effects of Water Pollution

1. Effects on aquatic ecosystem:

i) Polluted water reduces Dissolved Oxygen (DO)
content, thereby, eliminates sensitive organisms
like plankton, molluscs and fish etc.

However a few tolerant species like Tubifex (an-
nelid worm) and some insect larvae may survive in

highly polluted water with low DO content. Such
species are recognised as indicator species for pol-
luted water.

ii) Biocides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and
heavy metals directly eliminate sensitive aquatic
organisms.

iii) Hot waters discharged from industries, when
added to water bodies, lowers its DO content.

2. Effects on human health:

¢ The polluted water usually contains pathogens like
virus, bacteria, parasitic protozoa and worms,
therefore, it is a source of water borne diseases
like jaundice, cholera, typhoid, amoebiasis etc.


--- PAGE 111 ---
. \O
SHANKAR . ie a a ~)
a IAS ACADEMY Qe ae QW n

A cripling deformity called Minamata disease due

po , BOD, COD

e Presence of organic and inorganic wastes in
water decreases the dissolved Oxygen (DO) con-
tent of the water. Water having DO content
below 8.0 mg L-1 may be considered as con- -
taminated. Water having DO content below. 4.0 e Water contaminated with cadmium can cause itai
mg L-1 is considered to be highly polluted. DO itai disease also called ouch-ouch disease (a
content of water is important for the survival painful disease of bones and joints) and cancer of
of aquatic organisms. A number of factors like lungs and liver.
surface turbulence, photosynthetic activity, 02 ¢ The compounds of lead cause anaemia, headache,
consumption by organisms and decomposition loss of muscle power and bluish line around the
of organic matter are the factors which deter- gum.

to consumption of fish captured from mercury con-
taminated Minamata Bay in Japan was detected in
1952.

mine the amount of DO present in water.

The higher amounts of waste increases the rates
of decomposition and O2 consumption, thereby
decreases the DO content of water. The demand
for O2 is directly related to increasing input of
organic wastes and is empressed as biological

oxygen demand (BOD) of water.

Water pollution by organic wastes is measured
in terms of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD).
BOD is the amount of dissolved oxygen needed
by bacteria in decomposing the organic wastes
present in water. It is expressed in milligrams
of oxygen per litre of water.

The higher value of BOD indicates low DO con-
tent of water. Since BOD is limited to biodegrad-
able materials only. Therefore, it is not a reliable
method of measuring pollution load in water.

Chemical oxygen demand (COD) is a slightly
better mode used to measure pollution load in
water. It is the measure of oxygen equivalent of
the requirement of oxidation of total organic
matter (i.e. biodegradable and non-biodegrada-
ble) present in water.

* Mercury compounds in waste water are converted
by bacterial action into extremely toxic methyl
mercury, which can cause numbness of limbs, lips
and tongue, deafness, blurring of vision and
mental derangement.

3. Hazards of ground water pollution:

i.

Presence of excess nitrate in drinking water is
dangerous for human health and may be fatal for
infants.

e Excess nitrate in drinking water reacts with

hemoglobin to form non-functional methae-
moglobin, and impairs oxygen transport. This
condition is called methaemoglobinemia or
blue baby syndrome.

ii.

iii.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission i iti
, in writing.

Excess fluoride in drinking water causes neuro-
muscular disorders, gastro-intestinal problems,
teeth deformity, hardening of bones and stiff and
painful joints (skeletal fluorosis).

High concentration of fluoride ions is present
in drinking water in 13 states of India. The
maximum level of fluoride, which the human

body can tolerate is 1.5 parts per million (mg/1
of water). Long term ingestion of fluoride ions
causes fluorosis.

Over exploitation of ground water may lead to
leaching of arsenic from soil and rock sources
and contaminate ground water. Chronic
€xposure to arsenic causes black foot disease. It
also causes diarrhoea, peripheral neuritis,
hyperkerotosis and also lung and skin cancer.


--- PAGE 112 ---
a

SHANKAR

e Arsenic contamination is a serious problem (in
tube well dug areas) in the Ganges Delta, west
bengal causing serious arsenic poisoning to large

numbers of people. A 2007 study found that over
137 million people in more than 70 countries are
probably affected by arsenic poisoning of drink-
ing water.

4. Biological Magnification

5.

Eutrophicaiton

5.3.3- Control Measures

1)

2)

3)

4)

6)

7\

8)

Riparian buffers

Treatment of sewage water and the industrial
effluents should be done before releasing it into
water bodies.

Hot water should be cooled before release from
the power plants

Domestic cleaning in tanks, streams and rivers,
which supply drinking water, should be
prohi¥ited.
Excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides should
be avoided.

Organic farming and efficient use of animal
residues as fertilizers.

Water hyacinth (an aquatic weed) can purify
water by taking some toxic materials and a
number of heavy metals from water.

Oil spills in water can be cleaned with the help of

bregoli - a by-product of paper industry
resembling saw dust, oil zapper, micro-organisms.

The steps taken by the Government to address the
issues of water pollution include the following:-.

1.

ii,

Preparation of action plan for sewage
management and restoration of water quality in
aquatic resources by State Governments;
Installation of Online Effluent Monitoring System
to check the discharge of effluent directly into the
rivers and water bodies;

vi.

Vii.

iii. Setting up of monitoring network for assessment

of water quality;

Action to comply with effluent standards is taken
by SPCBs / PCCs to improve the water quality of
the rivers;

Financial assistance for installation of Common
Effluent Treatment Plants for cluster of Small
Scale Industrial units;

Issuance of directions for implementation of Zero
Liquid Discharge;

Issuance of directions under Section 5 of
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to industries
and under Section 18(1)(b) of Water (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974;

viii. Implementation of National Lake Conservation

Plan (NLCP) and National Wetland Conservation
Programme (NWCP) for conservation and
management of identified lakes and wetlands in
the country which have been merged in
February, 2013 into an integrated scheme of
National Plan for Conservation of Aquatic Eco-
systems (NPCA) to undertake various
conservation activities including interception,
diversion and treatment of waste water, pollution
abatement, lake beautification, biodiversity
conservation, education and awareness creation,
community participation etc.

5.4. SOIL POLLUTION

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Soil is a thin layer of organic and inorganic
materials that covers the Earth’s rocky surface.
Soil pollution is defined as the ‘addition of
substances to the soil, which adversely affect
physical, chemical and biological properties of soil
and reduces its productivity.’

It is build-up of persistent toxic compounds,
chemicals, salts, radioactive materials, or disease
causing agents in soil which have adverse effects
on plant growth, human and animal health.

A soil pollutant is any factor which deteriorates
the quality, texture and mineral content of the soil
or which disturbs the biological balance of the
organisms in the soil.



--- PAGE 113 ---
CEOS ’”’C- ‘1

SHANKAR
a IAS ACADEMY () 6) ‘a
eines Beontiech 7

5-4-1. Causes

e Indiscriminate use of fertilizers, pesticides
insecticides and herbicides

e Dumping of large quantities of solid waste

e Deforestation and soil erosion.

e Pollution Due to Urbanisation

5-4-2. Source
i. Industrial Wastes:

e Industrial waste includes chemicals such as
mercury, lead, copper, zinc, cadmium, cynides,
thiocynates, chromates, acids, alkalies, organic
substances etc.

ii. Pesticides:

e Pesticides are chemicals that include insecticides,
fungicides, algicides, rodenticides, weedicides
sprayed in order to improve productivity of
agriculture, forestry and horticulture.

iii. Fertilizers and manures:

e Chemical fertilizers are added to the soil for
increasing crop yield. Excessive use of chemical
fertilizers reduces the population of soil borne
organism and the crumb structure of the soil,
productivity of the soil and increases salt content
of the soil.

iv. Discarded materials:

© It includes concrete, asphalt, rungs, leather, cans,
plastics, glass, discarded food, paper and
carcasses.

v. Radioactive wastes:

¢ Radioactive elements from mining and nuclear
power plants, find their way into water and then
into the soil.

vi. Other pollutants:

e Many air pollutants (acid rain) and water
pollutants ultimately become part of the soil and
the soil also receives some toxic chemicals during
weathering of certain rocks. [in box]

All Rights Reserved. No part of this mate:

5-4.3. Types of Soil Pollution
I. Agricultural Soil Pollution

Il. Pollution due to industrial effluents and solid
wastes

II]. Pollution due to urban activities

5.4.4. Effects of soil pollution on
i) Agriculture

¢ Reduced soil fertility

e Reduced nitrogen fixation

e Increased erosion

e Loss of soil and nutrients

e Reduced crop yield

e Increased salinity

© Deposition of silt in tanks and reservoirs
ii) Health

e Dangerous chemicals entering underground
water

e Bio magnification
e Release of pollutant gases

e Release of radioactive rays causing health
problems

iii) Environment
e Reduced vegetation
e Ecological imbalance
e Imbalance in soil fauna and flora
iv) Urban areas
e Clogging of drains
e Inundation of areas
e Foul smell and release of gases
e Waste management problems
e Control measures
¢ Reducing chemical fertilizer and pesticide use
e Use of bio pesticides, bio fertilizers.

e Organic farming

rial may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing



--- PAGE 114 ---
SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY ™
Toten nb aneteny ie tnen wis emey tone pal (A)

e Four R's: Refuse, Reduce, Reuse, and Recycle
e Afforestation and Reforestation
e Solid waste treatment

e Reduction of waste from construction areas

e Instead of buying new containers from the
market, use the ones that are in the house.

Refuse to buy new items though you may think
they are prettier than the ones you already have.

2. Reuse
e Do not throw away the soft drink cans or the
bottles; cover them with homemade paper or

paint on them and use them as pencil stands or
small vases.

3. Recycle

e Use shopping bags made of cloth or jute, which
can be used over and over again. Segregate your
waste to make sure that it is collected and taken
for recycling.

4. Reduce

® Reduce the generation of unnecessary waste,

e.g. carry your own shopping bag when you go
to the market and put all your purchases

directly into it.

5.5. NOISE POLLUTION

* Noise pollution is an unpleasant noise created by
people or machines that can be annoying,
distracting, intrusive, and/or physically painful.

© Noise pollution comes from sources such as “road
traffic, jet planes, garbage trucks, construction
equipment, manufacturing processes, leaf blowers,
and boom boxes.”

© Sound is measured in decibels (dB). An increase

of about 10 dB is approximately double the
increase in loudness.

e A person's hearing can be damaged if exposed to
noise levels over 75 dB over a prolonged period of
time. The World Health Organization recommends
that the sound level indoors should be less than

5.5.1. Ambient Noise Level Monitoring

e Noise Pollution (Control and Regulation) Rules,
2000 define ambient noise levels for various areas
as follows:

Category of Limits in
Area/Zone dB(A) Lec

| ay Time | Nigh Tie |

aon a ee |
p.m. 6am

B.commercatArea [65 [55

D. Silence Zone

e The Government of India on Mar 2011 launched a
Real time Ambient Noise Monitoring Network.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 115 ---
SHANKAR + ee : .

Under this network, in phase- |, five Remote Noise
Monitoring Terminals each have been installed in
different noise zones in seven metros (Delhi,
Hyderabad, Kolkata, Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai
and Lucknow).

e In Phase Il another 35 monitoring stations will be
installed in the same seven cities. Phase III will
cover installing go stations in 18 other cities.

e Phase-lll cities are Kanpur, Pune, Surat,
Ahmedabad, Nagpur, Jaipur, Indore, Bhopal,
Ludhiana, Guwahati, Dehradun,
Thiruvananthpuram, Bhubaneswar, Patna,
Gandhinagar, Ranchi, Amritsar and Raipur.

¢ Silence Zone is an area comprising not less than
100 metres around hospitals, educational
institutions, courts, religious places or any other
area declared as such by a competent authority.

5.5-2. Impacts of noise

e Annoyance: It creates annoyance to the receptors
due to sound level fluctuations. The a-periodic
sound due to its irregular occurrences causes
displeasure to hearing and causes annoyance.

e Physiological effects: The physiological features
like breathing amplitude, blood pressure, heart-
beat rate, pulse rate, blood cholesterol are affected.

e Loss of hearing: Long exposure to high sound
levels cause loss of hearing. This is mostly
unnoticed, but has an adverse impact on hearing
function.

¢ Human performance: The working performance
of workers/human will be affected as it distracts
the concentration.

¢ Nervous system: It causes pain, ringing in the
ears, feeling of tiredness, thereby effecting the
functioning of human system.

* Sleeplessness: It affects the sleeping there by
inducing people to become restless and loose
concentration and presence of mind during their
activities

* Damage to material: The buildings and materials

may get damaged by exposure to infrasonic /
ultrasonic waves and even get collapsed.

A

) §

5.5.3. Control
¢ The techniques employed for noise control can }y
broadly classified as

1. Control at source
Reducing the noise levels from domestic sectors

Maintenance of automobiles
e Control over vibration
Prohibition on usage of loud speakers

e Selection and maintenance of machinery

2. Control in the transmission path

e Installation of barriers

e Design of building

e Green belt development (planting of trees)

3. Using protective equipment.
e Job rotation

e Reduced Exposure time

e Hearing protection

e Documentation of noise measurements,
continuous monitoring and awareness are the
need of the hour.

Do youknow?

The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change has urged Chief Secretaries of Haryana,
Uttar Pradesh and National Capital Territory of
Delhi to take effective steps to enforce the ban on
burning of all types of waste in urban areas.

5.6. RADIO ACTIVE POLLUTION
5.6.1. Radioactive Pollution

© Radioaciivity is a pheuomenon of spontaneous
emission of proton (a-particles), electron:
(&-particles) and gamma rays (short wav
electromagnetic waves) due to disintegration of
atomic nuclei of some elements. These caus
radioactive pollution.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writin


--- PAGE 116 ---
|

/  AllRights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

SHANKAR
a IAS ACADEMY “F

The then GAL achootey bt

Radioactivity:
Radioactivity is a property of certain elements
(radium, thorium, uranium etc.) to spontaneously
emit protons (alpha particles) electrons (beta
particles) and gamma rays (short-wave
electromagnetic wave) by disintegration of their
atomic nuclei (nuclides).

5.6.2. Types of Radiations

1, Non-ionising radiations affect only those
components which absorb them and have low
penetrability.

2. lonising radiations have high penetration power
and cause breakage of macro molecules.

5.6.3. Types of radiation particles

1. Alpha particles, can be blocked by a piece of paper
and human skin.

2. Beta particles can penetrate through skin, while
can be blocked by some pieces of glass and metal.

3. Gamma rays can penetrate easily to human skin
and damage cells on its way through, reaching
far, and can only be blocked by a very thick,
strong, massive piece of concrete.

5.6.4. Sources
Natural

¢ They include cosmic rays from space and
terrestrial radiations from radio-nuclides present
in earth’s crust such as radium-224, uranium-238,
thorium-232, potassium-40, carbon-14, etc.

Man - made

Atomic explosion (Nuclear fallout):

¢ The nuclear arms use uranium-235 and pluto-
nium-239 for fission and hydrogen or lithium as
fusion material. Atomic explosions produce radio-
active particles that are thrown high up into the
air as huge clouds. These particles are carried to
long distances by wind and gradually settle over
the earth as fall out or are brought down by rain.
The fall out contains radioactive substances such
as strontium-go, cesium-137, iodine - 131, etc.

e Nuclear power plants

e Nuclear weapon

e Transportation of nuclear material
e Disposal of nuclear waste

e Uranium mining

e Radiation therapy

5.6.5. Effects

e The effects of radioactive pollutants depend upon
i. half-life

ii. energy releasing capacity

iii. rate of diffusion and

iv. rate of deposition of the pollutant.

v. Various environmental factors such as wind,
temperature, rainfall also influence their effects.

Period of Radioactivity

e Each radioactive nuclide has a constant decay
rate. Half-life is the time needed for half of its
atoms to decay. Half-life of a radio nuclide refers

to its period of radioactivity. The half-life may
vary from a fraction of a second to thousands of
years. The radio nuclides with long half-time are
the chief source of environmental radioactive
pollution.

e Radiations are of two types with regard to the
mode of their action on cells.

1. Non-ionising radiations:

e They include short-wave radiations such as
ultraviolet rays, which forms a part of solar
radiation.

e They have low penetrating power and affect the
cells and molecules which absorb them.



--- PAGE 117 ---
ANKAR

» They damage eyes which may be caused by
reflections from coastal sand, snow (snow
blindness) directly looking towards sun during
eclipse.

e They injure the cells of skin and blood capillaries
producing blisters and reddening called sunburns.

2. lonising radiations.

e They include X-rays, cosmic rays and atomic
radiations (radiations emitted by radioactive
elements).

e lonising radiations have high penetration power
and cause breakage of macro molecules.

e The molecular damage may produce short range
(immediate) or long range (delayed) effects.

i. Short range effects include burns, impaired
metabolism, dead tissues and death of the
organisms.

ii. Long range effects are mutations increased
incidence of tumors and cancer, shortening of
life-span and developmental changes.

iii. The mutated gene can persist in living organisms
and may affect their progeny.

e The actively dividing cells such as Embryo, foetus,

cells of skin, intestinal lining, bone marrow and’

gamete forming cells are more sensitive to
radiations.

© Some species of animals and plants preferentially
accumulate specific radioactive materials. For
example, oysters deposit 65Zn, fish accumulate
55Fe, marine animals selectively deposit goSr.

5.6.6. Control Measures

® Prevention is the best control measure as there is
no cure available for radiation damage.

i. All safety measures should be strictly enforced.
Leakage of radioactive elements should be totally
checked.

: i ial may be reproduced in an
ne _N part of this materia 1 y form or by an i
i y means, without permission in writing.

ii. Safe disposal of radioactive waste.

iii. Regular monitoring through frequent sampling
and quantitative analysis.

iv. Safety measures against nuclear accidents.

v. Nuclear explosions and use of nuclear weapons
should be completely banned.

vi. Appropriate steps should be taken to protect from
occupational exposure.

ROH? Yind jootte eavissibst qatentty pi}
Dey OM: KNOW tarsi crocds Haider ciasmogaie
solar power panels installed overhead of arail: coach
will save 1700 litres of diesel per year and, if dogne
techniques-are adopted,.100, million litres of diesel
can be saved by.the RaW AUISETDON 10 25th

5.7. E- WASTE

e The discarded and end-of-life electronic products
ranging from computers, equipment used in
Information and Communication Technology
(ICT), home appliances, audio and video products
and all of their peripherals are popularly known
as Electronic waste (E-waste).

e E-waste is not hazardous if it is stocked in safe
storage or recycled by scientific methods or
transported from one place to the other in parts
or in totality in the formal sector. The e-waste can,
however, be considered hazardous if recycled by
primitive methods.



--- PAGE 118 ---
SHANKAR
A IAS ACADEMY CG

——— health effects

Used in glass panels and gaskets in
computer monitors

Solder in printed circuit boards and
other Components

Lead causes damage to the central and
peripheral nervous systems, blood
systems, kidney and reproductive system
in humans. It also effects the endocrine
system, and impedes brain development
among children. Lead tends to
accumulate in the environment and has
high acute and chronic effects on plants,
animals and microorganisms.

Occurs in SMD chip resistors, infra-
red detectors, and semiconductor
chips

Some older cathode ray tubes contain
cadmium

Toxic cadmium compounds accumulate
in the human body, especially the
kidneys.

It is estimated that 22 % of the yearly
world consumption of mercury is
used in electrical and electronic
equipment

Mercury can cause damage to organs
including the brain and kidneys, as well
as the foetus. The developing foetus is
highly vulnerable to mercury exposure.
When inorganic mercury spreads out in
the water, it is transformed to methylated
mercury which bio-accumulates in living
organisms and concentrates through the
food chain, particularly via fish.

Mercury is used in thermostats,
sensors, relays, switches, medical
equipment, lamps, mobile phones and
in batteries

Mercury, used in flat panel displays,
will likely increase as their use
replaces cathode ray tubes

Chromium VI can cause damage to DNA
and is extremely toxic in the
environment.

Chromium VI is used as corrosion
protector of untreated and galvanized
steel plates and as a decorative or
hardener for steel housings Plastics
(including PVC): Dioxin is released
when PVC is burned.

The largest volume of plastics (26%)
used in electronics has been PVC.
PVC elements are found in cabling
and computer housings.

Chromium VI 29

Many computer moldings are now
made with the somewhat more
benign ABS plastics

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 119 ---
DSMAINTN Ars -
= ne fine eh eatery te Tet han SE ane [e- eee

Brominated flame | BFRs are used in the plastic housings
retardants (BFRs): | of electronic equipment and in circuit

boards to prevent flammability

4
Studies have shown that short-term |
exposure to barium causes brain |
swelling, muscle weakness, damage to |

the heart, liver, and spleen.

Barium is a soft silvery-white metal
that is used in computers in the front

panel of a CRT, to protect users from
radiation

Beryllium is commonly found on
motherboards and finger clips

It is used as a copper-beryllium alloy
to strengthen connectors and
tinyplugs while maintaining electrical
conductivity

Exposure to beryllium can cause lung.
cancer. Beryllium also causes a skin
disease that is characterised by poor
wound healing and wartlike bumps. |
Studies have shown that people can
develop beryllium disease many years
following the last exposure.

Found in the plastic printer cartridge
containing black and color toners.

Inhalation is the primary exposure
pathway, and acute exposure may lead
to respiratory tract irritation. Carbon
black has been classified as a class 2B
carcinogen, possibly carcinogenic to
humans. Reports indicate that colour
toners (cyan, magenta and yellow)
contain heavy metals.

Phosphor and
additives

Phosphor is an inorganic chemical
compound that is applied as a coat on
the interior of the CRT faceplate.

The phosphor coating on cathode ray
tubes contains heavy metals, such as
cadmium, and other rare earth metals,
for example, zinc, vanadium as additives.
These metals and their compounds are
very toxic. This is a serious hazard posed
for those who dismantle CRTs by hand.

5.7.2. E - Waste in India e The 65 cities generate more than 60% of the total
© “The Global E-Waste Monitor 2014”, 17 lakh tonnes generated e-waste, whereas, 10 states generate
of e-waste generation was reported in the country 70% of the total e-waste.
in 2014. No comprehensive State-wise °®

Most of the e-waste is recycled in India in
inventorization of e-waste generation in the

unorganized units, which engage significant

country has been done. number of manpower. Recovery of metals by
¢ In India, among top ten cities, Mumbai ranks first primitive means is a most hazardous act.
in generating e-waste followed by Delhi, °

The recycling process, if not carried out properly,
can cause damage to human being through
inhalation of gases during recycling, contact of the

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing

Bangalore, Chennai, Kolkata, Ahmadabad,
Hyderabad, Pune, Surat and Nagpur.



--- PAGE 120 ---
SHANKAR
a»: ACADEMY "Sa

The font iAh tesedhoony Do Sema Inde Some 2088

skin with hazardous substances and contact
during acid treatment used in recovery process.

Proper education, awareness and most
importantly alternative cost effective technology
need to be provided so that better means can be
provided to those who earn the livelihood from
this.

A holistic approach is needed to address the
challenges faced by India in e-waste management.
A suitable mechanism needs to be evolved to
include small units in unorganized sector and
large units in organized sector into a single value
chain.

5.8. SOLID WASTE

Solid wastes are the discarded (abandoned or
considered waste-like) materials. Solid waste
means any garbage, refuse, sludge from a
wastewater treatment plant, or air pollution
control facility and other discarded materials
including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained
gaseous material, resulting from industrial,
commercial, mining and agricultural operations,
and from community activities. But it does not
include solid or dissolved materials in domestic
sewage, or solid or dissolved materials in
irrigation return flows or industrial discharges.

5.8.1. Plastic Waste

Plastics are considered to be one of the wonderful
inventions of 2oth Century. They are widely used
as packing and carry bags because of cost and
convenience. But plastics are now considered as
environmental hazard due to the “Throw away
culture”.

5.8.2. Source of generation of waste plastics
¢ Household
¢ Health and medicare

e Hotel and catering
e Air/rail travel

5.8.3. Effects

The land gets littered by plastic bag garbage and
becomes ugly and unhygienic.

Conventional plastics have been associated with
reproductive problems in both humans and
wildlife.

Dioxin (highly carcinogenic and toxic) by-product
of the manufacturing process is one of the
chemicals believed to be passed on through breast
milk to the nursing infant.

Burning of plastics, especially PVC releases this
dioxin and also furan into the atmosphere. Thus,
conventional plastics, right from their
manufacture to their disposal are a major problem
to the environment.

Plastic bags can also contaminate foodstuffs due
to leaching of toxic dyes and transfer of pathogens.

Careless disposal of plastic bags chokes drains,
blocks the porosity of the soil and causes problems
for groundwater recharge.

Plastic disturbs the soil microbe activity. The
terrestrial and aquatic animals misunderstand
plastic garbage as food items, swallow them and
die.

Plastic bags deteriorates soil fertility as it forms
part of manure and remains in the soil for years.

These bags finding their way in to the city
drainage system results in blockage causing
inconvenience, difficult in maintenance, creates
unhygienic environment resulting in health
hazard and spreading of water borne diseases.

Designing eco-friendly, biodegradable plastics are
the need of the hour.

5.8.4. Types
e Solid wastes are classified depending on their

source:

a) Municipal waste,

b) Hazardous waste and

c) Biomedical waste or hospital waste.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 121 ---
a) Municipal solid waste

e Municipal solid waste consists of household waste,
construction and demolition debris, sanitation
residue, and waste from streets.

e With rising urbanization and change in lifestyle
and food habits, the amount of municipal solid
waste has been increasing rapidly and its
composition changing.

e In 1947 cities and towns in India generated an
estimated 6 million tonnes of solid waste, in 1997
it was about 48 million tonnes. More than 25% of
the municipal solid waste is not collected at all.

e 70% of the Indian cities lack adequate capacity to
transport it and there are no sanitary landfills to
dispose of the waste. The existing landfills are
neither well equipped and are not lined properly
to protect against contamination of soil and
groundwater.

e Over the last few years, the consumer market has
grown rapidly leading to products being packed in
cans, aluminium foils, plastics, and other such
nonbiodegradable items that cause incalculable
harm to the environment.

b) Hazardous waste

® Industrial and hospital waste is considered
hazardous as they contain toxic substances.
Hazardous wastes could be highly toxic to
humans, animals, and plants and are corrosive,
highly inflammable, or explosive.

¢ India generates around 7 million tonnes of
hazardous wastes every year, most of which is
concentrated in four states: Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu.

* Household waste that can be categorized as
hazardous waste include old batteries, shoe polish,
paint tins, old medicines, and medicine bottles.

® In the industrial sector, the major generators of
hazardous waste are the metal, chemical, paper,
pesticide, dye, refining, and rubber goods
industries.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission j
» Sion in writing.

hemicals in hazardous waste

: sure to C

such as mercury and cyan!

c. Hospital waste . |

Hospital waste is generated during the diagnosis,

treatment, or immunization of human beings me

animals or in research activities or in the
production or testing of biologicals.

e These chemicals include formaldehyde and
phenols, which are used as disinfectants, and
mercury, which is used in thermometers or
equipment that measure blood pressure.

e It may include wastes like soiled waste,
disposables, anatomical waste, cultures, discarded
medicines, chemical wastes, disposable syringes,
swabs, bandages, body fluids, human excreta, etc.

¢ These are highly infectious and can be a serious
threat to human health if not managed in a
scientific and discriminate manner.

e Surveys carried out by various agencies show that
the health care establishments in India are not
giving due attention to their waste management.

e After the notification of the Bio-medical Waste
(Handling and Management) Rules, 1998, these
establishments are slowly streamlining the
process of waste segregation, collection, treatment,
and disposal.

5.8.5. Treatment and disposal of solid waste
i) Open dumps

¢ Open dumps refer to uncovered areas that are
used to dump solid waste of all kinds. The waste
is untreated, uncovered, and not segregated. It is
the breeding ground for flies, rats, and other
insects that spread disease. The rainwater run-off
from these dumps contaminates nearby land and
water thereby spreading disease. Treatment by
open dumps is to be phased out.

ii) Landfills

° Landfills are generally located in urban areas. It
Is a pit that is dug in the 8round. The garbage is


--- PAGE 122 ---
SHANKAR nO
IAS ACADEMY y™ FA
The fn A Atiny bn et i SAY Bt nae

dumped and the pit is covered with soil everyday
thus preventing the breeding of flies and rats.
Thus, every day, garbage is dumped and sealed.
After the landfill is full, the area is covered with
a thick layer of mud and the site can thereafter be
developed as a parking lot or a park.

e Problems - Ail types of waste are dumped in
landfills and when water seeps through them it
gets contaminated and in turn pollutes the
surrounding area. This contamination of
groundwater and soil through landfills is known
as leaching.

iii) Sanitary landfills

e Sanitary landfill is more hygienic and built in a
methodical manner to solve the problem of
leaching. These are lined with materials that are
impermeable such as plastics. and clay, and are
also built over impermeable soil. Constructing
sanitary landfills is very costly

iv) Incineration plants

e The process of burning waste in large furnaces at
high temperature is known as incineration. In
these plants the recyclable material is segregated
and the rest of the material is burnt and ash is
produced.

e Burning garbage is not a clean process as it
produces tonnes of toxic ash and pollutes the air
and water. A large amount of the waste that is
burnt here can be recovered and recycled. In fact,
at present, incineration is kept as the last resort
and is used mainly for treating the infectious
waste.

v) Pyrolysis

e Itis.a process of combustion in absence of oxygen
or the material burnt under controlled atmosphere
of oxygen. It is an alternative to incineration. The
gas and liquid thus obtained can be used as fuels.
Pyrolysis of carbonaceous wastes like firewood,
coconut, palm waste, corn combs, cashew shell,
rice husk paddy straw and saw dust, yields
charcoal along with products like tar, methy]
alcohol, acetic acid, acetone and a fuel gas.

vi) Composting

¢ Composting is a biological process in which micro-
organisms, mainly fungi and bacteria, decompose
degradable organic waste into humus like
substance in the presence of oxygen.

e This finished product, which looks like soil, is high
in carbon and nitrogen and is an excellent medium
for growing plants.

e It increases the soil’s ability to hold water and
makes the soil easier to cultivate. It helps the soil
retain more plant nutrients.

e It recycles the nutrients and returns them back to
soil as nutrients.

e Apart from being clean, cheap, and safe,
composting can significantly reduce the amount
o f disposable
garbage.

vii) Vermiculture

e It is also known as earthworm farming. In this
method, Earth worms are added to the compost.
These worms break the waste and the added

excreta of the worms makes the compost very rich
in nutrients.

viii) Four R’s

5.8.6. Waste Minimization Circles (WMC)
WMC helps Small and Medium Industrial Clusters in
waste minimization in their industrial plants.

e This is assisted by the World Bank with the
Ministry of Environment and Forests acting as the
nodal ministry. The project is being implemented
with the assistance of National Productivity
Council (NPC), New Delhi.

e The initiative also aims to realize the objectives of
the Policy Statement for Abatement of Pollution
(1992), which states that the government should
educate citizens about environmental risks, the
economic and health dangers of resource
degradation and the real economic cost of natural
resources.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 123 ---
i SHANKAR —__ ee

e The policy also recognizes that citizens and non-
governmental organizations play a role in
environmental monitoring, therefore, enabling
them to supplement the regulatory system and
recognizing their expertise where such exists and
where their commitments and vigilance would be
cost effective.

5.9 THERMAL POLLUTION

Thermal pollution is the rise or fall in the temperature
of a natural aquatic environment caused by human
influence. This has become an increasing and the
most current pollution, owing to the increasing call
of globalization everywhere.

Thermal pollution is caused by either dumping hot
water from factories and power plants or removing
trees and vegetation that shade streams, permitting
sunlight to raise the temperature of these waters,
release of cold water which lowers the temperature.
Like other forms of water pollution, thermal pollution
is widespread, affecting many lakes and vast numbers
of streams and rivers in various parts of the world.

Major sources

¢ power plants creating electricity from fossil fuel
e water as a cooling agent in industrial facilities

e deforestation of the shoreline

e soil erosion

Ecological Effects — Warm Water

The change in temperature impacts organisms by
(a) decreasing oxygen supply, and

(b) affecting ecosystem composition.

Warm water contains less oxygen. Elevated
temperature typically decreases the level of dissolved
oxygen (DO) in water. So there is decrease in rate of
decomposition of organic matter. Green algae are
replaced by less desirable blue green algae. Many
animals fail to multiply.

It also increases the metabolic rate of aquatic animals

results in consumption of more food in a shorter time
than if their environment were not changed. An

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing

olic rate may result in food source
decrease in a population,
ment may also result in a
migration of organisms to another, more suitable
environment and to in-migration of fishes that

normally only live in warmer waters elsewhere. This

leads to competition for fewer resources; the more

adapted organisms moving in may have an advantage
over organisms that are not used to the warmer
temperature. As a result one has the problem of
compromising food chains of the old and new
environments. Biodiversity can be decreased as a
result.

Temperature changes of even one to two degrees
Celsius can cause significant changes in organism
metabolism and other adverse cellular biology effects.
Principal adverse changes can include rendering cel]
walls less permeable to necessary osmosis,
coagulation of cell proteins, and alteration of enzyme
metabolism. These cellular level effects can adversely
affect mortality and reproduction.

increased metab
shortages, causing a sharp

Changes in the environ

Primary producers are affected by warm water
because higher water temperature increases plant
growth rates, resulting in a shorter life span and
species overpopulation. This can cause an algae
bloom which reduces the oxygen levels in the water.
The higher plant density results in reduced light
intensity, decreases photosynthesis and leads to an

increased plant respiration rate. This is similar to the
eutrophication.

A large increase in temperature can lead to the
denaturing of life-supporting enzymes by breaking
down hydrogen- and disulphide bonds within the
quaternary structure of the enzymes. Decreased
enzyme activity in aquatic organisms can cause

problems such as the inability to break down lipids,
which leads to malnutrition.

Ecological Effects — Cold Water

Thermal pollution can also be caused by the release
of very cold water from the base of reservoirs into
warmer rivers. This affects fish (particularly their

eBBs and larvae), Macroinvertebrates and river
productivity.


--- PAGE 124 ---
|.

~yt s
an . reese

SHANKAR —
IAS ACADEMY "9

Control Measures

Instead of discharging heated water into lakes and
streams, power plants and factories can pass the
heated water through cooling towers or cooling
ponds, where evaporation cools the water before it is
discharged.

Alternatively, power plants can be designed or refitted
to be more efficient and to produce less waste heat in
the first place.

Cogeneration - process through which, the excess
heat energy from generating electricity can be used
in another manufacturing process that needs such
energy. Where homes or other buildings are located
near industrial plants, waste hot water can be used
for heating—an arrangement often found in
Scandinavian towns and cities, and proposed for use
in China.

To prevent thermal pollution due to devegetation, the
prescription is simple: do not devegetate and leave
strips of trees and vegetation along streams and
shorelines.

All efforts to control erosion also have the effect of
keeping water clearer and, dice cooler.

5.10 PLASTIC POLLUTION

The marine resource covering 70 percent of the
earth’s surface is a key asset in the biosphere. Of the
nearly 1.5 million species known, nearly a quarter
million live in the world’s oceans. More importantly,
nearly 50 percent of the global primary production
takes place in the upper stratum of sea water. Seafood
presently represents 20% of the protein in global
diet.

The health of the marine food web and the fisheries
resources invariably depend upon the long-term

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

viability of the autotrophic algae (phytoplankton -
primary producer) and the zooplankton (primary
consumers) in the marine food pyramid.

Plastics represent the latest contaminant in the
marine environment, the increased use of plastics has
lead to negative environmental impacts.

Plastics pollution can interfere with the plankton
species that form the foundation of the food web, and
other organisms adversely affecting the delicate
balance in the marine ecosystem.

Do you know?

“Science Express” is an innovative mobile science
exhibition mounted on a 16-coach AC train, which
has been custom-built for Department of Science &
Technology (DST). by Indian Railway. The Express
‘is a unique collaborative initiative of Department of
Science and Technology, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) and Ministry
of Railway. The unique mobile expo was launched
in October 2007 by DST. The 2012, 2013 and 2014,
three phases/runs of “Science Express” were rolled
out as a joint initiative of DST and MoEFCC as
Biodiversity Special and showcased the ‘myriad
“Biodiversity of India”. 2015 run with the focus to
the theme “Climate Change” and run it as “Science
\ Express Climate Action Special (SECAS).

Plastics as a Waste Material- in Marine
Environment

The amount of plastic waste estimation annually
introduced into the marine environment is not
available. But, plastic waste is well known to result
primarily from fishing-related activities, and from
non-point source influx from beaches.

There are two clear differences between the fate of
plastics debris in the ocean environment as opposed
to on land environments.

a) The rate of UV-induced photo-oxidative
degradation of plastics floating or submerged at
sea is very much slower than that exposed to the
same solar radiation on land.


--- PAGE 125 ---
b) Unlike on land there is no easy means of retrieval,
sorting and recycling of plastic waste that enters
into the ocean environment.

These two factors generally result in extended

lifetimes for plastics at sea.

The plastic waste that has been introduced into the

world’s oceans must accumulate for the most part

intact and unmineralized in the marine environment.

While the fate of such plastics is not clear, it is

reasonable to expect at least some of it to continue

disintegrating into microparticulate debris. Recent
reports even indicate an increase in their counts over
the last two decades.

Impact of Microparticles

Challenging the Antarctic krill and other zooplankton
with plastic beads that are about 20 microns or so in
size has demonstrated that these microparticulates
are readily ingested by these organisms. They appear
to ingest the particles unselectively, and the ingestion
rates depend on the concentration of particles in the
environment.

Plastics are bio-inert and are not expected to be toxic
to the animal in the conventional sense. While
physical obstruction or indirect interference with
physiology is always possible (as with sea birds
showing satiation on ingesting plastics) the material
will pass through the animal virtually unchanged.
The concern, however, is that plastics exposed to sea
water tends to concentrate toxic and non-toxic
organic compounds present in the sea water at low
concentrations. These, including PCBs, DDT, and
nonylphenols, have very high partition coefficients
and are very efficiently concentrated in the plastic
material.

Plastic-related distress to over 250 species has been
documented worldwide. The focus has very much
been on larger species in surface waters or beaches,
despite the fact that 99 percent of marine species live
in the benthos. The impact of negatively buoyant
plastic waste (such as nylon net fragments) on benthic
species has remained virtually unaddressed.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means without permission i a
, ion in writing.

SHANKAR
[a ewe Se: ,;

Despite years of interest on the topic little research
has been carried out by the government agencies or
the plastics industry to address the key issues relating
s in the marine environment.

Plastics as a Waste Material- in Land

Environment

Problems with the uncollected plastic waste, include

(i) Choking of drains by plastic carry bags which
may lead to unhygienic environment and water
borne diseases,

(ii) Causing of illness and possible death of animals
that may feed on plastics from garbage bins,
(iii) Non-biodegradable and impervious nature of
plastics disposed on soil which may arrest

recharge of ground water aquifers,

(iv) presence of additives and plasticizers, fillers,
flame retardants and pigments used in the plastic
products which have potential to cause adverse
health impact and ground water pollution.

to plastic

5.11. BBIOREMEDIATION

e Bioremediation is the use of microorganisms
(bacteria and fungi) to degrade the environmental
contaminants into less toxic forms.

e The microorganisms may be indigenous to a
contaminated area or they may be isolated from
elsewhere and brought to the contaminated site.

The process of bioremediation can be monitored
indirectly by measuring the Oxidation Reduction
Potential or redox in soil and groundwater, together

with pH, temperature, oxygen content, electron
acceptor/donor concentrations, and concentration
of breakdown products (e.g. carbon dioxide)

5.11.1. Bioremediation Strategies
(a) In situ bioremediation techniques

¢ Itinvolves treatment of the contaminated material
at the site.


--- PAGE 126 ---
Ieee

SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY”

e Bioventing - supply of air and nutrients
through wells to contaminated soil to stimulate
the growth of indigenous bacteria. It is used for
simple hydrocarbons and can be used where
the contamination is deep under the surface.

e Biosparging - Injection of air under pressure
below the water table to increase groundwater
oxygen concentrations and enhance the rate of

¢ Composting - dealt earlier in solid waste
management

Using bioremediation techniques, TERI has
developed a mixture of bacteria called ‘oilzapper’
which degrades the pollutants of oil-contaminated

sites, leaving behind no harmful residues. This
technique is not only environment friendly, but
also highly cost-effective.

biological degradation of contaminants by , ; ‘
naturally occurring bacteria 5-11.2. Genetic engineering approaches

e Bioaugmentation - Microorganisms are Phytoremediation

imported to a contaminated site to enhance
degradation process.

e Phytoremediation is use of plants to remove
contaminants from soil and water .

Doyouknow? y lees
oS not: +f oF together: That

Phytoextraction / phytoaccumulation is the
process by which plants accumulate contaminants
into the roots and above ground shoots or leaves.

(b) Ex ¢icu bioremediation ere

e Exsitu -involves the removal of the contaminated

material to be treated elsewhere.

e Landfarming - contaminated soil is excavated
and spread over a prepared bed and
periodically tilled [] until pollutants are
degraded.The goal is to stimulate indigenous
biodegradative microorganisms and facilitate
their aerobic degradation of contaminants.

¢ Biopiles - it is a hybrid of landfarming and
composting. Essentially, engineered cells are
constructed as aerated composted piles.
Typically used for treatment of surface
contamination with petroleum hydrocarbons.

e Bioreactors - it involves the processing of
contaminated solid material (soil, sediment,
sludge) or water through an engineered
containment system.

Phytotransformation or phytodegradation
refers to the uptake of organic contaminants from
soil, sediments, or water and their transformation
to more stable, less toxic, less mobile form.
Phytostabilization is a technique in which plants
reduce the mobility and migration of
contaminated soil. Leachable constituents are
adsorbed and bound into the plant structure so
that they form unstable mass of plant from which
the contaminants will not re-enter the
environment.

Phytodegradation or rhizodegradation is the
breakdown of contaminants through the activity
existing in the rhizosphere. This activity is due to
the presence of proteins and enzymes produced
by the plants or by soil organisms such as bacteria,
yeast, and fungi.

Rhizofiltration is a water remediation technique
that involves the uptake of contaminants by plant
roots. Rhizofiltration is used to reduce contamination
in natural wetlands and estuary areas.

The bacterium Deinococcus radiodurans has been

used to de toxify toluene and ionic mercury which
are released from radioactive nuclear waste.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 127 ---
SHANKAR BER EEG —
Bias acacemy” Rey fi ee OW

Mycoremediation

e isa form of bioremediation in which fungi are

used to decontaminate the area.

Mycofiltration

e isa similar process, using fungal mycelia to filter
toxic waste and microorganisms from water in

soil.

Advantages of bioremediation

e Useful for the complete destruction of a wide

variety of contaminants.

e The complete destruction of target pollutants is

possible.
e Less expensive.

e Environment friendly
Disadvantages of bioremediation

Do you know?

Rattlesnakes are easily recognized by, their rattle.
The rattlesnake babies are born with what is called
a pre-button. The baby snake loses this piece when
it sheds its skin for the first time. With the shedding
a new button appears. With every shedding after

that another button, or rattle, will be added. These
buttons are made up of a material called Keratin.
The rattles are empty. The noise comes. from each
segment knocking together, so until a rattlesnake
has two or more pieces it isn’t going to make a
sound! But when it does...you WILL hear it...and
you WILL RUN! Shae

susceptible to rapid and complete degradation.

® Biological processes are often highly specific.
scale studies to full-scale field operations.

treatment process.

Bioremediation is limited to those compounds that
are biodegradable. Not all compounds are

It is difficult to extrapolate from bench and pilot-

Bioremediation often takes longer time than other

5.12. ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION

AND HEALTH

First

Pollution inventory and apportionment studies
that assess relative contribution of different
sources are looked at in isolation and not within
a coherent framework of health protection.

What ultimately should drive policy is not just
what source is emitting more but which source is
likely to lead to a greater exposure to health
damaging pollutants.

Globally, studies show vehicles contribute from a
quarter to close to half of the particulates in cities,

Second

Our scientists do not say that people are exposed
to much higher health damaging pollutants than
what occurs in ambient conditions.

With each breath we inhale three-four times more
pollutants than the ambient air concentration.

Exposure to vehicular fumes is highest on road
and up to 500 metres from there. The majority in
our cities lives in that zone.

Third

People are exposed to a mixture of pollutants
whose combined effect has serious health impact.
The benefits are greater when pollution sources
are regulated for multi-pollutants.

Delhi’s air is thick with particulate matter,
nitrogen oxides, ozone and air toxins.

There is merit in NGT’s focus on diesel emissions
which is a multi-pollutant mixture classified as a
class one carcinogen for its strong link with lung
cancer. Exposure to toxins should be eliminated.

Fourth

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Our air quality policies are cut off from the
reported reality in the health sector.

India is experiencing a rapid health transition, with
a large and rising burden of chronic diseases,


--- PAGE 128 ---
f SHANKAR 2
f IAS ACADEMY

estimated to be more than half of all deaths and

Do youknow?
Gharial crocodile counts amongst the largest croc-

years lost to illness.

e Cancer, stroke, and chronic lung diseases are now odile species in the world. It is also one of two sur- |

major public health problems that are strongly viving members of the Gavialidae family. Gharial
influenced by air pollution. Crocodiles of India have an elongated and narrow
snout. It is mainly found in the river systems of

5.13 ACID RAIN Indus, Brahmaputra, Ganges, Mahanadi, Kaladan

and Ayeyarwad
Acid rain is the rainfall that has been acidified. It is

formed when oxides of sulfur and nitrogen react with
the moisture in the atmosphere. It is rain with a pH

(b) Dry Deposition
e In areas where the weather is dry, the acid
chemicals may become incorporated into dust or

of less than 5.6. Acid rain is particularly damaging to smoke and fall to the ground through dry
lakes, streams, and forests and the plants and deposition, sticking to the ground, buildings,
animals that live in these ecosystems. vegetation, cars, etc.
e Dry deposited gases and particles can be washed
5.14. TYPES OF ACID DEPOSITION from these surfaces by rainstorms, through
runoff.

“Acid rain” is a broad term referring to a mixture of
e This runoff water makes the resulting mixture

wet and dry deposition (form of deposition material) ais
more acidic.

from the atmosphere
e About half of the acidity in the atmosphere falls
(a) Wet Neposition back to earth through dry deposition.
e If the acid chemicals in the air are blown into
areas where the weather is wet, the acids can fall The pH scale
to the ground in the form of rain, snow, fog, or The pH scale is a measure of how acidic or basic
mist. (alkaline) a solution is.

e As this acidic water flows over and through the It ranges from o - nf APH of 7 is neutral.
ground, it affects a variety of plants and animals. A pH less than 7 is acidic, and a pH greater

than 7 is basic.

e The strength of the effects depends on several it was devised in 1909 and it is a logarithmic

factors, including how acidic the water is; the index for the hydrogen ion concentration in an
chemistry and buffering capacity of the soils aqueous solution.

involved; and the types of fish, trees, and other pH values decreases as hydrogen ion levels in-
living things that rely on the water. creases.

e Precipitation removes gases and particles from the A solution with pH 4 is ten times more acidic
than solution with pH 5, and a hundred times

atmosphere by two processes:
more acidic than solution with pH 6.

(i) rain-out which is the incorporation of particles
into cloud drops which fall to the ground, and

Whilst the pH range is usually given as 0 to 14,
lower and higher values are theoretically pos-
(ii) washout which occurs when materials below the sible.

cloud is swept down by rain or snow it falls.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.



--- PAGE 129 ---
5.14.1. Sources of compounds causing acid
rain
(a) Sulphur
(i) Natural sources:
e seas and oceans,
e volcanic eruptions,
e Biological processes in the soil e.g.,
Decomposition of organic matter.

(ii) Man-made sources:
e burning of coal (60% of SO,) and
e petroleum products (30% of SO,), and

e The smelting of metal sulfide ores to obtain the
pure metals.

e Industrial production of Sulfuric acid in
metallurgical, chemical and fertilizer
industries.

(b) Nitrogen
Natural sources:

e volcanic eruption, and

© Biological activity.
Anthropogenic sources:

¢ Forest fires

¢ Combustion of oil, coal, and gas
(©) Formic acid

© Biomass burning due to forest fires causes
emission of formic acid (HCOOH) and
formaldehyde (HCHO) into the atmosphere.

* Large fraction formaldehyde gets photo -
oxidation and forms formic acid in the

atmosphere.
These are three main compounds that cause
acidification of rain in the atmosphere.
(d) Other Acids:
* Chlorine
© Phosphoric acid
© Hydrochloric acid (smokestacks).

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in —

so) ENMROMMERT:

e Carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide
(automobiles). These become carbonic acid.

Does it occurs only in industrial areas alone?
SOX and NOX that create Acid Rain are often

i from their points
transported to distances far away
of origin by the wind so that the adverse effects of

pollution are also experienced at place remote from
the place of genesis. The problem is further
compounded as the environmental damage caused
by acid rain is not uniform, but is area-specific.

5.14.2. Common characteristics of acid rain
areas:

Areas which are prone to acid-rain attacks have some
common characteristics:

e They are concentrated in the industrialized belt of
the northern hemisphere.

e They are often upland and / or mountainous
areas, which are well-watered by rain and snow.

Due to the abundance of water, they possess

numerous lakes and streams and also have more
land covered with vegetation.

Being upland, they often have thin soils and
glaciated bedrock,

World scenario

Many parts of Scandinavia, Canada, the North and
Northeast United States and Northern Europe
(particularly West Ger many and upland Britain)
share these features. Across the Atlantic there are


--- PAGE 130 ---
SHANKAR
a ACADEMY “=

The Pernt 1AS Arachinany fv Sensi in SOE ee

number of acid rain hot spots including Nova Scotia,
Southern Ontario and Quebec in Canada, the
Adirondack Mountains in New York, Great Smoky
mountains, parts of Wisconsin, Minnesota, and the
Colorado Rockies of the US.

In India

In India, the first report of acid rain came from
Bombay in 1974. Instances of acid rain are being
reported from metropolitan cities.

In India, the annual SO, emission has almost doubled
in the last decade due to increased fossil fuel
consumption. Lowering of soil pH is reported from
north-eastern India, coastal Karnataka and Kerala,
parts of Orissa, West Bengal and Bihar.

Indicators

Lichens serve as good bio-indicators for air pollu-
tion. In the variety of pH around 6.0, several ani-

mals, those are important food items for fish
decline. These include the freshwater shrimp, cray-
fish, snails and some small mussels.

5.14.3. Chemistry of Acid Rain

Six basic steps are involved in the formation of acid

rain:

1. The atmosphere receives oxides of sulfur and
nitrogen from natural and man-made sources.

2. Some of these oxides fall back directly to the
ground as dry deposition, either close to the place
of origin or some distance away.

3. Sunlight stimulates the formation of photo-
oxidants (such as ozone) in the atmosphere.

4. These photo-oxidants interact with the oxides of
sulfur and nitrogen to produce H,SO, and HNO,
by oxidation.

5. The oxides are of sulfur and nitrogen, photo-
oxidants, and other gases (like NH,)

6. Acid rain containing ions of sulfate, nitrate,
ammonium and hydrogen falls as wet deposition.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Difference between normally and anthro-
pogenically acidified lakes

Concentrations
dissolved

of | Dissolved organic carbon
organic | concentrations are low.

Abound with aquatic}Some of the more
sensitive taxa, such as
blue-green algae, some
bacteria, snails, mussels
crustaceans, mayflies
and fish either decrease
or / are eliminated.

5.14.4. Impact Of Acid Rain

(a) Soil

e The exchange between hydrogen ions and the
nutrient cations like potassium and magnesium
in the soil cause leaching of the nutrients,
making the soil infertile.

e This is accompanied by a decrease in the
respiration of soil organisms.

e An increase in ammonia in the soil due to a
decrease in other nutrients decreases the rate
of decomposition.


--- PAGE 131 ---
e Acid rain can directly affect the eggs anq

The tow ith Acadioney be Senate Inte SCD HB

e The nitrate level of the soil is also found to
decrease.

e The impact of acid rain on soil is less in India;
because Indian soils are mostly alkaline, with
good buffering ability.

(b) Vegetation
Acid rains affect trees and undergrowth in forest in
several ways, Causing reduced growth or abnormal
growth:
e The typical growth-decreasing symptoms are:

e Discoloration and loss of foliar biomass

e Loss of feeder-root biomass, especially in
conifers

e Premature senescence (aging) of older needles
in conifers

e Increase in susceptibility of damage to
secondary root and foliar pathogens

e Death of herbaceous vegetation beneath
affected trees

e Prodigious production of lichens on affected
trees

e Death of affected trees.
(Q Micro organisms

e pH determines the proliferation of any
microbial species in a particular environment
and the rate at which it can produce.

¢ The optimum pH of most bacteria and protozoa
is near neutrality; most fungi prefer an acidic
environment, most blue-green bacteria prefer
an alkaline environment.

© So after a long run of acid rain, microbial
species in the soil and water shift from
bacteria-bound to fungi-bound and cause an
imbalance in the microflora.

® This causes a delay in the decomposition of soil
organic material, and an increase in fungal
disease in aquatic life and forests.

(d) Wild life

The effects of acid rain on wild life are not very
obvious and are therefore, difficult to document.
Nevertheless, several direct and indirect effects of
acid rain on the productivity and survival of wildlife
populations have been reported.

tadpoles of frogs and salamanders that bree

in small forest ponds.

It has been postulated that acid rain can
indirectly affect wildlife by allowing metals
bound on soils and sediments to be released
into the aquatic environment, where toxic
substances may be ingested by animals, like
birds, that feed in such an environment.

Other indirect effects of acid rain on wildlife
are loss or alteration of food and habitat

resources.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission i i
7 In writing


--- PAGE 132 ---
Se ——————_—_—_—_—— tt—~—

SHANKAR
IAS ACADEMY ~ al aE

(e) Humans
Acid rain affects human health is a number of ways.
e The obvious ones are bad smells, reduced

visibility; irritation of the skin, eyes and the
respiratory tract.

e Some direct effects include chronic bronchitis,
pulmonary emphysema and cancer.

e Some indirect effects include food poisoning vis
a vis drinking water and food.

e An increase in the levels of toxic heavy-metals
like manganese, copper, cadmium and
aluminium also contribute to the detrimental
effects on human health.

(f) Acid rain damage on Materials

Sulphur Oxides
and other acid
gases

Surface erosion
soiling, black
crust formation

Surface erosion,
surface crust
formation

Surface erosion,
discolouration,
soiling

Embrittlement,
discolouration

Sulphur Oxides
and other acid
gases

Acid gases,
especially
fluoride-
containing

Sulphur Oxides

(g) Socio-economic impacts of acid rain:

The adverse impact of acid rain on farming and
fishing leads to the deterioration of life quality indices
like GNP and per capita income, especially in the

predominantly agricultural and developing countries
like India

5.14.5. Trigger Effect of Acid Rain on Pollutants:
A low pH of the rainwater and subsequent increased
acidity in the environment can trigger off or
aggravate the effects of certain harmful pollutants.
(i) Mercury:
© Methyl mercury and related short chain alkyl
mercurial compounds are most dangerous to
humans, as they accumulate in edible fish
tissue.

e Although acid deposition may not increase the
production of methyl mercury, it may increase
the partitioning of methyl mercury into the
water column.

e The use of lime has helped in reducing the
mercury levels in fish.

(ii) Aluminium:

e Acidified waters are known to leach substantial
amounts of aluminium from watersheds.

e Even at relatively low levels, aluminium has
been implicated in dialysis dementia, a disorder
of the central nervous system, which may be
toxic to individuals with impaired kidney
function.

(iii) Cadmium:

e Cadmium can enter the drinking water supply
through corrosion of galvanized pipe or from
the copper-zinc through corrosion of
galvanized piper or from the copper-zinc solder
used in the distribution systems.

e A decrease in water pH from 6.5 to 4.5 can
result in a fivefold increase in cadmium and
could cause renal tubular damage.

(iv) Lead:
e Foetuses and infants are highly susceptible to
drinking water lead contamination.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 133 ---
SHANKAR
a IAS ACADEMY () 0 a 5 he
(e

e High blood lead levels in children (>30 mug/
Ml) are believed to induce biochemical and
neurophysiological dysfunction.

e However, lower than normal blood levels of
lead can cause mental deficiencies and
behavioural problems.

(v) Asbestos:
Asbestos in natural rock can be released by acidic
waters.

Do you know?

Tree ferns like Cyathaea and Alsophila have er e

rhizomes with generally unbranched © ‘tru 0
topped by acrown of graceful, ere fronds rag
form a rosette at the apex.

“Under Smart Cities Mission, first-of-its-kind
initiative — Climate Smart Cities Assessment
Framework 2019 has been launched which

intends to provide clear roadmap for cities and
urban India towards combating climate change
through adoption of both mitigation and
adaptation measures.

5.14.6. Control Measures:
Reducing or eliminating the sources of pollution by

e Buffering- the practice of adding a neutralizing
agent to the acidified water to increase the pH is
one of the important control measures. Usually
lime in the form of calcium oxide and calcium
carbonate is used.

© Reducing the emission of SO2 from power stations
by burning less fossil fuel, using alternate energy
sources like tidal, wind, hydropower etc.,

* using low sulphur fuel;

e desulphurization

decreasing emission of NOx from power stations

and

Modification of engines.

Emissions of SOx can be controlled by

© Converting to sulphuric acid.

e Converting it to elemental sulphur.

© Neutralizing it and using it in the manufacture
of other products.

5.15 CATEGORIZATION OF INDUSTRIAL

SECTORS

e The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate

Change (MoEFCC) has developed the criteria of
categorization of industrial sectors, Red, Orange,
Green and White categories based on the Pollution
Index which is a function of the emissions (air
pollutants), effluents (water pollutants), hazardous
wastes generated and consumption of resources.
The Pollution Index PI of any industrial sector is
a number from o to 100 and the increasing value
of PI denotes the increasing degree of pollution
load from the industrial sector.

“Re-categorization of industries based on their
pollution load is a scientific exercise. The old
system of categorization was creating problems for
many industries and was not reflecting the
pollution of the industries. The new categories will
remove this lacuna and will give clear picture to
everyone. “The new category of White industries
which is practically non-polluting will not require
Environmental Clearance (EC) and Consent and
will help in getting finance from lending
institutions. No Red category of industries shall

normally be permitted in the ecologically fragile
area / protected area.

o,

\/ \2
“~ & % % “9 “9

All Rights Reserved. No

i terial may be reproduced in any form or b a .
part of this ma y any means, without permission ;
n in writing.



--- PAGE 134 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

QF 6° g Go

| CHAPTER - 6 |

ENVIRONMENT

QW

RENEWABLE ENERGY

caused more environmental damage than any other

human activity. Electricity generated from fossil
fuels has led to high concentrations of harmful gases in the
atmosphere. This has in turn led to many environmental
and health problems being faced today.

C onsumption of non-renewable sources of energy has

Therefore, alternative sources of energy have become very
important and relevant.

Renewable energy is energy that is generated from natural
resources that are continuously replenished. This includes
sunlight, geothermal heat, wind, tides, water, and various
forms of biomass. This energy cannot be exhausted and is
constantly renewed.

They are viable source of clean limitless energy, cause less
emission, and are available locally. The use of renewable
energy greatly reduces all sort of pollutions vis-a-vis non-
renewable energy. Most of the renewable sources of energy
are fairly non-polluting and considered clean. But biomass
though a renewable source, is a major contributor of indoor
pollution.

Renewable energy comprises of
Solar energy - energy generated from the sun

Hydel energy - energy derived from water

Biomass - energy from firewood, animal dung, bio-
degradable waste and crop residues, when it is burnt.
Geothermal energy- energy from hot dry rocks,
magma, hot water springs, natural geysers, etc.
Ocean thermal - energy from waves and also from
tidal waves.

Co-generation - producing two forms of energy
from one fuel.

Fuel cells are also being used as cleaner energy
source.

Electricity is the flow of energy or current and is one of the
most widely used forms of energy throughout the world.

Source

Primary source - renewable energy like solar, wind, geo-
thermal

Secondary source - non-renewable energy generated
through the conversion of coal, oil, natural gas etc.

The Government has up-scaled the target of renewable
energy capacity to 175 GW by the year 2022 which includes
100 GW from solar, 60 GW from wind, 10 GW from bio-
power and 5 GW from small hydro-power.

Installed power generation capacity in India

The total installed capacity in India from renewable energy
on April, 2016 is 42,800 MW. Majority of the total capacity
is developed by the State sector accounting for about 39
per cent (app.) followed by Private sector for about 31 per
cent (app.) and Centre hold about 29 per cent (app.) each.

6.1 SOLAR ENERGY

India is one of the few countries naturally blessed with long
days and plenty of sunshine.

There are two ways we can produce electricity from the
sun light:

e Photovoltaic Electricity - uses photovoltaic cells that
absorb the direct sunlight to generate electricity

e Solar-Thermal Electricity - uses a solar collector that
has a mirrored surface which reflects the sunlight onto
a receiver that heats up a liquid. This heated up liquid
is used to make steam that produces electricity.

6.1.3 Photovoltaic Electricity

Solar panels are attached to an aluminium mounting sys-
tem. Photovoltaic (PV) cells are made up of at least 2 semi-
conductor layers - a positive charge, and a negative charge.
As a PV cell is exposed to sunlight, photons are reflected,

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 135 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

pass right through, or absorbed by the solar cell. When
enough photons are absorbed by the negative layer of the
photovoltaic cell, electrons are freed from the negative
semiconductor material. These freed electrons migrate to
the positive layer creating a voltage differential. When the
two layers are connected to an external load, the electrons
flow through the circuit creating electricity. The power
generated - Direct Current (DC) is converted to Alternate
Current (AC) with the use of inverters.

Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) or solar thermal
technology

It utilises focused sunlight and convert it into high-
temperature heat. That heat is then channelled through a
conventional generator to produce electricity.

Solar collectors capture and concentrate sunlight to heat
a fluid which in turn generates electricity. There are sev-
eral variations in the shape of the collectors. The most
commonly used are the parabolic troughs. Parabolic
trough power plants use a curved, mirrored trough which
reflects the direct solar radiation onto a glass tube contain-
ing a fluid and the fluid gets heated owing to the concen-
trated solar radiation and the hot steam generated is used
to rotate the turbine to generate electricity. Commonly
used fluids are synthetic oil, molten salt and pressurised
steam.

The power generated - Direct Current (DC) is converted to
Alternate Current (AC) with the use of inverters.

6.1.4 Potential of solar energy in India

e India has the potential to generate 35 MW/kmz2 using
solar photovoltaic and solar thermal energy.

e Solar energy of about 5,000 trillion kWh per year is
incident over India’s land area with most parts receiving
4-7 kWh per sq. m per day. Hence both technology
routes (solar thermal and solar photovoltaic) for conver-
sion of solar radiation into heat and electricity can ef-
fectively be harnessed providing huge scalability for
solar power in India.

e The states with very high solar radiation are Rajasthan,

northern Gujarat and parts of Ladakh region, Andhra
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.

6.1.5 Installed capacity - India
The current installed capacity of solar in grid connected

power crossed 10,000 MW, as on 2017, as per MNRE esti-
mates.

A major initiative called ‘The National Solar Mission’ was
formulated by Government of India and its state govern-
ments.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

One of the main features of the Mission is to make India
a global leader in solar energy and the mission envisages
an installed solar generation capacity of 100 GW (revised
target) by 2022.

6.16 International Solar Alliance

International Solar Alliance (ISA) is launched at the CoP21
Climate Conference in Paris on 30th November as a special
platform for mutual cooperation among 121 solar resource
rich countries lying fully or partially between Tropic of
Cancer and Tropic of Capricorn.

The alliance is dedicated to address special energy needs
of ISA member countries.

International Agency for Solar Policy and Application
(IASPA) will be the formal name of International Solar
Alliance. The ISA secretariat will be set up in National
Institute of Solar Energy, Gurgaon.

Objectives

1. to force down prices by driving demand;

2. to bring standardization in solar technologies

3. to foster research and development.

Prime Minister coined the new term “Surya Putra” for all
the nations which fall between Tropic of Cancer and Tropic
of Capricorn, and which have been invited to join the alli-

ance. The other term used for these countries is “Sunshine
Countries”.

IESS 2047 stands for India Energy Security Scenarios 2047
calculator which has been launched by India to explore the
potential of future energy scenarios for India.

6.2. LUMINESCENT SOLAR
CONCENTRATORS

A luminescent solar concentrator (LSC) is a device that
uses a thin sheet of material to trap solar radiation over a
large area, before directing the energy (through lumines-
cent emission) to cells mounted on the thin edges of the
material layer.

The thin sheet of material typically consists of a polymer
(such as polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)), doped with
luminescent species such as organic dyes, quantum dots or
rare earth complexes.

What is the need for LSCs?

e The main motivation for implementing LSCs is to
replace a large area of expensive solar cells in a stand-

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 136 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

ard flat-plate PV panel, with a cheaper alternative.
Therefore there is both a reduction in both the cost
of the module (¢/W) and the solar power produced
(£/kWh).

e A key advantage of over typical concentrating sys-
tems is that LSCs can collect both direct and diffuse
solar radiation. Therefore tracking of the sun is not
required.

e LSCs are excellent candidates for building integrated
photovoltaics (BIPV) and for the cloudier northern
climates.

Ideal LSC

e A broad absorption range to utilize the solar spectrum
efficiently.

¢ 100% emission of light from the absorbing luminescent
species.

e A large shift between the absorption and emission spec-
tra to reduce absorption losses.

e Long term stability.

Challenges for LSC

e The development of LSCs aims to create a working
structure that performs close to the theoretical maxi-
mum efficiency.

International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA)

IRENA has 150 member nations with Headquarters in Abu
Dhabi.

The International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) is
an intergovernmental organisation that supports countries
in their transition to a sustainable energy future, and
serves as the principal platform for international coop-
eration, a centre of excellence, and a repository of policy,
technology, resource and financial knowledge on renew-
able energy.

IRENA promotes the widespread adoption and sustainable
use of all forms of renewable energy, including bioenergy,
geothermal, hydropower, ocean, solar and wind energy in
the pursuit of sustainable development, energy access,
energy security and low-carbon economic growth and
prosperity.

6.3 WIND ENERGY

Wind energy is the kinetic energy associated with the
movement of atmospheric air. Wind turbines transform the
energy in the wind into mechanical power, further con-
verting to electric power to generate electricity. Five

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

nations - Germany, USA, Denmark, Spain and India -
account for 80% of the world’s installed wind energy
capacity.

6.3.1 Wind farm

A wind farm is a group of wind turbines in the same loca-
tion used for production of electricity. A wind farm can be
located onshore and offshore.

¢ Onshore wind farms: operate on land, where the wind
tends to be the strongest. The turbines of a Onshore
wind farms are less expensive and easier to set up,
maintain and operate than offshore turbines.

e Offshore wind farms: Construction of wind farms in
large bodies of water to generate electricity. Offshore
wind farms are more expensive than onshore wind
farms of the same nominal power.

6.3.2 Working of wind turbines

Wind turbines convert the kinetic energy in the wind into
mechanical energy. This mechanical power can be used
for specific tasks (such as grinding grain or pumping
water) or a generator can convert this mechanical power
into electricity. Most turbines have three aerodynamically
designed blades. The energy in the wind turns two or
three propeller-like blades around a rotor that is con-
nected to the main shaft, which spins a generator to create
electricity. Wind turbines are mounted on a tower to cap-
ture the most energy. At 100 feet (30 meters) or more
above ground, they can take advantage of faster and less
turbulent wind.

Three main variables determine how much electricity a
turbine can produce:

1. Wind speed- stronger winds produce more energy.
Wind turbine generates energy at a speed of 4-25 me-
tres per second

2. Blade radius- the larger the radius of blades, the more
the energy produced. Doubling the blade radius can
result in four times more power.

3. Air density- Heavier air exerts more lift on a rotor. Air
density is a function of altitude, temperature and pres-
sure. High altitude locations have low air pressure and
lighter air so they are less productive turbine locations.
The dense heavy air near sea level drives rotors faster
and thus relatively more effectively.

6.3.3 Two types of wind turbines

1) Horizontal-axis design has two or three blades that spin
upwind of the tower. A horizontal axis machine has its
blades rotating on an axis parallel to the ground.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 137 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

2) Vertical-axis turbines has vertical blades that rotate in
and out of the wind. The vertical axis turbine has its
blades rotating on an axis perpendicular to the ground.
This drag-type turbine turns relatively slowly but yields
a high torque. It is useful for grinding grain, pumping
water and many other tasks, but its slow rotational
speeds are not optimal for generating electricity. Ver-
tical-axis turbines do not take advantage of the higher
wind speeds at higher elevations (100 feet and so) above
the ground vis-a-vis horizontal axis turbines.

6.3.4 Potential of wind energy in India

The National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE) has recently
launched Wind Energy Resource Map of India at 100 meter
above ground level (AGL) on online Geographic Informa-
tion System platform.

The wind energy potential in the country at 100 m AGL is
over 302 GW. Gujarat has the maximum potential followed
by Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andra Pradesh according to
the resource map.

Wind energy target
© 60000 MW (60 GW) by 2022
@ 200000 MW (200 GW) by 2022

6.3.5 Capacity installed
e Tamil Nadu - 7200 MW
e Maharastra - 4000 MW
e Karnataka - 2700 MW
e Rajasthan - 2700 MW

Andra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, kerala are minor players
with installed capacity of less than 1000 MW

National Offshore Wind Energy Policy, 2015:

Under this Policy, the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy
(MNRE) has been authorized as the Nodal Ministry for use
of offshore areas within the Exclusive Economic Zone
(EEZ) of the country and the National Institute of Wind
Energy (NIWE) has been authorized as the Nodal Agency
for development of offshore wind energy in the country
and to carry out allocation of offshore wind energy blocks,
coordination and allied functions with related ministries
and agencies.

It would pave the way for offshore wind energy develop-
ment including, setting up of offshore wind power projects
and research and development activities, in waters, in or
adjacent to the country, up to the seaward distance of 200
Nautical Miles (EEZ of the country) from the base line.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

The policy will provide a level playing field to all investors/
beneficiaries, domestic and international.

National Wind Energy Mission (Proposed):

Initiated the process of establishing National Wind Energy
Mission.

The setting up of a Mission would help in

(a) achieving the targets of 12th Plan and energy generation
from renewable energy as set under NAPCC, and

(b) addressing the issues and challenges which the wind
sector is faced with, such as precise resource assessment,
effective grid integration, improvement in technology and
manufacturing base, to maintain its comparative advan-
tage in the wind sector.

6.4. HYDRO POWER

Hydraulic power can be captured when water flows down-
ward from a higher level to a lower level which is then used
to turn the turbine, thereby converting the kinetic energy
of water into mechanical energy to drive the generator.

Hydro power is cheapest, and cleanest source of energy but
there are many environmental and social issues associated
with big dams as seen in projects like Tehri, Narmada, etc.
Small hydro power are free from these problems

6.4.1 Types of hydro power stations
There are three types of hydropower facilities: impound-

ment, diversion, and pumped storage. Some hydropower
plants use dams and some do not.

(a) Impoundment

The most common type of hydroelectric power plant is an
impoundment facility. An impoundment facility, typically
a large hydropower system, uses a dam to store river water
in a reservoir. Water released from the reservoir flows
through a turbine, spinning it, which in turn activates a
generator to produce electricity.

(2) Diversion

A diversion, sometimes called run-of-river facility, channels
a portion of a river through a canal or penstock and then
to flow through a turbine, spinning it, which in turn acti-
vates a generator to produce electricity.It may not require
the use of a dam.

(3) Pumped storage

It works like a battery, storing the electricity generated by
other power sources like solar, wind, and nuclear for later

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 138 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

use. When the demand for electricity is low, a pumped
storage facility stores energy by pumping water from a
lower reservoir to an upper reservoir. During periods of
high electrical demand, the water is released back to the
lower reservoir and turns a turbine, generating electricity.

6.4.2 Small Hydro Power (SHP)

Small hydro is defined as any hydro power project which
has an installed capacity of less than 25 MW. It is in most
cases run-of-river, where a dam or barrage is quite small,
usually just a weir with little or no water is stored. There-
fore run-of-river installations do not have the same kind
of adverse effect on the local environment as large-scale
hydro projects. Small hydropower plants can serve the
energy needs of remote rural areas independently.

India and China are the major players of the SHP sector,
holding the highest number of installed projects.

6.4.3 Small Hydro Potential in India

e Anestimated 5,415 sites of small hydro have been iden-
tified with a potential of around 19,750 MW.

e River based projects in the Himalayan states and irriga-
tion canals in other states have massive potential for
development of Small Hydro Projects.

e According to the XIIth five year plan targets, capacity
addition from Small Hydro Projects is targeted at 2.1
GW in 2011-17 period.

e The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy is encour-
aging development of Small Hydro Projects in both the
public and private sector and aims to exploit at least
50% of the current potential in the next 10 years.

6.4.4 Installed capacity

The cumulative installed capacity of Small Hydro Projects
amount to 3726 MW.

6.5 OCEAN THERMAL ENERGY

Large amounts of solar energy is stored in the oceans and
seas. On an average, the 60 million square kilometre of the
tropical seas absorb solar radiation equivalent to the heat
content of 245 billion barrels of oil.

The process of harnessing this energy is called OTEC
(ocean thermal energy conversion). It uses the temperature
differences between the surface of the ocean and the
depths of about 1000m to operate a heat engine, which
produces electric power

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

Wave energy

Waves result from the interaction of the wind with the
surface of the sea and represent a transfer of energy from
the wind to the sea.

The first wave energy, project with a capacity of 1450MW,
has been set up at Vizhinjam near Trivandrum.

Tidal energy

Energy can be extracted from tides by creating a reservoir
or basin behind a barrage and then passing tidal waters
through turbines in the barrage to generate electricity.

A major tidal wave power project costing of Rs.5000 crores,
is proposed to be set up in the Hanthal Creek in the Gulf
of Kutch in Gujarat.

Biomass

Biomass is a renewable energy resource derived from the
carbonaceous waste of various human and natural activi-
ties. It is derived from numerous sources, including the
by-products from the timber industry, agricultural crops,
grassy and woody plants, residues from agriculture or for-
estry, oil-rich algae, and the organic component of mu-
nicipal and industrial wastes. Biomass is a good substitute
for the conventional fossil fuels for heating and energy
generation purposes.

Burning biomass releases about the same amount of car-
bon dioxide as burning fossil fuels. However, fossil fuels
release carbon dioxide captured by photosynthesis over its
formative years. Biomass, on the other hand, releases car-
bon dioxide that is largely balanced by the carbon dioxide
captured in its own growth (depending how much energy
was used to grow, harvest, and process the fuel). Hence,
Biomass does not add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere as
it absorbs the same amount of carbon in growing as it
releases when consumed as a fuel.

Chemical processes like gasification, combustion and py-
rolysis convert biomass to useful products, combustion
being the most common of them. Each of the technologies
mentioned produces a major calorific end product and a
mixture of by-products. The processing method is selected
on the basis of nature and origin of feed stocks, their phys-
iochemical state and application spectrum of fuel products
derived from it.

Anaerobic Digestion/Biomethanation

Biomethanation, or methanogenesis, is a scientific process
whereby anaerobic microorganisms in an anaerobic envi-
ronment decompose biodegradable matter producing

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 139 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

methane-rich biogas and effluent. The three functions that
take place sequentially are hydrolysis, acidogenosis and
methanogenesis.

Combustion/Incineration

In this process, waste is directly burned in the presence of
excess air (oxygen) at high temperatures (about 800°C),
liberating heat energy, inert gases and ash. Combustion
results in transfer of 65-80% of heat content of the organic
matter to hot air, steam and hot water. The steam gener-
ated, in turn, can be used in steam turbines to generate
power.

Pyrolysis/Gasification

Pyrolysis is a process of chemical decomposition of organic
matter brought about by heat. In this process, the organic
material is heated in the absence of air until the molecules
thermally break down to become a gas comprising smaller
molecules (known collectively as syngas).

Gasification can also take place as a result of partial
combustion of organic matter in the presence of a re-
stricted quantity of oxygen or air. The gas so produced
is known as producer gas. The gases produced by py-
rolysis mainly comprise carbon monoxide (25%), hydro-
gen and hydrocarbons (15%), and carbon dioxide and
nitrogen (60%). The next step is to ‘clean’ the syngas or
producer gas. Thereafter, the gas is burned in internal
combustion (IC) engine generator sets or turbines to pro-
duce electricity.

6.6 COGENERATION

Co-generation is producing two forms of energy from one
fuel. One of the forms of energy must always be heat and
the other may be electricity or mechanical energy. In a
conventional power plant, fuel is burnt in a boiler to gener-
ate high-pressure steam. This steam is used to drive a
turbine, which in turn drives an alternator through a
steam turbine to produce electric power. The exhaust
steam is generally condensed to water which goes back to
the boiler.

As the low-pressure steam has a large quantum of heat
which is lost in the process of condensing, the efficiency of
conventional power plants is only around 35%. In a cogen-
eration plant, the low-pressure exhaust steam coming out
of the turbine is not condensed, but used for heating pur-
poses in factories or houses and thus very high efficiency
levels, in the range of 75%-90%, can be reached.

Since co-generation can meet both power and heat needs,
it has other advantages as well in the form of significant

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

cost savings for the plant and reduction in emissions of
pollutants due to reduced fuel consumption.

Even at conservative estimates, the potential of power gen-
eration from co-generation in India is more than 20,000
MW. Since India is the largest producer of sugar in the
world, bagasse-based cogeneration is being promoted. The
potential for cogeneration thus lies in facilities with joint
requirement of heat and electricity, primarily sugar and
rice mills, distilleries, petrochemical sector and industries
such as fertilizers, steel, chemical, cement, pulp and paper,
and aluminium.

Potential in India

e Biomass energy is one of the most important sources of
energy forming 32% of the total primary energy usage
in the country with more than 70% of the Indian pop-
ulation dependent on it for its energy needs.

e The current availability of biomass is estimated at about
450-500 million tonnes annually translating to a poten-
tial of around 18000 MW.

e In addition, about 5000 MW additional power could be
generated through bagasse based cogeneration in the
country’s 550 Sugar mills

e It attracts over Rs 600 crore in investments annually
creating rural employment of more than 10 million man
days whilst generating more than 5000 million units of
electricity.

Installed capacity in India

e Approximately over 300 biomass power and cogenera-
tion projects aggregating 3700 MW have been installed
in the country for feeding power to the grid. Also, 30
biomass power projects aggregating about 350MW are
under different stages of implementation.

e Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Maharashtra
and Uttar Pradesh are the leading states in the imple-
mentation of bagasse cogeneration projects.

e Inthe biomass power projects, Andhra Pradesh, Chhat-
tisgarh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and
Tamil Nadu have taken leadership position.

e The Government plans to meet 20% of the countries
diesel requirements by 2020 using biodiesel. Potential
sources of biodiesel production have been identified in
wild plants such as jatropha curcas, neem, mahua,
karanj, Simarouba (exotic tree) etc.

e Several incentive schemes have been introduced
to rehabilitate waste lands through the cultivation of
Jatropha.

88 All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 140 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Central Finance Assistance (CFA) is provided by the
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE) in the
form of capital subsidy and financial incentives to bio-
mass energy projects in India.

6.7 WASTE TO ENERGY

In today’s era, there are increasing quantities of waste due
to urbanization, industrialization and changes in life pat-
terns which are harmful to the environment. In the recent
past, development of technology has helped to reduce the
amount of waste for its safe disposal and to generate elec-
tricity from it.

Waste-to-energy has the potential to divert waste from
landfills and generate clean power without the emission of
harmful greenhouse gas. This significantly reduces the
volume of waste that needs to be disposed of and can gen-
erate power Pyrolysis and gasification are emerging tech-
nologies apart from the common incineration and
biomethanation.

6.7.1 Potential of waste-to-energy

e There is an estimated potential of about 225 MW from
all sewage and about 1460 MW from Municipal Solid
Waste (MSW) in India totaling around 1700 MW of
power.

e There is current potential to recover 1,300 MW of power
from industrial wastes, which is projected to increase
to 2,000 MW by 2017.

e The total installed capacity of grid interactive power
from Waste to energy is 99.08 MW of grid power and
about 115.07 MW of off-grid power.

e MNRE is actively promoting the generation of energy
from waste by providing incentives and subsidies on
projects

6.7.2. Major Constraints Faced by the Indian
Waste to Energy Sector

e Choice of technology - Waste-to-Energy is still a new
concept in India. Most of the proven and commercial
technologies in respect of urban wastes are required to
be imported;

e High costs - The costs of the projects especially based
on biomethanation technology are high as critical
equipment for a project is required to be imported.

e Improper segregation - India lacks a source separated
waste stream, owing to the low level of compliance of

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Rules 2000 by the Mu-
nicipal Corporations/ Urban Local Bodies. The organic
waste is mixed with the other types of waste. Hence the
operations of the waste to energy techniques are hin-
dered and a lack of smoothness causes the attempts to
be short lived.

e Lack of policy support - Lack of conducive policy
guidelines from State Governments in respect of allot-
ment of land, supply of garbage and power purchase /
evacuation facilities.

6.8 GEOTHERMAL ENERGY

Geothermal generation refers to harnessing of the geother-
mal energy or the vast reservoir of heat stored in the
earth’s inner core. Below the earth’s crust, there is a layer
of hot and molten rock called ‘magma’. Heat is continually
produced there, mostly from the decay of naturally radio-
active materials such as uranium and potassium.

How is it captured

Geothermal systems can be found in regions with a normal
or slightly above normal geothermal gradient (gradual
change in temperature is known as the geothermal gradi-
ent, which expresses the increase in temperature with
depth in the earth’s crust. The average geothermal gradient
is about 2.5-3 °C/100 m.) and especially in regions around
plate margins where the geothermal gradients may be sig-
nificantly higher than the average value.

The most common current way of capturing the energy
from geothermal sources is to tap into naturally occurring
“hydrothermal convection” systems where cooler water
seeps into the earth’s crust, is heated up and then rises to
the surface. When heated water is forced to the surface, it
is a relatively easy to capture that steam and use it to drive
electric generators.

Potential in India

India has a potential for producing around 10,600 MW of
power from geothermal resources. Although India was
amongthe earliest countries to begin geothermal projects
since the 1970’s, at present there are no operational geo-
thermal plants in India. 340 hot springs were identified
across India.These have been grouped together and termed
as different geothermal provinces based on their occur-
rence in specific geotectonic regions, geological and struc-
tural regions such as occurrence in orogenic belt regions,
structural grabens, deep fault zones, active volcanic re-
gions etc.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 141 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Orogenic regions:
1. Himalayan geothermal province
2. Naga-Lushai geothermal province

3. Andaman-Nicobar Islands geothermal province
Non-orogenic regions:
1. Cambay graben,
2. Son-Narmada-Tapigraben,
. West coast,

3

4. Damodar valley,
5. Mahanadi valley,
6

Godavari valley etc

Potential Sites:
1. Puga Valley J&K)
Tattapani (Chhattisgarh)

N

Godavari Basin Manikaran (Himachal Pradesh)
Bakreshwar (West Bengal)
Tuwa (Gujarat)

Unai (Maharashtra)

NAD PF &

Jalgaon (Maharashtra)

Recent Developments:

In 2013,India’s first geothermal power plant was an-
nounced to be set up in Chhattisgarh. The plant would be
set up at Tattapani in the Balrampur district.

Satellites like the IRS-1 have played an important role,
through infrared photographs, in locating geothermal
areas.

Challenges

High generation costs

Most costs relating to geothermal power plants are in-
curred due to resource exploration and plant construction.

Drilling costs

Although the cost of generating geothermal electricity has
decreased by 25 percent during the last two decades, ex-
ploration and drilling remain expensive and risky. It is
because rocks in geothermal areas are extremely hard and
hot, developers must frequently replace drilling equipment.

Transmission barrier

Geothermal power plants must be located near specific
areas near a reservoir because it is not practical to trans-

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

port steam or hot water over distances greater than two
miles. Since many of the best geothermal resources are
located in rural areas, developers may be limited by their
ability to supply electricity to the grid. New power lines are
expensive to construct and difficult to site. Many existing
transmission lines are operating near capacity and may
not be able to transmit electricity without significant up-
grades. Consequently, any significant increase in the num-
ber of geothermal power plants will be limited by the
plants ability to connect, upgrade or build new lines to
access the power grid and whether the grid is able to de-
liver additional power to the market.

Accessibility

Some areas may have sufficient hot rocks to supply hot
water to a power station, but many of these areas are lo-
cated in harsh areas or high up in mountains. This curbs
the accessibility of geothermal resources adding on to the
costs of development.

Execution challenges

Harmful radioactive gases can escape from deep within
the earth through the holes drilled by the constructors.
The plant must be able to contain any leaked gases and
ensure safe disposal of the same.

6.9 FUEL CELLS

Fuel cells are electrochemical devices that convert the
chemical energy of a fuel directly and very efficiently into
electricity (DC) and heat, thus doing away with combus-
tion. The most suitable fuel for such cells is hydrogen or a
mixture of compounds containing hydrogen. A fuel cell
consists of an electrolyte sandwiched between two elec-
trodes. Oxygen passes over one electrode and hydrogen
over the other, and they react electrochemically to generate
electricity, water, and heat.

Fuel cells for automobile transport

Compared to vehicles powered by the internal combustion
engine, fuel-cell powered vehicles have very high energy
conversion efficiency, and near-zero pollution, CO2 and
water vapour being the only emissions. Fuel-cell-powered
EV’s (electric vehicles) score over battery operated EV’s
in terms of increased efficiency and easier and faster
refuelling.

In India, diesel run buses are a major means of transport
and these emit significant quantities of SPM and SO2.Thus,
fuel-cell powered buses and electric vehicles could be in-
troduced with relative ease to dramatically reduce urban

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 142 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

air pollution and to make a positive impact on urban air
quality.

Fuel cells for power generation

Conventional large-scale power plants use non-renewable
fuels with significant adverse ecological and environmen-
tal impacts. Fuel cell systems are excellent candidates for
small-scale decentralized power generation.

Fuel cells can supply combined heat and power to com-
mercial buildings, hospitals, airports and military instal-
lation at remote locations. Fuel cells have efficiency levels
up to 55% as compared to 35% of conventional power
plants. The emissions are significantly lower (CO2 and
water vapour being the only emissions). Fuel cell systems
are modular (i.e. additional capacity can be added when-
ever required with relative ease) and can be set up wher-
ever power is required.

Constraint

High initial cost is the biggest hurdle in the widespread
commercialization of fuel cells.

REN21

REN2z1 is the global renewable energy policy multi-stake-
holder network that connects a wide range of key actors
from:

e Governments

e International organisations

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Industry associations
e Science and academia as well as civil society

To facilitate knowledge exchange, policy development and
joint action towards a rapid global transition to renewable
energy. REN21 promotes renewable energy to meet the
needs of both industrialized and developing countries that
are driven by climate change, energy security, development
and poverty alleviation.

REN21 is an international non-profit association
and committed to the following objectives:

e Providing policy-relevant information and research-
based analysis on renewable energy to decision makers,
multipliers and the public to catalyse policy change

e Offering a platform for interconnection between multi-
stakeholder actors working in the renewable energy
field worldwide and identifying barriers as well as
working to bridge existing gaps to increase the large-
scale deployment of renewable energy worldwide.

Conclusion

Efficient use of renewable energy would reduce our depend-
ence on non-renewable sources of energy, make us energy
self-sufficient and make our environment cleaner.As more
green power sources are developed - displacing conven-
tional generation - the overall environmental impacts as-
sociated with electricity generation will be significantly
reduced.

%, o% of of o% o%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 143 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 144 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

QF 6° g Go

| CHAPTER - 7 |

ENVIRONMENT

QW

ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

7.1. INDIAN HIMALAYAN REGION
(IHR) - ENVIRONMENTAL
CHALLENGES

The Indian Himalayan Region (IHR), which occupies a
strategic position along the entire northern and north-
eastern boundary of the country and administratively cov-
ers 10 States in their entirety Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Naga-
land, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, Meghalaya) and two
states partially (the hill districts of Assam and West Ben-
gal), has wide ranging ecological and socio-economic sig-
nificance.

IHR Services

e Besides innumerable goods, IHR generates a plethora of
services not only for Himalayan inhabitants but also
influences the lives of people living well beyond its
boundaries.

e Among other services, the region, with its large area
under permanent snow cover and glaciers, forms a
unique water reservoir that feeds several important
perennial rivers.

e With its vast green cover, IHR also acts as a giant car-
bon ‘sink’.

e IHR also forms a considerably large part of identified
Himalayan Biodiversity global hotspot.

Role in Indian climate.

The region, however, is facing environmental problems on
account of various factors including the stress caused by
anthropogenic activities. Even geologically, the Himalayan
ecosystem falls under the most vulnerable category. There-
fore the environmental issues being faced by the IHR are
of critical importance.

Managing the Himalayan ecosystem sustainably is critical
not only for preserving its pristine beauty and spectacular

landscapes, but also for ensuring the ecological security of
the entire Indian sub-continent.

(A) URBANIZATION IN THE HIMALAYAS - IS IT
SUSTAINABLE?

IMPACT - SOLID WASTE

The continued expansion in urban settlements, influx of
visitors, trekkers and mountaineers in the Himalayan re-
gion has started to pose high biotic pressure and concom-
itant indiscriminate solid waste dumping. As a result, the
IHR is getting adversely affected.

In the absence of proper management practices and inad-
equate infrastructural facilities, human induced pollution,
such as solid waste, untreated sewage and local air pollution
due to vehicles has been continuously increasing in the IHR.

IMPACT - TOWN PLANNING

Rapid unplanned growth of hill towns, construction ac-
tivities without a proper plan, general non-compliance with
prescribed norms and guidelines, and indiscriminate use
of land for commercial outfits/tourist resorts have severely
and adversely affected the fragile ecosystem of the Hima-
layas.

Large scale land instabilities, drying up of natural water
sources, waste disposal problems and changing socio-
cultural values are known impacts of unplanned construc-
tion activities.

Deforestation activities - cutting in an area causes eco-
logical damage and slope instability in adjacent areas.
INITIATIVES

Ban on Plastic in HP

e State government enacted the Himachal Pradesh Non-
Biodegradable Garbage (Control) Act, 1995 in order to
prevent throwing or depositing non- biodegradable gar-
bage in public drains, roads.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 145 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e It has then increased the minimum thickness of plastic
carry bags to 70 microns of virgin material, which ex-
ceeded the 20 micron thickness recommended by Cen-
tral Rules.

e Further, the state Government has taken a Cabinet de-
cision to ban plastics altogether in the entire state since
2009.

Participatory Conservation of Lakes in the Region

e The Naini Lake is the sole source of drinking water for
Nainital town, an important tourist destination in Ut-
tarakhand state.

e Increasing inflow of tourists, urban waste making its
way into the lake is adversely affecting water quality.

e To conserve the water body, the residents have switched
on to a scientific garbage disposal system - under the
project name ‘Mission Butterfly’ by Nainital Lake Con-
servation Project.

e The sweepers, on a small monthly charge, collect waste
from each household and directly transfer it to the com-
post pits. Apart from the residents, schools and hotel
owners have extended full cooperation to the authori-
ties, to save its precious eco-system.

e In addition, they are able to generate income and em-
ployment by converting it to manure.

Conservation of Dal lake

e Dal Lake a favorite tourist destination attracting thou-
sands of tourists in Jammu & Kashmir state, is also spe-
cial for settlement of about 60,000 people within the lake.

e The lake is in peril due to anthropogenic pressure and
overall deterioration of surrounding environment.

e The lake has been included in the lake conservation
programme of the MoEFF, GOI.

e The Lake and Waterways Development Authority
(LAWDA), Srinagar, in collaboration with Centre for
Environment Education (CEE) and other NGOs has
taken up the initiative for lake conservation through
education and mass awareness. Use of polythene carry
bags has also been banned in the lake area.

Assam Hill Land and Ecological Sites Act, 2006

e The Assam Hill Land and Ecological Sites (Protection
and Management) Act, 2006 to prevent indiscriminate
cutting of hills and filling up of water bodies in urban
areas, which had led to serious ecological problems in
places like Guwahati.

e Under the Act, the state government can bring any hill
under its purview for protection.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Urban Development through JNNURM

e “The aim is to encourage reforms and fast track planned
development of identified cities. Focus is to be on
efficiency in urban infrastructure and service delivery
mechanisms, community participation, and accounta-
bility of ULBs/ Parastatal agencies towards citizens”.

e The duration of the mission is seven years starting from
2005-06with initially 13 towns.

Recommendations / solutions for Solid Waste
Management in IHR

The “development” in the present context has become un-
sustainable. An integrated approach is, therefore, neces-
sary to protect the environment and achieve required
economic development at the same time. Advance planning
based on timely and reliable data has become crucial for
sustainable growth of hill towns.

1. Guidelines prohibiting indiscriminate disposal of gar-
bage, particularly the non-degradable waste.

2. Preventive and management steps for solid waste man-
agement at the point of origin itself.

3. Documentation about the varying composition of waste
from the hill towns to expedition tops.

4. Promotion of techniques such as conversion of biode-
gradable waste into biocompost, or vermicompost in
place of land filling, open dumping or burning.

5. The four ‘R’s principle’ - Refuse waste prone commod-
ities, Reuse discarded commodities for other uses, Re-
duce through segregation into categories—biodegradable
and non-biodegradable at household/ individual level,
and Re-cycling once fully used or completely unusable
commodities/items.

6. Good quality potable water, available at various loca-
tions in hill towns so that people can fill their bottles,
on payment basis.

7. Awareness and capacity building of the stakeholders.

8. Best international experiences & practices followed in
regard to preservation of surroundings and prevention
of littering in eco-sensitive places, [e.g., Alaska, Gan-
gotri/Leh region, Nepal and China] should be examined
and appropriately adopted.

9. Need support and innovative thinking on different as-
pects, ranging from traditional architectural practices,
local water management and diverse systems of sewage
and garbage management.

10. There is a need to motivate residents to switch over to
a more scientific waste disposal system in a participa-
tory manner.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 146 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Recommendations / solutions - Hill Town Planning
and Architectural Norms

1. Fragmentation of habitats in hill areas should be pre-
vented.

2. Specific areas for rural/urban development should be
designated.

3. No construction should be undertaken which fall in
hazard zones or areas falling on the spring lines and
first order streams.

4. Architectural and aesthetic norms for construction of
buildings in mountain/hill areas should be enforced.

5. Deforestation activities shall not be undertaken un-
less appropriate measures are taken to avoid such
damages.

6. An integrated development plan may be prepared tak-
ing into consideration environmental and other rele-
vant factors

7. Inhighly seismic areas like Himalaya, all construction
should incorporate earthquake resistant features

8. Location-specific technologies should be deployed for
construction of buildings

g. “Green roads” having channels for collection of water
for irrigation purposes should be made a part of the
construction norm.

(B) TOURISM - WILL IT BE REGULATED?

Pilgrimage Tourism in Sensitive Areas

e The Himalayas is known to be a home of saints, destina-
tion of pilgrimage since time immemorial.

e For example, Badrinath, Kedarnath, Gangotri- Yamu-
notri and Hemkund Sahib in Uttarakhand, Manima-
hesh, Jwala Devi, Chintpurni, Naina Devi in Himachal
Pradesh and Vaishnav Devi and Amarnath in Jammu &
Kashmir, Khecheopalri and other sacred lakes in Sikkim
are particularly important destinations.

e Unfortunately, most of these places lack adequate fa-
cilities of transport, accommodation, waste disposal and
other amenities for the ever growing number of pil-
grims that visit them every year.

e Also, there is a gross lack of regulatory mechanism for
infrastructure creation, management, and for control-
ling the tourist inflow in such sites.

e Asaresult the sensitive ecosystems and cultural values
of these areas are facing pressures far beyond their
carrying capacities.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Impact - of Commercial Tourism

e The impacts of tourism on mountain ecosystems and
biological resources are of great concern because of the
high biodiversity and environmental sensitivity of the
Himalayas.

e Cultural identities and diversity in mountain regions
are also under threat by the economic, social and envi-
ronmental forces associated with mountain tourism.

e In this context, community based ecotourism emerges
as one of the sustainable alternatives to the presently
practiced commercial tourism in already over saturated
hill towns like Nainital, Mussoorrie, Shimla, Kullu-
Manali, Gangtok, etc.

INITIATIVES

Harnessing Religious Sentiments for Conservation

There is immense scope of harnessing the religious senti-
ments of tourists in the right perspectives of conservation
and sustainable management of natural resources in the
eco-sensitive Himalayan areas.

This can be done through:

(i) Encouraging them to undertake participatory planta-
tion for rehabilitation of degraded areas (e.g., Badrivan
initiative of GBPIHED in Uttarakhand).

(ii) Promoting the concept of eco-cultural landscapes (e.g.,
Demazong - Buddhist landscape, Sikkim, and Apatani
eco-cultural landscape, Arunachal Pradesh). Both land-
scapes are highly evolved with high level of economic
and ecological efficiencies.

(iii) Involving them in maintenance and strengthening of
sacred groves/landscape (e.g., Sacred Groves of Megha-
laya: The tribal communities - Khasis, Garos, and
Jaintias, have a tradition of environmental conserva-
tion based on religious beliefs and customary law and
are protected from any product extraction.

Ladakh Himalayan Homestays- Transforming
Local Mindsets towards Snow Leopards

e The Himalayan Homestays programme fosters conser-
vation-based community managed tourism develop-
ment in remote settlements, by gradually building local
capacity and ownership.

e It stands out as an example that aims to be sensitive
to both host and visitor expectations without compro-
mising the aspirations of host communities, and at
the same time seeks to balance these aspects with
conservation of the area’s unique cultural and natural
heritage.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 147 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Highlights of Sikkim’s Ecotourism Policy

e “Sikkim - the Ultimate Tourist Destination” is the policy
motto of the state. The state is employing a system of
environmental fees, and permits for entries, and stay
time restrictions in some environmentally sensitive
high altitude/ pristine areas.

e Operationalization of tourism in various modes, such
as village tourism, nature tourism, wildlife tourism,
trekking/adventure tourism, and cultural tourism in
the state and institutionalization of tourism manage-
ment at the community level.

e Promotion and use of local art & craft, cuisines, etc.,
along with organizing tourism fairs and festivals.

e Imparting training in tourism related service in-
dustries.

The efforts made by Sikkim can be a basis of responsible
tourism in other Himalayan states.

Adventure tourism

Immense opportunities for adventure cum ecotourism in
the Himalayan region (e.g., Annapurna Conservation Area
project, Nepal; Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve ecotourism
approach, Uttarakhand) could be harnessed through com-
munity involvement.

Tourism + art and culture

Linking of tourism with initiatives like Rural Business
Hubs (RBH), as introduced in North East region, which
envisages promotion of quality rural products like hand-
loom, handicrafts, agro products, herbal products, bio-fuel,
etc., may be considered as yet another aspect of promoting
eco-tourism in the IHR.

Regulated entry

The Government of Uttarakhand has restricted the number
of tourists visiting the origin of the river Ganga - Gangotri
area to 150 per day.

Recommendations / solutions

However, considering the sensitivity (both cultural and
natural) of this region, strict operational guidelines are
required to be enforced across IHR with region specific
provisions for facilitating and promoting community based
ecotourism.

Recommendations / solutions - Regulating Tourism and
Pilgrimage to Sensitive Areas

1. Pilgrimage tourism in the Himalaya requires both de-
velopment and regulation so as to reduce congestion
and resultant pollution.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

2. The accommodation and road transport infrastructure
needs to be developed in pilgrimage sites.

3. The pilgrimage tourism is a kind of “economy class”
tourism in the Indian Himalayan Region. Suitable ac-
commodation and other facilities need to be made
available accordingly.

4. All existing sites should have adequate provision of
garbage disposal and management.

5. An inventory of historical, sensitive and sacred sites
including sacred groves should be prepared and their
vulnerability should be assessed.

6. The access to such sites of incomparable value through
vehicles needs to be restricted beyond a certain zone.

Recommendations / solutions - Promoting
Ecotourism and Regulation of Commercial Tourism

1. Eco-tourism villages, parks, sanctuaries and other
areas should be identified to establish a primary base
for ecotourism.

2. Village communities, especially youths, and rural
women should be involved in Ecotourism.

3. Restrictions on the entry of vehicles and visitors per
day/ per group should be imposed in sensitive ecologi-
cal sites.

4. Local art, crafts, cuisines, and dishes should be pro-
moted and made an integral part of tourist experience
in order to ensure economic benefits to the locals and
their cultural integrity/ entity is not lost.

5. Best practices on commercial trekking should be im-
posed on a mandatory basis

6. Creation of log/bamboo huts should be promoted in
busy mountain areas.

Recommendations / solutions for related segments

Rejuvenation of Springs and Degraded Sites

e Special attention should be paid to recharge of ground
water and quality of mountain lakes/wetlands through
restoration of forests.

e Detailed geological mapping should be conducted to
identify the spring recharge zone and locate geological
structures.

e Nuclear water prospecting technologies should be used
to map the water sources and prevent the construction
activities in such locations that could damage or ad-
versely affect such sources.

e Engineering measures to protect recharge zone from
biotic interferences.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 148 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Social fencing measures, e.g.
(i) digging shallow infiltration trenches, mulching.

(ii) construction of stone-mud check dams in gullies
to store rainwater and check soil erosion; and

(iii) land levelling, maintenance of crop field bunds to
allow stagnation of rainwater should be en-
hanced.

e Vegetative measures with the aim to enhance rainwater
infiltration and reduce rainwater runoff.

e Involvement of stakeholder community should be en-
sured at every step of the Spring Sanctuary Develop-
ment. The maintenance and aftercare of the interven-
tions have to be ensured through their involvement.

Rain Water Harvesting

e All buildings to be constructed in future in urban
areas should have provision for roof-top rain water
harvesting

e The institutional and commercial buildings should not
draw water from existing water supply schemes which
adversely affect water supply to local villages or settle-
ments.

e Inrural areas rain water harvesting should be under-
taken through such structures as percolation tanks,
storage tanks and any other means.

e Spring sanctuary development should be undertaken
in the spring recharge zones to augment spring water
discharge.

e Rain water collected through storm water drains should
be used to clean the waste disposal drains and sewers.

e Ground water aquifer recharge structures should be
constructed wherever such structures do not lead to
slope instabilities.

Ecologically Safer Roads

e For construction of any road in the Himalayan region
of more than 5 km length where the same may not be
tarred roads and environmental impact assessment is
otherwise not required, environmental impact assess-
ment should be carried out in accordance with the in-
structions to be issued for this purpose by the State
Governments.

e Provision should be made in the design of the road for
treatment of hill slope instabilities resulting from road
cutting, cross drainage works and culverts using bio-
engineering and other appropriate techniques.

e Provisions should be made for disposal of debris from
construction sites in appropriate manner at suitable and

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

identified locations so as not to affect the ecology of the
area adversely.

Further, the dumped material should be treated using bio-
engineering and other appropriate techniques.

e No stone quarrying should be carried out without
proper management and treatment plan including re-
habilitation plan.

e All hill roads should be provided with adequate number
of road side drains and these drains shall be kept free
from blockage for runoff disposal; further, the cross
drains shall be treated suitably using bio-engineering
and other appropriate technologies so as to minimise
slope instability.

e The runoff from the road side drains should be con-
nected with the natural drainage system in the area.

e Fault zones and historically land slide prone zones
should be avoided during alignment of a road, where
for any reason it is not possible to do so, the construc-
tion should be carried out only after sufficient measures
have been taken to minimize the associated risks.

e Ridge alignment should be preferred to valley align-
ment.

e Alignment should be selected so as to minimise loss of
vegetal cover.

e Encouragement should be provided for use of debris
material for local development.

7.2 SAND MINING IN INDIA -
ENVIRONMENTAL ISSUES

Sand is an important mineral for our society in protecting
the environment, buffer against strong tidal waves and
storm, habitat for crustacean species and marine organ-
isms, used for making concrete, filling roads, building sites,
brick making, making glass, sandpapers, reclamations, and
in our tourism industry in beach attractions.

Sand mining is the process of removal of sand and gravel
where this practice is becoming an environmental issue as
the demand for sand increases in industry and construction.

Despite a Supreme Court order that prohibits sand mining
without the requisite clearance from the required author-
ities and places limits on the quantities that can be mined,
thousands of tonnes of sand is being illegally mined to
meet the rising demand of construction industry and for
extraction of minerals. Let’s discuss about the scenario of
sand mining in India

The environmental reasons for this ban and others across
India are numerous. Sand acts as an aquifer, and as a nat-

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 149 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

ural carpet on the bottom of the river. Stripping this layer
leads to downstream erosion, causing changes in channel
bed and habitat type, as well as the deepening of rivers and
estuaries, and the enlargement of river mouths. As the
river system lowers, local groundwater is affected, which
leads to water scarcities aggravating agriculture and local
livelihoods.

In terms of legal measures, ground water shortages have
been noted as the patent problem with river sand mining.
Less considered in legal action, but centrally relevant, ex-
perts also note substantial habitat and ecological problems,
which include “direct loss of stream reserve habitat, dis-
turbances of species attached to streambed deposits, re-
duced light penetration, reduced primary production, and
reduced feeding opportunities”.

Economic consequences of sand mining
1. Revenue loss to the exchequer

For e.g.: It is estimated that in Noida and Greater Noida
alone the loss to the exchequer is about Rs.1,000 crore,
but the impact that sand mining, which is simply put
theft on environment and ecology, cannot even be cal-
culated.

Environmental consequences of sand mining
1. Forcing the river to change its course

Sand and boulders prevent the river from changing the
course and act as a buffer for the riverbed.

2. Illegally dredged sand is equivalent to robbing water.

Sand holds a lot of water, and when it is mindlessly
mined and laden on to trucks, large quantities of water
is lost in transit.

3. Depletion of groundwater tables

Sand, on a riverbed it acts as a link between the flowing
river and the water table and is part of the aquifer.

For e.g.: Illegal and excessive sand mining in the river-
bed of the Papagani catchment area in Karnataka has
led to the depletion of groundwater levels and environ-
mental degradation in the villages on the banks of the
river in both Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka.

4. Adversely impacting the habitat of micro-organisms

There are a lot of micro-organisms that are not visible
and widely known, but are critical to soil structure and
fertility. When sand is dredged, literally it takes away
their habitat.

5. Increased river erosion

When sand and boulders are removed in an unimpeded

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

way using heavy machines, the erosion capacity of the
river increases.

6. Damage to roads and bridges

For e.g.: In Vishnuprayag the boulders that came down
with the river water damaged a side of the dam and the
waters spread out across causing heavy damage.

7. Threat to agriculture

For e.g.: Despite numerous prohibitions and regula-
tions, sand mining continues rapidly on the riverbed of
the Bharathapuzha in kerala. Water tables have dropped
dramatically and a land once known for its plentiful
rice harvest now faces scarcity of water. In the villages
and towns around the river, groundwater levels have
fallen drastically and wells are almost perennially dry.

8. Damage to coastal ecosystem

This destructive illegal practice in beaches, creeks leads
to erosion along the shoreline. Eg: Kihim Beach off
Alibaug, Shore levels have reduced, forcing residents to
build walls to protect themselves from the sea.

It wrecks the intertidal area and creates the imminent
danger of saline water ingress into fresh water.

Coastal sand mining destroys fisheries, disturbs coral,
mangroves, wetlands and has led to the near extinction
of ghariyals, a crocodile species unique to India.

A major impact of beach sand mining is the loss of
protection from storm surges associated with tropical
cyclones and tsunamis.

9. Lesser availability of water for industrial, agricultural
and drinking purposes.

10. Loss of employment to farm workers.
11. Threat to livelihoods.

Current rules and policies in operation relation to
sand mining

Kerala: Kerala Protection of River Banks and Regulation
of Removal of Sand Act, 2001

Key features: To permit sand mining in select areas and
each selected area or Kadavu will be managed by a Kadavu
Committee which will decide on matters such as quantum
of mining to be permitted, and to mobilise local people to
oversee these operations and ensure protection of rivers
and riverbanks.

Key rivers affected: Bharatapuzha, Kuttiyadi river,
Achankovil, Pampa and Manimala, Periyar, Bhavani, Siru-
vani, Thuthapuzha, and Chitturpuzha, rivers in the catch-
ments of Ashtamudi and Vembanad lakes

Tamil Nadu: Policy that ensures that quarrying of sand in
Government poramboke lands and private patta lands will

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 150 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

only be undertaken by the Government. Mechanised sand
mining is prohibited. In 2008, this policy was counter-
manded by the government and private parties were given
permits for mining.

Rivers affected: Cauvery, Vaigai, Palar, Cheyyar, Araniyar
and Kosathalaiyar, Bhavani, Vellar , Vaigai Thamiraparani,
Kollidam. coastal districts of Nagapattinam, Tuticorin,
Ramanatha-puram and Kanyakumari. hill regions of
Salem and Erode districts.

Karnataka: The Uniform Sand Mining Policy does not
allow sand mining in Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) area
and prohibits the use of machineries to mine sand from
river. High Court of Karnataka banned mechanised boats
for sand mining in the state from April 2011.

From September 2011, according to Karnataka Minor
Mineral Concession (Amendment) Rules 2011,the respon-
sibility of oversight of sand mining has been transferred
to the Public Works, Ports and Inland Water Transport
Department.

Rivers affected: Cauvery, Lakshmanateerta, Harangi, He-
mavathi, Nethravatai, Papagani

Andhra Pradesh: In 2006, a new policy that allows only
manual labour and bullocks to mine sand in riverbeds.
Bullock carts, mules and other animals would be exempted
from any mining tax. Contractors will be allotted sand
through open bidding by a committee headed by district
joint collectors. Sand can be sold only if it has a maximum
retail price tag, otherwise there will be a penalty. Use of
poclaines has been banned entirely, and mining will be
disallowed below three metres.

Rivers affected: Godavari, Tungabhadra, Vamsadhara,
Nagavali, Bahuda and Mahendratanaya

Maharashtra: New policy, 2010, under which it is compul-
sory for contractors to obtain permission from the
Gramsabha, for sand mining. Ban on use of suction pumps
in dredging and sand mining licences can be given only
through a bidding process. Also sand mining projects have
to obtain environmental clearances.

Rivers affected: creeks at Thane, Navi Mumbai, Raigad
and Ratnagiri

Uttar-Pradesh: the Noida administration established a
“Special Mining Squad,” charged with the specific task of
impeding and ultimately extricating Greater Noida from
the sand mafia’s degradation.

Rivers affected: Chhoti Gandak, Gurra, Rapti and Gha-
ghara.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Suggestions

1. The most viable alternative is ‘manufactured sand’. It
is produced in a stone crushing plant. M-sand is pro-
duced from stones which is used for aggregates, and
the quality is consistent and even better than river
sand. M-sand is relatively cheaper too.

2. Use of fly ash from industries as alternative should be
promoted for construction purposes.

3. The government should exercise prudence when it
comes to leasing out the riverbed for mining activities
and also demarcate areas clearly and monitor mining
through a suitable institutional mechanism.

4. Periodic assessment of how much sand can be sustain-
ably mined, as the quantity can vary from a river to
river and within a river from stretch to stretch has to
be done.

5. The use of intrusive techniques such as the use of ex-
plosives and heavy excavator machines in sand mining
are largely destructive.

6. In the mountain areas especially sand mining should
be carried out manually and sustainably.

7. A high level lobbying committee must be formed and
Laws has to be enforced in an efficient and unbiased
way and decisive steps are to be taken for environmen-
tal solution.

Guidelines for Sustainable Sand & Minor Mineral

Mining

1. Where to mine and where to prohibit mining: District
Survey Report for each district in the country, taking
the river in that district as one ecological system. Use
of ISRO, remote sensing data and ground truthing.

2. Sustainable mining: Mining out material only that
much which is deposited annually.

3. Involvement of District authorities in the process: The
District-level Environment Impact Assessment Authority
(DEIAA) headed by District Collector. The District Col-
lector is to be assisted by the District Level Expert Ap-
praisal Committee (DEAC) headed by Executive
Engineer (Irrigation Department) being assigned the
responsibility of granting environment clearance up to
5 hectare of mine lease area for minor minerals , mainly
sand. So district administration, which is the key in
assessing the requirement of sand in a district and pro-
hibiting illegal sand mining in district is being involved
directly in environmental clearance.

4. Monitoring using scientific tools: Stringent monitoring
of movement of mined out material from source to

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 151 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

destination using information technology tools, bar
coding, SMS etc. Till date, there is no authentic data on
how much sand is being mined, this system will gener-
ate real-time data on mined out sand. The movement
of sand is controlled through Transit Permit.

The monitoring of mined out mineral, Environmental
Clearance, EC conditions and enforcement of Environ-
ment Management Plan (EMP) will be ensured by the
District Collector and the State Pollution Control
Board. The monitoring of enforcement of EC condi-
tions can be done by the Central Pollution Control
Board, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change and the agency nominated by Ministry for the
purpose.

Exemptions: Proposal to exempt certain category from
mining for the purpose of environmental clearance,
like:

i. Extraction of ordinary clay or ordinary sand manu-
ally by hereditary Kumhars (potters) who prepare
earthen pots on a cottage industry basis.

ii. Extraction of ordinary clay or ordinary sand manu-
ally by earthen tile makers who prepare earthen tiles
on a cottage industry basis.

jae)

iii. Removal of sand deposited on agricultural field after

flood by owner farmers.

iv. Customary extraction of sand and ordinary earth
from sources situated in Gram Panchayat for per-
sonal use or community work in a village.

v. Community works like desilting of village ponds/
tanks, construction of village/rural roads, bunds
undertaken in MGNREGS and other Government-
sponsored schemes.

He

vi. Dredging and desilting of dam, reservoirs, weirs,
barrages, river and canals for the purpose of main-
tenance and upkeep, and the dredged material is
used departmentally. If the dredging activities are
undertaken for the purpose of winning of mineral
and selling it commercially, it will be considered

mining and prior EC will be required.

. Guideline on handling cluster issues: The original EIA
notification does not provide for the procedure to han-
dle cluster situation, which has been proposed in this
guideline and will become part of the Notification. One
EIA/EMP will be prepared for one cluster irrespective
of number and size of mining leases in that cluster, if
the area is more than 5 hectares. Area less than 5 hec-
tare will be B2.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

7.3 PALM OIL - ENVIRONMENTAL
ISSUES AND INDIA’S ROLE IN IT

When forest shrink, so does the home of
endangered species

Palm oil has emerged as the main global source of vegeta-
ble oil due to adequate availability, versatility in usage,
higher yield and lower cost, as compared to other vegetable
oils. Palm oil is generally sold in the name of vegetable oil.

Palm oil forms 33% of the world vegetable oil production
mix. Indonesia and Malaysia contribute almost 87% of
production of palm oil, whereas China and India constitute
34% of imports.

Global edible oil consumption has grown from 123 Million
Metric tonnes in 2007 to 158 Mn MT in 2012. This growth
has been fuelled by increased population, incomes and per
capita consumption especially in developing countries like
India, Indonesia and China, etc. Palm oil, at 48.7 Mn MT is
the largest consumed edible oil in the world.

As demand for palm oil increases, substantial tracts of
tropical forests are often cleared to make room for large
plantations. As per WWF's estimates, the expansion of oil
palm plantations is likely to cause four million hectares
(more than twice the size of Kerala) of forest loss by 2020.

Deforestation would most likely occur in high biodiversity
areas, such as Borneo, Papua New Guinea, Sumatra and the
Congo Basin in Africa. The felling and burning of forests
impact populations of endangered wildlife such as Suma-
tran Tigers, Rhinos and Orangutans. It also has adverse
impacts on people’s health and disrupts local livelihoods.

At the global level, the impacts of forest loss are even more
dramatic, including the release of greenhouse gases into
the atmosphere that contribute to global warming.

Applications of Palm Oil
1) Food based applications

Cooking oil, substitute for butter, vanaspati/vegetable
ghee, margarine, confectionary and bakery fats, ice
cream, coffee creamers, emulsifiers, vitamin E supple-
ments among others.

2) Non-food applications

Cosmetics, toiletries, soaps and detergents. Oleo chem-
ical industry, as a base material for laundry detergents,
household cleaners and cosmetics.

According to USDA estimates, 75% of the global palm oil
consumption is for food purposes, while 22% is for indus-
trial/non-food purposes. The remaining, though currently,
of marginal quantity, is used for biodiesel

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 152 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF PALM OIL
PRODUCTION

1. Deforestation - Substantial tracts of tropical forests are
cleared to make room for large plantations to service
an ever increasing demand for palm oil. Studies show
that the forest cover on the island of Borneo had de-
clined from 73.7 percent in 1985 to 50.4 percent in
2005, while the projected cover in 2020 was 32.6 per-
cent. Loss of forest cover in Sumatra, Indonesia, has
also been very alarming.

2. Loss of biodiversity - Concerns about biodiversity loss
are directly related to the loss of natural forests. In
particular, orangutan habitats have been threatened by
palm oil production. In 1900, there were around
315,000 orangutans in Indonesia and Malaysia. Today,
fewer than 50,000 exist in the wild, split into small
groups. The palm oil industry is the biggest threat to
orangutans, with the species like to be driven to extinc-
tion within 12 years unless the devastation of their
natural habitat is halted. A related problem has been
that fragmentation of natural forest habitats and en-
croachment by palm oil development which has been
resulted in serious human- wildlife (elephant, etc)
conflicts.

3. Climate change - 15% of all human induced greenhouse
gas emissions are caused by deforestation, forest deg-
radation and peat land emissions. As land on mineral
soil becomes less readily available, the expansion of oil
palm is increasing on peat lands. . As these areas are
drained, the peat is exposed to oxidation, resulting in
significant CO2 release over an extended period. Other
significant sources of GHG emissions associated with
oil palm are the use of fires for land clearing and the
emissions of methane from the effluent treatment
ponds of palm oil mills. Forests are felled, peat swamps
drained and burnt, creating a haze that covers large
areas, affecting people’s health and disrupting eco-
nomic activities.

4. Use of pesticides and fertilizers - Misuse of pesticides
and fertilizers is frequently cited as a negative impact
of oil palm cultivation. In general, pesticide use is low
compared to many other crops, but some chemicals
used, pose significant risks to operators and smallhold-
ers and the environment. Among these hazardous
chemicals, the herbicide paraquat gives the most cause
for concern, as it poses serious health hazards to the
spray operators. The Pesticides Action Network-Asia &
the Pacific has called for a ban on paraquat production
and use on numerous occasions, but to no avail.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

INDIA and OIL PALM

Indonesian palm oil companies produce palm oil by de-
stroying virgin rainforests and tiger habitat in Indonesia.
Indian huge palm oil imports from Indonesia is been ac-
celerating the destroyal of rainforest. India’s palm oil de-
mand destroying Indonesia’s rainforests.

The expansion of palm oil plantations to meet the global
demand for vegetable oils (palm oil usually used in this
name) happens at the expense of forest, wildlife and com-
munities.

Consumption of palm oil in India

Palm oil has dominated Indian imports since the last two
decades, for its logistical advantages, contractual flexibility,
and consumer acceptance change in consumption patterns,
availability, pricing, and policy changes. India is the largest
importer of palm oil which is also the lowest priced oil.
Palm oil contributes to around 74% (as of 2012) of the total
edible oils that are imported into the country.

Almost 90% of the palm oil imported and produced domes-
tically is used for edible/ food purposes, while the remain-
ing is used for industrial/non-edible purposes. Palm oil is
now the single largest consumed vegetable oil in India.

Palm oil in India - Production

Despite being the world’s fourth largest oilseed producing
country, India’s share of palm oil production is small, ac-
counting for 0.2% share in the total world produce

Palm oil production in India has grown at 22.7% CAGR
over the past five years in 2011. However, India would con-
tinue to be a net importer of palm oil.

State-wise Palm Oil Production in India

Andhra Pradesh is the leading palm oil producing state in
India contributing approximately 86 % of country’s pro-
duction, followed by Kerala (40%) and Karnataka (2%).
Other palm oil producing states include Orissa, Tamil
Nadu, Goa and Gujarat.

Major constraints in domestic cultivation of oil palm

e Geographical location: The ideal locations for oil palm
trees are within eight degrees latitude north and south
of the Equator.

e Irrigation: Palms need regular rainfall throughout the
year. However, they can withstand dry periods of 3-4
months depending on soils type without irrigation. Oil
palm can be grown in Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Karna-
taka, Goa and a few other areas, but only with irriga-
tion. This places significant pressure on the hydrological
system of the region.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 153 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Long gestation periods: Oil palm has very high pro-
ductivity when compared to other oilseeds like mustard,
however, the farmers would have to wait for four years
for the trees in India to obtain yield.

e Small farm holdings with Indian farmers generally are
challenging.

e Limited investments by corporate sector compared with
Malaysia and Indonesia.

Policies Related to Production and Distribution of
Palm Oil

Subsidies for distribution of imported palm oil:

The Ministry of Food has been subsiding imported edible
oil distribution under the public distribution system
(PDS):

e To provide relief, in particular BPL households, from the
rising prices of edible oils, the Central Government in-
troduced a scheme for distribution of upto 10 lakh tons
of imported edible oils in 2008-09 at a subsidy of rs
15/- per kg through State Governments/UTs.

e The scheme was extended during 2009-10, 2010-2011
and in 2011-12. After the implementation of the scheme,
edible oil prices have substantially declined and poorer
sections were provided edible oils at subsidized rates.

Oil Palm Development Programme in India:

e@ OPDP was launched during 1991- 92 under the “Technol-
ogy Mission on Oilseeds and Pulses” (TMOP), with a
focus on expansion of area under oil palm cultivation.

e From 2004-05, the scheme is being implemented as part
of the “Integrated Scheme of Oilseeds, Pulses, Oil Palm
& Maize” (ISOPOM) and provides support for oil palm
cultivation in 12 states: Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat,
Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Orissa,
Tamil Nadu, Tripura & West Bengal.

For the year 2011-12, the government rolled out the Oil
Palm Area Expansion (OPAE) Programme in order to
bring an additional 60,000 hectares area under oil palm
cultivation.

e The government has also announced various subsidies
for oil palm growers for planting, buying pump set and
drip-irrigation systems, partial compensation in case of
loss during the gestation period and support for pro-
cessing units.

Roundtable on Sustainable Oil (RSPO)

The RSPO was established in 2004 to promote the produc-
tion and use of sustainable palm oil for people, planet and
prosperity

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

RSPO is a membership based organisation with oil palm
growers, palm oil processers and traders, consumer good
manufactures, NGOs and retailers.

8 principles for growers to be RSPO certified

* commitment to transparency

¢ compliance with applicable laws and regulations

* commitment to long term economic and financial
viability

e use of appropriate best practices by growers and millers

¢ environmental responibility and conservation of natural
resources and biodiversity

e responsible consideration of employees, and of indi-
viduals and communities affected by growers and mills

e responsible development of new plantings

* commitent to continous improvement in key areas of
activity

RSPO impact
e Presently 14 % of palm oil globally is certified by RSPO

It is however important to understand that palm oil itself
is not the problem, but rather how palm oil is produced.
When done right, palm oil can be a catalyst for develop-
ment and to improve livelihoods. It can also enhance bio-
diversity and sequestrate carbon di oxide when planted on
degraded lands.

To ensure an uninterrupted supply of ‘clean’ palm oil that
does not involve sacrificing the remaining tropical forests
or contributing to global warming and other social prob-
lems, all companies that produce, trade or use palm oil
need to move towards sustainable palm oil.

When forest shrink, so does the home of endangered
species

7.4. COLONY COLLAPSE DISORDER

Bees are one of a myriad of other animals, including birds,
bats, beetles, and butterflies, a called pollinators. Pollina-
tors transfer pollen and seeds from one flower to another,
fertilizing the plant so it can grow and produce food. Cross-
pollination helps at least 30 percent of the world’s crops
and go percent of our wild plants to thrive. Without bees
to spread seeds, many plants - including food crops -
would die off.

Bees are not summertime nuisance, they are small and
hard-working insects actually make it possible for many of
your favorite foods to reach your table. From apples to
almonds to the pumpkin in our pumpkin pies, we have
bees to thank. Now, a condition known as Colony Collapse

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 154 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Disorder is causing bee populations to plummet, which
means these foods are also at risk.

Colony Collapse Disorder (CCD) is a new tagname presently
being given to a condition that is characterized by an un-
explained rapid loss of a Bee colony’s adult population.

Sudden loss of a colony’s worker bee population with very
few dead bees found near the colony. The queen and brood
(young) remained, and the colonies had relatively abun-
dant honey and pollen reserves. But hives cannot sustain
themselves without worker bees and would eventually die.
This combination of events resulting in the loss of a bee
colony has been called Colony Collapse Disorder (CCD).
Reduction or loss of bee population has been seen in the
history and known by the name such as disappearing dis-
ease, spring dwindle, May disease, autumn collapse, and
fall dwindle disease

Symptoms

e Contain no adult bees, with few to no dead bees around
the colony

e Contain capped brood

e Contain food stores that are not robbed by neighboring
bees or colony pest

e Worker bees failed to return to colony from flight

CAUSES

The problem is that there doesn’t seem to be a single
smoking gun behind CCD but a range of possible causes,
including:

Global warming

Global warming causes flowers to bloom earlier or later
than usual. When pollinators come out of hibernation, the
flowers that provide the food they need to start to start the
season has already bloomed.

Pesticide (neonicotinoids, a neuroactive chemical)

It’s not that the pesticides which are aimed at other insects
are killing the bees outright. Rather that sublethal expo-
sure of pesticides in nectar and pollen may be interfering
with the honeybees internal radar, preventing them from
gathering pollen and returning safely to the hive.
Varroa mite - parasites

European foulbrood (A bacterial disease that is increas-
ingly being detected in U.S. bee colonies) microsporidian
fungus Nosema.

Malnutrition

Beekeepers collect (steal) bees honey so humans can con-
sume it, they are taking away the insects’ food. They re-

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

place it with high-fructose corn syrup, leaving the bees
malnourished and weakening their immune systems.

Researchers have identified some specific nutrients that
bees need, get from honey, and don’t get from corn syrup.

When honeybees collect nectar from flowers, they also
gather pollen and a substance called propolis, which they
use to make waxy honeycombs. The pollen and propolis
are loaded with three types of compounds that can help
the bees detoxify their cells and protect themselves from
pesticides and microbes.

The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change is implementing various Schemes for Envi-
ronmental Conservation. The funding under the Cen-
tral Sector Schemes is 100 percent from the
Government of India. Under the Centrally Sponsored
Schemes, as per the revised funding pattern from
2015- 16 onwards, the Government of India’s share is

50 percent for rest of India and 80 percent for the
North Eastern States and 3 Himalayan States i.e
Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttara-
khand in environment sector. The share of the Gov-
ernment of India is 60 percent for rest of India in the
schemes related to forestry and wildlife and 90 per-
cent in respect of North Eastern States and 3 Himala-
yan States.

Metal Pollution

Bees absorbing metal pollution from flowers that absorbed
it from the soil that absorbed it from modern machines
and vehicles

Stress

The stress of shipping bees back and forth across the coun-
try, increasingly common in commercial beekeeping, may
be amplifying the stress on the insects and leaving them
more vulnerable to CCD.

Habitat loss

Habitat loss brought by development, abandoned farms,
growing crops without leaving habitat for wildlife and
growing gardens with flowers that are not friendly to
farmers.

How can we Protect Bees?

e Policy makers must take action to protect the bees and
other pollinators.

e Farmers must be rewarded for practices that help wild
bee populations thrive.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 155 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Assistance should be provided to farmers who plan to
support a wider variety of pollinators beyond just bees.

e Bee research must be strengthened, and must also be
broadened to include research on pollinators besides
honey bees.

e Integrated Pest Management (IPM) techniques should
be used to minimize pesticide us and risk to bees.

e City dwellers can also practice IPM where they live,
work, and play to protect our health, water quality, and
pollinators.

And if CCD continues, the consequences for the agricul-
tural economy — and even for our ability to feed ourselves
— could be dire.

“No more Bees, No more Pollination, No more Plants, No
more Animals, No more Man”.

Neonicotinoids

Neonicotinoids are a new class of insecticides chemically
related to nicotine. The name literally means “new nico-
tine-like insecticides”. Like nicotine, the neonicotinoids act
on certain kinds of receptors in the nerve synapse. They
are much more toxic to invertebrates, like insects, than
they are to mammals, birds and other higher organisms.

Neonicotinoids share a common mode of action that affect
the central nervous system of insects, resulting in paraly-
sis and death.

One thing that has made neonicotinoid insecticides popu-
lar in pest control is their water solubility, which allows
them to be applied to soil and be taken up by plants. Soil
insecticide applications reduce the risks for insecticide drift
from the target site, and for at least some beneficial insects
on plants.

They include imidacloprid, acetamiprid, clothianidin, di-
notefuran, nithiazine, thiacloprid and thiamethoxam.
Uncertainties prevail since their initial registration regard-
ing the potential environmental fate and effects of neoni-
cotinoid pesticides, particularly as they relate to pollinators.

Studies conducted in the late 1990s suggest that neonico-
tinic residues can accumulate in pollen and nectar of
treated plants and represent a potential risk to pollinators.
There is major concern that neonicotinic pesticides play a
role in recent pollinator declines.

Neonicotinods can also be persistent in the environment,
and when used as seed treatments, translocate to residues
in pollen and nectar of treated plants.

New research points out potential toxicity to bees and
other beneficial insects through low level contamination of
nectar and pollen with neonicotinoid insecticides used in

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

agriculture. Although the low level exposures do not nor-
mally kill bees directly, they may impact some bee’s ability
to foraging for nectar, learn and remember where flowers
are located, and possibly impair their ability to find their
way home to the nest or hive.

In April 2013, the European Commission decided to intro-
duce a 2-year moratorium in EU on the 3 neonicotinod
compounds—clothianidin, imidacloprid, and thiameth-
oxam—following reports by the European Food Safety Au-
thority (EFSA) saying the substances pose an “acute risk”
to honey bees essential to farming and natural ecosystems.

7.5 WILDLIFE (ELEPHANT, LEOPARD,
ETC) DEATHS DUE TO COLLISION
WITH TRAINS

Such accidents pose a grave danger to wildlife, and to the
conservation of our national biodiversity.

Article 48A (DPSP) of the Indian Constitution, it is stated
that the State shall endeavor to protect and improve the
environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of
the country.

Article 51A (Fundamental Duties) to protect and improve
the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and
wild life and to have compassion for living creatures

It is the duty of every citizen to preserve, protect and nour-
ish our wildlife heritage, particularly since these animals
are helpless in facing the challenge of biotic pressure.

What has to be done?

¢ Coordination between MoEF and Railways has to be
enhanced to ensure the safety of wildlife.

e Vulnerable patches for wildlife to be identified as wild
life crossing spots, and signage put up to warn train
drivers and other railway personnel, to enable them to
give directions for trains to slow down their speed in
these patches in the normal course.

¢ Update the list of well known vulnerable patches for
wild life, and conveying them to the Railways.

e Electronically tag prominent wildlife like elephants,
leopards, etc particularly in high traffic areas, so that
wildlife and forest personnel could keep track of their
movements, and warn railway officials well in time to
enable them to avoid accident. Once they are electroni-
cally tagged, forest personnel could track their move-
ments, and keep them from harm.

e Improvement in infrastructure for forest and Railway
staff, such as, equipped with walkie talkies, constant
connection with the control room, etc.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 156 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e In prominent wildlife areas, or wherever considered
necessary, forest officials should be posted at Railway
control rooms to coordinate with railway staff, in-
formed regarding the movement of elephants, to enable
railway authorities to take preventive action, well in
advance.

e Strict instructions to all railway and forest field person-
nel, emphasizing the importance of the protection and
conservation of wild life.

7.6. IMPACT OF RADIATION FROM
MOBILE PHONE TOWERS ON
HUMAN BEINGS AND WILDLIFE

The remarkable increase in mobile phones users in the
country and mushrooming of mobile tower installations in
every nook and corner of cities and towns have raised con-
cerns on its probable impact on wildlife and human health.

Health Impacts

Every antenna on cell phone tower radiates electro-mag-
netic power. One cell phone tower is being used by a num-
ber of operators, more the number of antennas more is the
power intensity in the nearby area. The power level near
towers is higher and reduces as we move away.

How the cell phone tower’s radiation affects the birds and
bees?

e The surface area of bird is relatively larger than their
body weight in comparison to human body so they ab-
sorb more radiation.

e Also the fluid content in the body of the bird is less due
to small body weight so it gets heated up very fast.

e Magnetic field from the towers disturbs birds’ naviga-
tion skills hence when birds are exposed to EMR they
disorient and begin to fly in all directions.

e A large number of birds die each year from collisions
with telecommunication masts.

How the cell phone tower’s radiation affects human?

e EMR may cause cellular and psychological changes in
human beings due to thermal effects that are generated
due to absorption of microwave radiation.

e The exposure can lead to genetic defects, effects on re-
production and development, Central Nervous System
behaviour etc.

e EMR can also cause non thermal effects which are
caused by radio frequency fields at levels too low to
produce significant heating and are due to movement
of calcium and other ions across cell membranes.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Such exposure is known to be responsible for fatigue,
nausea, irritability, headaches, loss of appetite and other
psychological disorders.

e The current exposure safety standards are purely based
on the thermal effects considering few evidences from
exposure to non thermal effects.

What are the responsibilities of Stakeholders?
MoEF:

e The MoFF has to notify the impacts of communication
towers on wildlife and human health to the concerned
agencies for regulating the norms for notification of
standards for safe limit of EMR.

State/Local Bodies:

e Regular monitoring and auditing in urban localities/
educational/hospital/ industrial/ residential/ recrea-
tional premises including the Protected Areas and eco-
logically sensitive areas.

e Carry out an ‘Ecological Impact Assessment’ before giv-
ing permission for construction of towers in wildlife
and ecologically important areas.

State Environment and Forest Department:

e State Environment and Forest Department are en-
trusted with the task of providing regular awareness
among the people about the norms on cell phone towers
and dangers of EMR from them.

Department of Telecommunications:

e Avoid overlapping of high radiation fields. New towers
should not be permitted within a radius of one kilom-
eter of the existing tower.

e The location and frequencies of cell phone towers and
other towers emitting EMR should be made available in
the public domain

e GIS mapping of all the cell phone towers to be main-
tained to monitor the population of bird and bees in and
around the wildlife protected area and the mobile towers.

e Need to refine the Indian standard on safe limits of
exposure to EMR, keeping in view the available litera-
ture on impacts on various life forms

e To undertake Precautionary approaches to minimize
the exposure levels and adopt stricter norms

Other agencies

e Any study conducted on impact of EMF radiation on
wildlife needs to be shared to facilitate appropriate
policy formulations.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 157 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

7.7 GENETICALLY ENGINEERED (GE)
TREES

The proponents of biotechnology industry claim that trees
that are genetically altered grow faster and yield better
quality of wood in extreme temperatures. Thus they are a
boon to forestry in dealing with climate change.

Historical background

The first field trials of GE trees were started in Belgium in
1988, when researchers began to develop poplar trees that
were herbicide resistant and that could grow faster. In
2002, China established commercial GE poplar trees plan-
tation as a strategy to address the issue of deforestation.
Initially GE trees were established in 300 hectares, and
now China has embraced the GE technology on a large
scale, integrating this into forestry sector. Latin American
countries like Brazil and Argentina, the forerunners in GM
food crops are also working on GE trees to enhance the
production of pulp and paper.

Is GE trees safer than GM crops?
For:

The proponents of the technology claim that GE trees are
safer and there is no need to fear about negative conse-
quences. Already the United Nations has approved planta-
tions of GE trees as carbon sinks under Kyoto Protocol’s
clean development mechanism. With this stamp of ap-
proval, many countries would like to adopt the technology
and establish GE plantations.

Against:

Environmentalists state that this technology poses as seri-
ous a threat as GM crops. The trees are perennial, that live
longer than agricultural crops. The changes in the me-
tabolism of trees may occur many years after they are
planted, and trees are wild, undomesticated. This makes
it difficult to decipher as to how the introduced gene will
behave in natural environment. This fact implies that the
ecological risks associated with GE trees are far greater
than the agricultural crops.

It has also been documented that the tree pollen travels a
distance of more than 600 km. The probability that the
GE tree pollen is likely to contaminate vast expanses of
native forests with a wide variety of destructive traits may
be a threat to ecological balance and the existing biodi-
versity of the tropical forests in global south. The con-
taminated pollen might pose threat to honey bees,
adversely impacting pollination in the wild and on agri-
culture crops.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Who are behind developing GE trees and why?

It is ArborGen a subsidiary of Monsanto, oil companies like
British Petroleum and Chevron that are investing in this
technology. For these companies GE trees offer a viable
alternate to fossil fuels as GE trees could produce ethanol,
a green fuel. As the ethanol produced from food stocks
came under attack, the companies see bright future in
non-food cellulose feedstock like GE trees.

In INDIA

The first experiment with genetically engineered tree was
with rubber tree developed by the Rubber Research Insti-
tute in Kerala. The GE rubber are better adapted to drought
resistance and increased environment stress tolerance.
This will help to establish rubber in non traditional areas
where the conditions are not favourable. Ironically the field
trials for GE rubber trees were approved by the then envi-
ronmental minister (Mr. Jairam Ramesh). Ministry as-
serted that the genetically modified trees posed lesser
threat in comparison to the food crops.

This assumption is baseless as the seeds of rubber tree are
used as cattle feed, that gets into the food chain through
milk. Similarly, Kerala is one of those regions that produce
large quantity of rubber honey from rubber plantations.
Kerala, a GM free state worried about the implications of
GE rubber on biodiversity, has voiced its concern about bio
safety issues. Now the rubber trees are being experimented
in Maharashtra.

These developments show the predominance of the west-
ern forestry science that lays emphasis on forests as a com-
mercial entity to produce wood and pulp. Diverse forests
were simplified by removal of multiple species and estab-
lishing monocultures that had commercial value. Already
the country’s landscape is scarred with millions of hectares
of teak and eucalypts mono culture plantations. This ap-
proach has had negative consequences for the environ-
ment, biodiversity and the local indigenous people. The
same trend will be reinforced with the establishment of GE
tree plantations, leading to further devastation of the nat-
ural environment and forests.

7.8 MOEF BANNED DOLPHIN CAPTIVITY

Ministry of Environment and Forests has banned dolphin
captivity within India. This opens up a whole new discourse
of ethics in the animal protection movement in India.

The unprecedented decision is particularly significant be-
cause it reflects an increasing global understanding that
dolphins deserve better protections based on who - rather
than what - they are.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 158 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Dolphinariums in India

India’s only experience of keeping dolphins was in the late
1990s. Four dolphins were imported from Bulgaria to
Chennai’s Dolphin City, a substandard marine-themed
amusement show, where they died within 6 months of
arrival.

New proposals

Several state governments had recently announced plans
for the state tourism development corporations to estab-
lish dolphinariums for commercial dolphin shows. Dol-
phins are a major tourist attraction at amusement parks
abroad.

The major proposals that were made for similar establish-
ments were by the Maharashtra Tourism Development
Corporation, the Kerala fisheries department in Kochi and
a few private hoteliers in Noida in the National Capital
Region.

Why ban?

Cetaceans, including whales, dolphins and porpoises, are
known to be highly intelligent animals. However, they do

not adjust well to living in captivity. Confinement alters
their behaviour and causes extreme distress.

The captivity industry exploit the lives of dolphins by deny-
ing them freedom and being allowed to cause them harm
and the captivity industry has become adept at hiding the
harm they cause to dolphins in their care.

Despite the fact that some humane laws exist to prevent
unnecessary cruelty, animals are still considered property
and are usually denied the basic rights of life, liberty or
freedom from harm.

The rights include not to be captured, confined, or killed,
in order to prevent the suffering that they most likely ex-
perience when these rights are violated.

Several countries, including Brazil, the United Kingdom
and Chile, have banned dolphins in captivity.

The move by MoEF came after months of protests against
a proposed dolphin park in the southern state of Kerala
and plans for several other marine mammal parks in other
parts of the country.

MoFF order

According to the circular released by the Central Zoo Au-
thority, states that because dolphins are by nature “highly
intelligent and sensitive,” they ought to be seen as “nonhu-
man persons” and should have “their own specific rights.”
It says that it is “morally unacceptable to keep them captive
for entertainment purposes.”

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

MoEF has asked all states to reject proposals for dolphi-
nariums either by private parties or by government agen-
cies, asking them not to allow import or capture of cetacean
species and their use for commercial entertainment, and
private or public exhibition.

In India, the Gangetic Dolphin and Snubfin Dolphin are
protected species as per the Indian Wildlife (Protection)
Act, 1972. The government has also declared Gangetic Dol-
phin as the national aquatic animal

Various animal protection organisation under the banner
of Federation of Indian Animal Protection Organisations
(FIAPO), has campaigned in the country to ban the estab-
lishment of dolphinariums.

7.9 PROHIBITION OF REMOVAL OF
SHARK FINS IN THE SEA

With a view to stop the inhuman hunting of sharks and to
enable the enforcement agencies to monitor the illegal
hunting/poaching of the species of Sharks, Rays and Skates
(Elasmobranchs) listed in Schedule I of the Wild Life (Pro-
tection) Act, 1972, Minister of for Environment and Forests
has approved a policy for prohibiting the removal of shark
fins on board a vessel in the sea.

The policy prescribes that any possession of shark fins that
are not naturally attached to the body of the shark, would
amount to “hunting” of a Schedule I species. The Policy
calls for concerted action and implementation by the con-
cerned State Governments through appropriate legislative,
enforcement and other measures.

They play an important the role in maintenance of the
marine ecosystem like tigers and leopards in the forests.
India is known to be home to about 40-60 species of
sharks. However, the population of some of these have
declined over the years due to several reasons including
over exploitation and unsustainable fishing practices.

Due to high demand of shark fines in the shark fin-soup
industry, it has been reported that the fins of the sharks
captured in the mid sea are removed on the vessel and
the de finned sharks are thrown back in the sea to die.
This has resulted in in-human killing of large number of
sharks and further decimated the population of Schedule
I species.

This practice prevailing on board the shipping vessels has
led to difficulties in enforcement of provisions of Wild
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 as it becomes difficult to iden-
tify the species of sharks from the fins alone, without the
corresponding carcass, from which the fins have been
detached.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 159 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

7.10 COST OF ENVIRONMENTAL
DEGRADATION IN INDIA

The annual cost of environmental degradation in India is
about Rs. 3.75 trillion, or 5.7% of India’s 2009 gross do-
mestic product (GDP), according to a report released by the
World Bank.

The impact of outdoor air pollution on GDP is the highest
and accounts for 1.7% of the GDP loss, said the report.
Indoor air pollution is the second-biggest offender and
costs India 1.3% of GDP.

“The higher costs for outdoor/indoor air pollution are pri-
marily driven by an elevated exposure of the young and
productive urban population to particulate matter pollu-
tion that results in a substantial cardiopulmonary and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (heart ailments)
mortality load among adults,” the report said.

The study, titled Diagnostic Assessment of Select Environ-
mental Challenges in India, has taken into account envi-
ronmental damage in India from urban air pollution,
including particulate matter and lead; inadequate water
supply; poor sanitation and hygiene; and indoor air pollu-
tion. Other factors that contribute to the loss include dam-
age to natural resources because of worsening agricultural
output because of an increase in soil salinity, water logging
and soil erosion; rangeland degradation; deforestation and
natural disasters.

“Environmental pollution, degradation of natural re-
sources, natural disasters and inadequate environmental
services, such as improved water supply and sanitation,
impose costs to society in the form of ill health, lost income,
and increased poverty and vulnerability,” the report said.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

A significant portion of diseases caused by poor water sup-
ply, sanitation and hygiene affect children younger than
five, the report said. It attributed 23% of child mortality
in the country to environmental degradation.

Following the concept of growing economically now and
cleaning up later will not be environmentally sustainable for
the country in the long run, said the lead author of the report.

The possible policy options to reduce particulate matter
pollution could be incentivizing technology upgradation,
securing efficiency improvements, strengthening enforce-
ment and enhancing technology and efficiency standards.

Steps taken by the Indian Government for control
air pollution

e formulation of a Comprehensive Policy for Abatement
of Pollution,

e supply of improved auto-fuel,
e tightening of vehicular and industrial emission norms,

e mandatory environmental clearance for specified indus-
tries,

¢ management of municipal, hazardous and bio-medical
wastes,

¢ promotion of cleaner technologies,

e strengthening the network of air quality monitoring
stations,

e assessment of pollution load,
e source apportionment studies,

¢ preparation and implementation of action plans for
major cities & critically polluted areas,

e Public awareness.

%, o% of of o% o%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 160 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY Q@, 0° A WDo ENVIRONMENT

CO) O | CHAPTER - 8 | QW

ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT

nvironmental Protection and Sustainable Develop- The Need for EIA

ment has been the cornerstones of the policies and

procedures governing the industrial and other de-
velopmental activities in India.

e Every anthropogenic activity has some impact on the
environment. More often it is harmful to the environ-
ment than benign. However, mankind as it is developed

Project Initiation

Present Status

Adverse (without project)

With project

Environment

(a) Anticipated environment impact of development project.

Environmental status without project

Project with EIA

EIA bridges the gap

~+~ _ Project done without EIA

Environmental components

(b) Environent impact rectification after EIA

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 161 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

today cannot live without taking up these activities for
his food, security and other needs. Consequently, there
is a need to harmonise developmental activities with
the environmental concerns. It is desirable to ensure
that the development options under consideration are
sustainable. In doing so, environmental consequences
must be characterised early in the project cycle and
accounted for in the project design.

Environmental impact assessment (EIA)

Environmental impact assessment (EIA) is one of the tools
available with the planners to achieve the goal of harmo-
nising development activities with the environmental con-
cerns.

EJA integrates the environmental concerns in the devel-
opmental activities right at the time of initiating for pre-
paring the feasibility report. In doing so it can enable the
integration of environmental concerns and mitigation
measures in project development. EIA can often pre-
vent future liabilities or expensive alterations in project
design.

The objective of EIA is to foresee the potential environmen-
tal problems that would arise out of a proposed develop-
ment and address them in the project’s planning and
design stage. EIA/ Environment Management Plan (EMP)
should assist planners and government authorities in the
decision making process by identifying the key impacts/
issues and formulating the mitigation measures.

EIA is a planning tool which is accepted as an integral
component of sound decision-making.

Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoE&F) has taken
several policy initiatives and enacted environmental and
pollution control legislations to prevent indiscriminate ex-
ploitation of natural resources and to promote integration
of environmental concerns in developmental projects.

One such initiative is the Notification on Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) of developmental projects 1994
under the provisions of Environment (Protection) Act,
1986.

8.1. INDIAN POLICIES REQUIRING EIA

e The environmental impact assessment in India was
started in 1976-77 when the Planning Commission
asked the then Department of Science and Technology
to examine the river-valley projects from environmen-
tal angle. This was subsequently extended to cover
those projects, which required approval of the Public
Investment Board. These were administrative decisions,
and lacked the legislative support. The Government of

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

India enacted the Environment (Protection) Act on 1986.
To achieve the objectives of the Act, one of the decisions
that were taken is to make environmental impact as-
sessment statutory.

Besides EJA, the Government of India under Environ-
ment (Protection) Act 1986 issued a number of other
notifications, which are related to environmental im-
pact assessment. These are limited to specific geo-
graphical areas. They are

e Prohibiting location of industries except those re-
lated to Tourism in a belt of 1 km from high tide
mark from the Revdanda Creek up to Devgarh
Point (near Shrivardhan) as well as in 1 km belt
along the banks of Rajpuri Creek in Murud Janjira
area in the Raigarh district of Maharashtra (1989)

Restricting location of industries, mining opera-
tions and regulating other activities in Doon Valley
(989)

Regulating activities in the coastal stretches of the
country by classifying them as coastal regulation
zone and prohibiting certain activities (1991)

Restricting location of industries and regulating
other activities in Dahanu Taluka in Maharashtra
(991)

Restricting certain activities in specified areas of
Aravalli Range in the Gurgaon district of Haryana
and Alwar district of Rajasthan (1992)

Regulating industrial and other activities, which
could lead to pollution and congestion in an area
north west of Numaligarh in Assam (1996)

Do you know?

Khangchendzonga National Park (KNP), Sikkim has
been inscribed as India’s first “Mixed World Heritage
Site” on UNESCO World Heritage List, by fulfilling the
nomination criteria under both natural and cultural
heritage.

8.2 THE EIA CYCLE AND PROCEDURES
The EIA process in India is made up of the
following phases:

e Screening

e Scoping

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 162 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Baseline data collection
e Impact prediction

e Assessment of alternatives, delineation of mitigation
measures and environmental impact statement

e Public hearing
e Environment Management Plan
e Decision making

e Monitoring the clearance conditions

8.2.1 Screening

e Screening is done to see whether a project requires
environmental clearance as per the statutory notifica-
tions. Screening Criteria are based upon:

e Scales of investment;
e Type of development; and,
e Location of development.

e A Project requires statutory environmental clearance
only if the provisions of EIA notification and/or one or
more statutory notification mentioned in Box 1 cover it

8.2.2 Scoping

e Scoping is a process of detailing the terms of reference
of EIA. It has to be done by the consultant in consulta-
tion with the project proponent and guidance, if need
be, from Impact Assessment Agency.

e The Ministry of Environment and Forests has published
sector-wise guidelines (Comprehensive terms of refer-
ence) which outline the significant issues which has to
be addressed in the EIA studies.

¢ Quantifiable impacts are to be assessed on the basis of
magnitude, prevalence, frequency and duration and
non-quantifiable impacts (such as aesthetic or recrea-
tional value), significance is commonly determined
through the socio-economic criteria.

e After the areas, where the project could have significant
impact, are identified, the baseline status of these
should be monitored. And then the likely changes in
these on account of the construction and operation of
the proposed project should be predicted.

8.2.3 Baseline Data

e Baseline data describes the existing environmental sta-
tus of the identified study area. The site-specific pri-
mary data should be monitored for the identified
parameters and supplemented by secondary data if
available.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Do you know?

India has the worst air pollution in the entire world, ac-
cording to a study released by World Economic Forum. Of
132 countries, India ranks dead last in the ‘Air (effects on
human healthy ranking.

8.2.4 Impact Prediction

e Impact prediction is a way of mapping the environmen-
tal consequences of the significant aspects of the project
and its alternatives. Environmental impact can never
be predicted with absolute certainty and this is all the
more reason to consider all possible factors and take all
possible precautions for reducing the degree of uncer-
tainty.

The following impacts of the project should be

assessed:

Air

e changes in ambient levels and ground level concentra-

tions due to total emissions from point, line and area
sources

e effects on soils, materials, vegetation, and human health

Noise

e changes in ambient levels due to noise generated from
equipment and movement of vehicles

e effect on fauna and human health

Water

availability to competing users

e changes in quality
e sediment transport

e ingress of saline water

Land
e changes in land use and drainage pattern

e changes in land quality including effects of waste dis-
posal

e changes in shoreline/riverbank and their stability

Biological
e deforestation/tree-cutting and shrinkage of animal
habitat.

¢ impact on fauna and flora (including aquatic species if
any) due to contaminants/pollutants

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 163 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e impact on rare and endangered species, endemic spe-
cies, and migratory path/route of animals.

Impact on breeding and nesting grounds

Socio-Economic

e impact on the local community including demographic
changes.

Impact on economic status
¢ impact on human health.

e impact of increased traffic

8.2.5 Assessment of Alternatives, Delineation of
Mitigation Measures and Environmental Impact
Assessment Report

e For every project, possible alternatives should be identi-
fied and environmental attributes compared. Alterna-
tives should cover both project location and process
technologies. Alternatives should consider no project
option also. Alternatives should then be ranked for se-
lection of the best environmental option for optimum
economic benefits to the community at large.

e Once alternatives have been reviewed, a mitigation plan
should be drawn up for the selected option and is sup-
plemented with an Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) to guide the proponent towards environmental
improvements. The EMP is a crucial input to monitoring
the clearance conditions and therefore details of moni-
tor should be included in the EMP.

e An EIA report should provide clear information to the
decision-maker on the different environmental scenar-
ios without the project, with the project and with pro-
ject alternatives. Uncertainties should be clearly
reflected in the EIA report.

8.2.6 Public Hearing

e Law requires that the public must be informed and con-
sulted on a proposed development after the completion
of EIA report.

e Any one likely to be affected by the proposed project is
entitled to have access to the Executive Summary of the
EIA. The affected persons may include:

e bonafide local residents;
e local associations;
e environmental groups: active in the area

e any other person located at the project site / sites of
displacement

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e They are to be given an opportunity to make oral/
written suggestions to the State Pollution Control
Board.

Do you know?

Hon’ble Supreme Court has directed all manufactur-
ers/dealers of Delhi-NCR, selling diesel cars with en-
gine capacity of 2000 cc and above, to pay 1%
Environment Protection Charge (1% of Ex-Showroom
price of the vehicle).

8.2.7. Environment Management Plan
Environment Management Plan should include:

e Delineation of mitigation and compensation measures
for all the identified significant impacts

e Delineation of unmitigated impacts

e Physical planning including work programme, time
schedule and locations for putting mitigation and com-
pensation systems in place

e Delineation of financial plan for implementing the mit-
igation measures in the form of budgetary estimates
and demonstration of its inclusion in the project budget
estimates.

8.2.8 Decision Making

e Decision making process involve consultation between
the project proponent (assisted by a consultant) and the
impact assessment authority (assisted by an expert
group if necessary)

e The decision on environmental clearance is arrived
through a number of steps including evaluation of EIA
and EMP.

8.2.9 Monitoring the Clearance Conditions

e Monitoring should be done during both construction
and operation phases of a project. This is not only to
ensure that the commitments made are complied with
but also to observe whether the predictions made in
the EIA reports were correct or not. Where the impacts
exceed the predicted levels, corrective action should be
taken. Monitoring will enable the regulatory agency to
review the validity of predictions and the conditions of
implementation of the Environmental Management
Plan (EMP).

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 164 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Salient Features of 2006 Amendment

Environment Impact Assessment Notification of 2006 has
decentralised the environmental clearance projects by cat-
egorizing the developmental projects in two categories, i.e.,
Category A and Category B.

‘Category A’ projects are appraised at national level by Im-
pact Assessment Agency (IAA) and the Expert Appraisal
Committee (EAC) and Category B projects are apprised at
state level.

State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority
(SEIAA) and State Level Expert Appraisal Committee
(SEAC) are constituted to provide clearance to Category B
process.

After 2006 Amendment the EIA cycle comprises of four
stages

1. Screening

2. Scoping

3. Public hearing
4. Appraisal

Category A projects require mandatory environmen-
tal clearance and thus we do not undergo the screening
process.

Category B projects undergoes screening process and they
are classified into two types.

1. Category B projects (Mandatory requires EIA).
2. Category B, projects (Do not require EIA).

Thus Category A projects and Category B, projects undergo
the complete EIA process whereas Category B, projects are
excluded from complete EIA process.

8.3 COMPONENTS OF EIA

e The difference between Comprehensive EIA and Rapid
EIA is in the time-scale of the data supplied. Rapid EIA
is for speedier appraisal process. While both types of
EIA require inclusion/ coverage of all significant envi-
ronmental impacts and their mitigation, Rapid EIA
achieves this through the collection of one season (other
than monsoon) data only to reduce the time required
where comprehensive EIA collects data from all four
seasons.

e Rapid EIA is acceptable if it does not compromise on the
quality of decision-making. The review of Rapid EIA
submissions will show whether a comprehensive EIA is
warranted or not.

e Itis, therefore, clear that the submission of a profession-
ally prepared Comprehensive EIA in the first instance

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

would generally be the more efficient approach. De-
pending on nature, location and scale of the project EIA
report should contain all or some of the following com-
ponents.

Air Environment

e Determination of impact zone (through a screening
model) and developing a monitoring network

e Monitoring the existing status of ambient air quality
within the impacted region (7-10 km from the periph-
ery) of the proposed project site

e Monitoring the site-specific meteorological data, viz.
wind speed and direction, humidity, ambient tempera-
ture and environmental lapse rate

e Estimation of quantities of air emissions including fugi-
tive emissions from the proposed project

e Identification, quantification and evaluation of other
potential emissions (including those of vehicular traffic)
within the impact zone and estimation of cumulative of
all the emissions/impacts

e Prediction of changes in the ambient air quality due to
point, line and areas source emissions through appro-
priate air quality models

e Evaluation of the adequacy of the proposed pollution
control devices to meet gaseous emission and ambient
air quality standards

e Delineation of mitigation measures at source, path ways
and receptor

Noise Environment

e Monitoring the present status of noise levels within the
impact zone, and prediction of future noise levels result-
ing from the proposed project and related activities
including increase in vehicular movement

e Identification of impacts due to any anticipated rise in
noise levels on the surrounding environment

e Recommendations on mitigation measures for noise
pollution

Water Environment

e Study of existing ground and surface water resources
with respect to quantity and quality within the impact
zone of the proposed project

e Prediction of impacts on water resources due to the
proposed water use/pumping on account of the project

e Quantification and characterisation of waste water in-
cluding toxic organic, from the proposed activity

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 165 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Evaluation of the proposed pollution prevention and
wastewater treatment system and suggestions on mod-
ification, if required

e Prediction of impacts of effluent discharge on the qual-
ity of the receiving water body using appropriate math-
ematical/simulation models

e Assessment of the feasibility of water recycling and
reuse and delineation of detailed plan in this regard

Biological Environment

Survey of flora and fauna clearly delineating season and
duration.

e Assessment of flora and fauna present within the impact
zone of the project

e Assessment of potential damage to terrestrial and
aquatic flora and fauna due to discharge of effluents and
gaseous emissions from the project

e Assessment of damage to terrestrial flora and fauna due
to air pollution, and land use and landscape changes

e Assessment of damage to aquatic and marine flora and
fauna (including commercial fishing) due to physical
disturbances and alterations

e Prediction of biological stresses within the impact zone
of the proposed project

e Delineation of mitigation measures to prevent and / or
reduce the damage.

Land Environment

e Studies on soil characteristics, existing land use and
topography, landscape and drainage patterns within the
impact zone

e Estimation on impacts of project on land use, landscape,
topography, drainage and hydrology

e Identification on potential utility of treated effluent in
land application and subsequent impacts

e Estimation and Characterisation of solid wastes and
delineation of management options for minimisation of
waste and environmentally compatible disposal

Socio-economic and Health Environment

e Collection of demographic and related socio-economic
data

e Collection of epidemiological data, including studies on
prominent endemic diseases (e.g. fluorosis, malaria,
fileria, malnutrition) and morbidity rates among the
population within the impact zone

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Projection of anticipated changes in the socio-economic
and health due to the project and related activities in-
cluding traffic congestion and delineation of measures
to minimise adverse impacts

e Assessment of impact on significant historical, cultural
and archaeological sites/places in the area

e Assessment of economic benefits arising out of the
project

e Assessment of rehabilitation requirements with special
emphasis on scheduled areas, if any.

Risk Assessment

e Hazard identification taking recourse to hazard indices,
inventory analysis, dam break probability, Natural Haz-
ard Probability etc.

e Maximum Credible Accident (MCA) analysis to identify
potential hazardous scenarios

e Consequence analysis of failures and accidents result-
ing in fire, explosion, hazardous releases and dam
breaks etc.

e Hazard & Operability (HAZOP) studies

e Assessment of risk on the basis of the above evaluations

e Preparation of an onsite and off site (project affected
area) Disaster Management Plan

Environment Management Plan

e Delineation of mitigation measures including preven-
tion and control for each environmental component and
rehabilitation and resettlement plan.

e Delineation of monitoring scheme for compliance of
conditions

e Delineation of implementation plan including schedul-
ing and resource allocation

Do you know?

Environment Ministry to create ‘urban forests’ in 200
cities to increase green cover. ‘Urban Forestry Scheme’
launched in Pune, to create an ‘urban jungle’ on about
80 acres of land.

8.4. KEY ELEMENTS OF AN INITIAL
PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND SCOPING

e The key environmental issues to be considered in rela-
tion to a project characteristics are discussed in Secto-
ral Guidelines published by MoEF from time to time.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 166 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e An Initial Project Description (IPD) should at the very
least, provide the reviewer with all the information nec-
essary to enable project screening and scoping.

Specific information that must be covered by the IPD in-
cludes:

e Location/current land use along with contours and
whether it conforms to the development plans pro-
posed for that area

e Details of proposed project activity including the
project cost

e Outlining the key project elements during the pre-
construction, the construction and the operation
phases etc. as per the list of documents to be at-
tached with the questionnaire

e The IPD may also include.

e Off-site activities

e Associated activities

e Expected project induced activities

e Project activities as PERT chart and process as a
flow chart delineating unit processes with input-
output.

e This would facilitate the reviewers task. The project
proponent after suitable scoping should provide envi-
ronmental information for consideration in detailed
EIA. The reviewer while assessing the report should
focus on the crucial aspects involving project location
and characteristics.

8.4.1 Project Location(s)

e The site(s) selection can be an effective approach in
minimising the requirement of mitigation measures.

e Proposed project locations should be reviewed based
upon regulatory and non-regulatory criteria.

e Project siting restrictions depend on the sensitivity of
the surrounding environment. Sensitivity should be
assessed in relation to proximity of the project to the
places/sites listed in the identified ecologically sensitive
zones (ESZ) notified by MOEF.

The siting criteria delineated by MoEF include:

I. As far as possible prime agricultural land/forest land
may not be converted into an industrial site

I. Land acquired should be minimum but sufficient to
provide for a green belt wherein the treated wastewa-
ter, if possible/suitable, could be utilised from waste-
water treatment systems

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

III. Enough space may be provided for storing solid wastes.
The space and the waste can be made available for pos-
sible reuse in future

IV. Layout and form of the project must conform to the
landscape of the area without unduly affecting the sce-
nic features of that place

V. Associated township of the project if any to be created
must provide for space for phyto- graphic barrier be-
tween the project and the township and should take
into account predominant wind direction.

In addition the following distances should be maintained:

¢ Coastal Areas: at least 1/2 km from the high tide line
(within 0.5 km of High Tide Line (HTL), specified ac-
tivities as per CRZ notification, 1991 are permitted)
(The HTL is to be delineated by the authorised agency
only.)

e Estuaries: At least 200 metres from the estuary bound-
aries

Flood Plains of the Riverine systems: at least 500
metres from flood plain or modified flood plain or by
flood control systems

Transport/Communication System: at least 500 me-
tres from highway and railway

e Major Settlements (3,00,000 population) at least
25 km from the projected growth boundary of the
settlement

In addition to the siting criteria listed above, the proposed
project location should be reviewed in relation to the fol-
lowing salient issues:

e Ambient air, water and noise quality standards
© Critically polluted areas

e Natural disaster prone areas

e Ecologically sensitive areas

e Availability of water and other critical infrastruc-
tures like electricity, roads with adequate width and
capacity

Do you know?

Government of India has established the National
Adaptation Fund for Climate Change (NAFCC) with
a budget provision of Rs 350 crore for 2015-16 and
2016-17 to assist States and Union Territories to un-
dertake projects and actions for adaptation to climate
change.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 167 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

PROCEDURE FOR PUBLIC HEARING

G) Process of Public Hearing: -

Whoever apply for environmental clearance of projects,
shall submit to the concerned State Pollution Control Board.

(2) Notice of Public Hearing: -

1.

il.

The State Pollution Control Board shall cause a notice
for environmental public hearing which shall be pub-
lished in at least two newspapers widely circulated in
the region around the project, one of which shall be in
the vernacular language of the locality concerned. State
Pollution Control Board shall mention the date, time
and place of public hearing. Suggestions, views, com-
ments and objections of the public shall be invited
within thirty days from the date of publication of the
notification.

All persons including bona fide residents, environmen-
tal groups and others located at the project site/sites of
displacement/sites likely to be affected can participate
in the public hearing. They can also make oral/written
suggestions to the State Pollution Control Board.

Do you know?

Human-induced emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG)
including those from the agriculture sector are con-
sidered to be the drivers of observed climate change.
While annual total GHG emissions from agriculture
in 2010 are estimated to be of the order of 10-12% of
global anthropogenic emission, the research con-
ducted by the government indicates that agriculture
in India contributed to 18% of the total emissions of
India in 2010. The gases emitted from this sector are
mainly methane (CH4) and Nitrous Oxide (N20).

(3) Composition of public hearing panel: -

The composition of Public Hearing Panel may consist of the
following, namely: -

i. Representative of State Pollution Control Board;

ii. District Collector or his nominee;

jae)

iii. Representative of State Government dealing with the
subject;
iv. Representative of Department of the State Govern-

ment dealing with Environment;

v. Not more than three representatives of the local bod-
ies such as Municipalities or panchayats;

Qd O°@ Wo ENVIRONMENT

vi. Not more than three senior citizens of the area nom-
inated by the District Collector.

8.5 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
ASSESSMENT IN THE INDIAN
SYSTEM - DRAWBACKS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS

DRAW BACKS

Applicability:

1. There are several projects with significant environmen-
tal impacts that are exempted from the notification
either because they are not listed in schedulei, or their

investments are less than what is provided for in the
notification.

Composition of expert committees and standards:

1. It is being found that the team formed for conducting
EIA studies is lacking the expertise in various fields
such as environmentalists, wild life experts, Anthro-
pologists and Social Scientists (to study the social im-
pact of the project).

2. There is a lack of exhaustive ecological and socio-eco-
nomic indicators for impact assessment.

Public hearing:

1. Public comments are not taken into account at the early
stage, which often leads to conflict at the later stage of
project clearance.

2. A number of projects with significant environmental
and social impacts have been excluded from the man-
datory public hearing process.

3. The documents which the public are entitled to are
seldom available on time.

4. The data collectors do not pay respect to the indigenous
knowledge of local people.

Quality:
1. One of the biggest concerns with the environmental
clearance process is related to the quality of EIA report

that are being carried out. The reports are generally
incomplete and provided with false data.

2. EIA reports ignore several aspects while carrying out
assessments and significant information is found to
omitted.

3. Many EIA report are based on single season data and
are not adequate to determine whether environmental
clearance should be granted. All this makes the entire
exercise contrary to its very intent.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 168 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

4. As things stand today, it is the responsibility of the
project proponent to commission the preparation of the
EIA for its project. The EIA is actually funded by an
agency or individual whose primary interest is to pro-
cure clearance for the project proposed. There is little
chance that the final assessment presented is un biased,
even if the consultant may provide an unbiased assess-
ment that is critical of the proposed project. Some
times it is found that a consultancy which is working
in the project area has no specialization in the con-
cerned subject. For example for the preparation of EIA
report of the proposed oil exploration in coast of Orissa
by the reliance group has been given to the life science
Dept of Berhampur university which has no expertise
on the study of turtles and its life cycle.

5. The EIA document in itself is so bulky and technical,
which makes it very difficult to decipher so as to aid in
the decision making process.

6. There are so many cases of fraudulent EIA studies
where erroneous data has been used, same facts used
for two totally different places etc. This is due to the
lack of a centralized baseline data bank, where such
data can be crosschecked.

7. There is no accreditation of EIA consultants, therefore
any such consultant with a track record of fraudulent
cases cannot be held liable for discrepancies. It is hard
to imagine any consultant after being paid lakh of ru-
pees, preparing a report for the project proponents,
indicating that the project is not viable.

8. In nearly every case, the consultants try to interpret
and tailor the information looking for ways and means
to provide their clients with a report that gives them
their moneys worth.

Monitoring, compliance and institutional
arrangements:

Do you know?

India has also set up a National Adaptation Fund with
an initial allocation of INR 3,500 million (USD 55.6
million) to combat the adaptation needs in key sectors.
This fund will assist national and state level activities
to meet the cost of adaptation measures in areas that
are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of
climate change.

1. Often, and more so for strategic industries such as
nuclear energy projected, the EMPs are kept confiden-
tial for political and administrative reasons

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

2. Details regarding the effectiveness and implementation
of mitigation measures are often not provided.

3. Emergency preparedness plans are not discussed in
sufficient details and the information not disseminated
to the communities.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Independent EIA Authority

Pp

Sector wide EIA s needed
Creation of an information desk

Creation of a centralized baseline data bank

gg BRB WON

Dissemination of all information related to projects
from notification to clearance to local communities and
general public

Applicability:
1. All those projects where there is likely to be a signifi-

cant alternation of ecosystems need to go through the
process of environmental clearance, without exception.

2. No industrial developmental activity should be permit-
ted in ecologically sensitive areas.

Public hearing:

1. Public hearings should be applicable to all hitherto ex-
empt categories of projects which have environmental
impacts.

Quality:
1. The focus of EIA needs to shift from utilization and

exploitation of natural resources to conservation of
natural resources.

2. At present EJA reports are extremely weak when it
comes to assessment of biological diversity of a project
area and the consequent impacts on it. This gap needs
to be plugged through a specific guidelines and through
necessary amendments.

3. The checklist needs to include impacts on agricultural
biodiversity, biodiversity related traditional knowledge
and live hoods.

4. All EIA reports should clearly state what are the ad-
verse impacts that a proposed projects will have. This
should be a separate chapter and not hidden within
technical details.

5. The sub components or subsidiary reports of EIA re-
ports (e.g. Assessments of Biodiversity impacts done by
a sub consultant) should be made publicly accessible as
stand alone reports with the EIA. This should be avail-
able on the websites of the MOEF.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 169 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

6. EIAs should be based on full studies carried out over
at least one year. Single season data on environmental
parameters like biodiversity, as is being done for sev-
eral rapid assessments is not adequate to gain under-
standing of the full impact of the proposed project.

7. Itis critical that the preparation of an EIA is completely
independent of the project proponent. One option for this
could be the creation of a central fund for the EIAs which
contains fees deposited by project proponents while seek-
ing that an EIA be done for their proposed project.

8. State and central governments should maintain a list
of credible, independent and competent agencies that
can carry out EIAs. similarly the EIA consultant those
are making false reports should be black listed.

g. A national level accreditation to environment consul-
tancy should be adopted

Do you know?

National Clean Development Mechanism Authority
(NCDMA) was established in December 2003 for ac-
cording Host Country Approval (HCA) to the CDM
projects.

Grant of clearance:

1. The notification needs to make it clear that the provi-
sion for site clearance does not imply any commitment
on the part of the impact Assessment agency to grant
full environmental clearance.

2. The prior informed consent of local communities and
urban wards or residents association needs to be made
mandatory before the grant of environmental clear-
ance. The consent should be from the full general body.

3. The language used for specifying conditions of clear-
ance must be clear and specific.

Composition of expert committees:

1. The present executive committees should be replaced
by expert’s people from various stakeholder groups,
who are reputed in environmental and other relevant
fields.

2. The process of selection of those committees should be
open and transparent. The minutes, decisions and ad-
vice by these committee should be open to public.

Monitoring, compliance and institutional
arrangements:

1. The EIA notification needs to build within it an auto-
matic withdrawal of clearance if the conditions of clear-
ance are being violated, and introduce more stringent

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

punishment for non- compliance. At present the EIA
notification limits itself to the stage when environmen-
tal clearance is granted.

2. The MOEF should set up more regional offices with
advisory Expert committees, each with smaller areas
of jurisdiction, to effectively monitor the compliance of
clearance conditions.

3. Arobust monitoring mechanism should be established
by the state department to address compliance of both
sets of clearance conditions together and to take puni-
tive action against the project proponent in case of non-
compliance.

4. Local communities should be brought in to the formal
monitoring and reporting process of the compliance of
conditions presently done by the regional offices of the
MOEF.

Redressal:

1. The composition of the NGT needs to be changed to
include more judicials from the field of environment.

2. Citizen should be able to access the authority for re-
dressal of all violation of the EIA notification as well as
issues relating to non-compliance.

Capacity building:
NGOs, civil society groups and local communities need to
build their capacities to use the EIA notification towards
better decision making on projects that can impact their
local environments and live hoods. Capacities can be built
to proactively and effectively use the notification rather
than respond in a manner that is seen as negative or un-
productive.

List of Environmentally Sensitive Places
e Religious and historic places

e Archaeological monuments/sites

e Scenic areas

e Hill resorts/mountains/ hills

e Beach resorts

e Health resorts

e Coastal areas rich in corals, mangroves, breeding
grounds of specific species

e Estuaries rich in mangroves, breeding ground of spe-
cific species

e Gulf areas

e Biosphere reserves

e National park and wildlife sanctuaries

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 170 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Natural lakes, swamps Seismic zones tribal Settlements
Areas of scientific and geological interests

Defense installations, specially those of security impor-
tance and sensitive to pollution

Border areas (international)

Airport

Tiger reserves/elephant reserve/turtle nestling grounds
Habitat for migratory birds

Lakes, reservoirs, dams

Streams/rivers/estuary/seas

Railway lines

Highways

Urban agglomeration

Do you know?

The criteria followed for specification of a community
as a Scheduled Tribe are (i) indications of primitive
traits, (ii) distinctive culture, (iii) geographical isola-
tion, (iv) shyness of contact with the community at
large, and (v) backwardness.

ENVIRONMENT SUPPLEMENT PLAN (ESP)

An Environmental Supplemental Plan (ESP) is an envi-
ronmentally beneficial project or activity that is not
required by law, but that an alleged violator of Envi-
ronmental Impact Assessment Notification, 2006 agrees
to undertake as part of the process of environmental
clearance.

“Environmentally beneficial” means an Environmental
Supplemental Plan must remediate, improve, protect
the environment or reduce risks to public health or the
environment.

Proposals under ESP

ESP would allow violator companies to continue their
activities by paying a financial penalty.

This would then be invested in an “environmentally
beneficial project or activity” for an affected target
group of stakeholders.

Positives

Many developmental projects have been currently been
stalled to non-compliance with EIA regime or for pre-
paring an improper EIA. ESP would enable reviving
these projects.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

The “Bad Loans” issue currently plaguing the Banking
sector can be substantially resolved through reviving
the stalled projects.

Negatives:

ESP is a clever attempt to legalize EIA violation and gain
corporate confidence, thereby allowing violator to dam-
age the environment and circumvent the EIA process.

Among all cases filed in the National Green Tribunal
(NGT), around 41% are cases where the NGT found
faults with an EIA assessment. Thus, EIA violation is a
major in developmental projects. Allowing such viola-
tors to carry on, defeats the ultimate purpose of EIA.

Many experts argue that this indirectly allows pardon-
ing of violations. Rather than building upon the “Pol-
luters Pay Principle”, the ESP looks like an attempt to
promote corporate development by using a contradic-
tory “Pay and Pollute” principle.

MoEFCC stated the notification has legal basis in
two judgments, one by the NGT and the other by
the Jharkhand High Court. But neither of the two
judgments condones EIA violations to be regularized
post facto nor does it prescribe a way out of these for
violators.

Valuation of environmental loss cannot be just compen-
sated by pecuniary payment by the violator.

Whether the fine amount would be collected properly
and utilized for restoration is doubtful. No mechanism
has been proposed to utilize the collected funds.

ESP provides an escape mechanism to violators. Instead
of following the path of an EIA clearance, they can get
away by paying a penalty through specific investment
activities.

PARIVESH (Pro-Active and Responsive facilitation
by Interactive, Virtuous and Environmental
Single-window Hub)

PARIVESH is a Single-Window Integrated Environmen-
tal Management System. Key features include single
registration and single sign-in for all types of clearances
(i.e. Environment, Forest, Wildlife and CRZ), unique-ID
for all types of clearances required for a particular pro-
ject and a single Window interface for the proponent to
submit applications for getting all types of clearances
(i.e. Environment, Forests, Wildlife and CRZ clear-
ances).

Oe CO Gir, Ge,
~~ ~° “~~ “~e “~ “~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 171 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 173 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 174 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

QF 6° g Go

ENVIRONMENT

CHAPTER - 9

BIODIVERSITY

iodiversity found on Earth today consists of many

millions of distinct biological species, the product of

four billion years of evolution. Biodiversity is the
variety of life on Earth, it includes all organisms, species,
and populations; the genetic variation among these; and
their complex assemblages of communities and ecosystems.
It also refers to the interrelatedness of genes, species, and
ecosystems and in turn, their interactions with the envi-
ronment.

This is life, This is Biodiversity.

9.1. BIODIVERSITY

Biodiversity is defined as ‘the variability among living or-
ganisms from all sources, including terrestrial, marine and
other aquatic ecosystems and the ecological complexes of
which they are a part; this includes diversity within spe-
cies, between species and of ecosystems’.

- United Nations Earth Summit (1992)

Do you know?

Sea snakes are very poisonous. The most poisonous
one is the Beaded Sea Snake. Just 3 drops of venom can
kill about 8 people! Their other methods of defense
include to spray a stinky, musky liquid or to poop. Eew!

Conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity is funda-
mental to ecologically sustainable development. Biodiver-
sity is part of our daily lives and livelihood, and constitutes
resources upon which families, communities, nations and
future generations depend.

g.1.1. Levels of Biodiversity

Biodiversity is considered to exist at three levels: genetics,
species, and ecosystems.

(a) Genetic diversity:

e It is concerned with the variation in genes within a
particular species.

e Genetic diversity allows species to adapt to changing
environments.

e This diversity aims to ensure that some species sur-
vive drastic changes and thus carry on desirable
genes.

e The survival of individuals ensures the survival of
the population.

e The genetic diversity gives us beautiful butterflies,
roses, parakeets or coral in a myriad hues, shapes
and sizes.

(b) Species diversity:
e It refers to the variety of living organisms on earth.

e Species differ from one another, markedly in their
genetic makeup, do not inter-breed in nature.

e Closely-related species however have in common
much of their hereditary characteristics. For in-
stance, about 98.4 per cent of the genes of humans
and chimpanzees are the same.

e It is the ratio of one species population over total
number of organisms across all species in the given
biome.

e ‘Zero’ would be infinite diversity, and ‘one’ repre-
sents only one species present.

(c) Ecosystem/ Community diversity:

e This refers to the different types of habitats. A habi-
tat is the cumulative factor of the climate, vegetation
and geography of a region.

e There are several kinds of habitats around the world.
Corals, grasslands, wetland, desert, mangrove and
tropical rain forests are examples of ecosystems.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 175 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e Change in climatic conditions is accompanied by a
change in vegetation as well. Each species adapts
itself to a particular kind of environment.

e As the environment changes, species best adapted to
that environment becomes predominant. Thus the
variety or diversity of species in the ecosystem is
influenced by the nature of the ecosystem.

Do you know?

The most dangerous sharks are the Great White shark,
the Tiger shark, the Hammerhead shark, the Mako
shark and the Bull shark. On average, there are only
about 100 shark attacks each year and only 10 of those
result in a human death. People kill thousands of
sharks in a year for sport and for food. Shark skins are
used to make leather products. Until the 1950 s, shark
livers were used as a vitamin A supplement. Shark fin
soup and shark steaks are both eaten in many coun-
tries. So... who’s the dangerous predator?

9.1.2. Measurement of Biodiversity
Biodiversity is measured by two major components:
i. species richness, and

ii. species evenness.

(i) Species richness

It is the measure of number of species found in a com-
munity

a) Alpha diversity

It refers to the diversity within a particular area or ecosys-
tem, and is usually expressed by the number of species (i.e.,
species richness) in that ecosystem.

b) Beta diversity

It is a comparison of diversity between ecosystems, usually
measured as the change in amount of species between the
ecosystems

c) Gamma diversity

It is a measure of the overall diversity for the different
ecosystems within a region.

(ii) Species evenness

It measures the proportion of species at a given site, e.g.
low evenness indicates that a few species dominate the
site.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

9.1.3. Biodiversity and Food Web

The building blocks of plants, animals and humans are
identical, and are made of the four elements - carbon, oxy-
gen, nitrogen and hydrogen.

These elements are present in the environment - in air,
water and soil. However, only green plants can absorb
nitrogen from the soil through their roots, and use sunlight
and water to produce energy by a process called photosyn-
thesis. They are known as producers.

Animals and humans, who have plants or other animals
as their food, are known as consumers. The chain that
links consumers to producers is called the food chain or
web.

Every living creature is found in a food chain. There are
several food chains and they can be complex or simple
depending on the environment.

To cite some examples, grasshoppers eat grass and are in
turn eaten by frogs; snakes eat frogs and rodents.

Thus the importance of each and every creature in the web
of life is evident. Tampering with the food chain only pro-
duces negative results, leading to the destruction of the
species.

Every time a species becomes extinct, the chain is broken
and many species, including humans, move closer to ex-
tinction.

9.1.4. Services provided by Biodiversity:
Biodiversity provides a number of natural services for
human beings:
(a) Ecosystem services

e Protection of water resources

e Soils formation and protection

e Nutrient storage and recycling

e Pollution breakdown and absorption

e Contribution to climate stability

e Maintenance of ecosystems

e Recovery from unpredictable events

(b) Biological services
e Food
e Medicinal resources and pharmaceutical drugs
e Wood products
e Ornamental plants
e Breeding stocks

e Diversity in genes, species and ecosystems

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 176 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(© Social services
e Research, education and monitoring
e Recreation and tourism

e Cultural values

9.1.5. Causes for Biodiversity Loss

Loss of biodiversity occurs when either a particular species
is destroyed or the habitat essential for its survival is dam-
aged. The latter is more common as habitat destruction is
inevitable fallout of development.

The extinction of species takes place when they are ex-
ploited for economic gain or hunted as sport or for food.
Extinction of species may also occur due to environmental
reasons like ecological substitutions, biological factors and
pathological causes which can be caused either by nature
or man.

(a) Natural causes
e floods,

e earthquakes,

landslides,

e rivalry among species,

lack of pollination and diseases.

(b) Man-Made causes
e Habitat destruction
e Uncontrolled commercial exploitation
e Hunting & poaching

e Conversion of rich bio-diversity site for human set-
tlement and industrial development

e Extension of agriculture
e Pollution
e Filling up of wetlands

e Destruction of coastal areas

9.1.6. Biodiversity conservation

Do you know?

Not all snakes have fangs. Only the poisonous ones
do. Fangs are sharp, long, hollow teeth that are
hooked up to small sacs in the snake’s head behind
their eyes. These sacs produce a poisonous liquid
called venom. When a snake bites, venom is released
and starts to work immediately to kill or paralyze the

prey.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Conservation of biological diversity leads to conservation
of essential ecological diversity and preserve the continuity
of food chains.

9.1.7. Modes of Conservation

(a) Ex-situ conservation: Conserving biodiversity outside
the areas where they naturally occur is known as ex-
situ conservation.

e Here, animals are reared or plants are cultivated like
zoological parks or botanical gardens. Reintroduc-
tion of an animal or plant into the habitat from
where it has become extinct is another form of ex
situ conservation.

e For example, the Gangetic gharial has been reintro-
duced in the rivers of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh and Rajasthan where it had become extinct.

e Seed banks, botanical, horticultural and recreational
gardens are important centres for ex-situ conserva-
tion.

(b) In-situ conservation: Conserving the animals and
plants in their natural habitats is known as in-situ
conservation. The established natural habitats are:

e National parks

e Sanctuaries

e Biosphere reserves and
e Reserved forests

e Protected forests

Constraints in biodiversity conservation

e Low priority for conservation of living natural re-
sources.

e Exploitation of living natural resources for monetary
gain.

e Values and knowledge about the species and ecosystem
are inadequate.

¢ Unplanned urbanization and uncontrolled industrializa-
tion.

9.1.8. Botanical garden

Botanical garden refers to the scientifically planned collec-
tion of living trees, shrubs, herbs, climbers and other
plants from various parts of the world.

Purpose of botanical gardens

1. To study the taxonomy as well as growth of plants.

2. To study the introduction and acclimatization process
of exotic plants.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 177 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

3. It acts as a germplasm collection.
4. It helps development of new hybrids.

5. It augments conserving rare and threatened species.

9.1.9. ZOO

Zoo is an establishment, whether stationary or mobile,
where captive animals are kept for exhibition to the public
and includes a circus and rescue centers but does not in-
clude an establishment of a licensed dealer in captive ani-
mals - CZA.

The initial purpose of zoos was entertainment, over the
decades, zoos have got transformed into centres for wildlife
conservation and environmental education.

Apart from saving individual animals, zoos have a role to
play in species conservation too (through captive breeding).

Do you know?

Two species of bear which have special feet are polar
bear and the giant panda. The polar bear has partially
webbed toes for swimming and walking on snow as
well as furry bottoms to keep its feet warm on the ice.
Giant pandas do not have a heel pad so they walk
more on their toes.

9.2. THE RED DATA BOOK

Species judged as threatened are listed by various agencies
as well as by some private organizations. The most cited
of these lists is the Red Data Book.

It is a loose-leaf volume of information on the status of
many kinds of species. This volume is continually updated
and is issued by the International Union for Conservation
of Nature (IUCN) located in Morges, Switzerland.

“Red” of course is symbolic of danger that the species both
plants and animals presently experience throughout the
globe.

The Red Data Book was first issued in 1966 by the IUCN’s
Special Survival Commission as a guide for formulation,
preservation and management of species listed.

In this Book, information for endangered mammals and
birds are more extensive than for other groups of animals
and plants, coverage is also given to less prominent organ-
isms facing extinction.

The pink pages in this publication include the critically
endangered species. As the status of the species changes,
new pages are sent to the subscribers.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Green pages are used for those species that were formerly
endangered, but have now recovered to a point where they
are no longer threatened. With passing time, the number
of pink pages continue to increase. There are pitifully few
green pages.

Vulnerable (VU)

cs

Not Evaluated (NE)

IUCN Categories

CRITERIA

RED LIST
CATEGORIES

9.2.1 IUCN CLASSIFICATION OF CONSERVATION
PRIORITY

9.2.1. Extinct (EX)

A taxon is Extinct when there is no reasonable doubt that
the last individual has died. A taxon is presumed Extinct
when exhaustive surveys in known and/or expected habitat,
at appropriate times (diurnal, seasonal, annual), throughout
its historic range have failed to record an individual.

9.2.2. Extinct in the Wild (EW)

A taxon is Extinct in the Wild when it is known only to
survive in cultivation, in captivity or as a naturalized pop-

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 178 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

ulation (or populations) well outside the past range. A
taxon is presumed Extinct in the wild when exhaustive
surveys in known and/or expected habitat, at appropriate
times (diurnal, seasonal, annual), throughout its historic
range have failed to record an individual.

9.2.3. Critically Endangered (CR)

A taxon is Critically Endangered when the best available
evidence indicates that it meets any of the criteria for Crit-
ically Endangered.

criteria

e reduction in population (> 90% over the last 10 years),

e population size (number less than 50 mature indi-
viduals),

¢ quantitative analysis showing the probability of extinc-
tion in wild in at least 50% in their 10 years) and

e itis therefore considered to be facing an extremely high
risk of extinction in the wild.

PIT VIPERS

The ‘pit’ is a special organ in between the eyes and the
nostrils. The pit senses body heat from animals and
gives the snake a ‘picture’ of that animal. The snake
can then attack it. This helps these snakes to find prey
in the dark.

Some pit vipers will bite and poison the prey and then
release it. It will follow the dying animal, using its
heat sensors, until it stops and the snake can swallow
it. Most pit vipers hunt at night when the air is cooler
and the heat from rodents and other prey is most
obvious to them. All rattlesnakes are Pit Vipers.

9.2.4. Endangered (EN)

A taxon is Endangered when the best available evidence

indicates that it meets any of the criteria for Endangered.

criteria

e reduction in population size (70% over the last 10 years),

e population size estimated to number fewer than 250
mature individuals,

¢ quantitative analysis showing the probability of extinc-
tion in wild in at least 20% within 20 years and

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e it is therefore considered to be facing a very high risk
of extinction in the wild.

9.2.5. Vulnerable (VU)

A taxon is Vulnerable when the best available evidence
indicates that it meets any of the criteria for Vulnerable i.e.

criteria
e reduction in population (> 50% over the last 10 years)

¢ population size estimated to number fewer than 10,000
mature individuals,

e probability of extinction in wild is at least 10% within
100 years, and

e it is therefore considered to be facing a high risk of
extinction in the wild.

9.2.6. Near Threatened (NT)

A taxon is Near Threatened when it has been evaluated
against the criteria but does not qualify for Critically En-
dangered, Endangered or Vulnerable now, but is close to
qualifying for or is likely to qualify for a threatened cate-
gory in the near future.

9.2.7. Least Concern (LC)

A taxon is Least Concern when it has been evaluated
against the criteria and does not qualify for Critically
Endangered, Endangered, Vulnerable or Near Threat-
ened. Widespread and abundant taxa are included in this
category.

9.2.8. Data Deficient (DD)

A taxon is Data Deficient when there is inadequate infor-
mation to make a direct, or indirect, assessment of its risk
of extinction based on its distribution and/or population
status. A taxon in this category may be well studied, and
its biology well known, but appropriate data on abundance
and/or distribution are lacking.

Data Deficient is therefore not a category of threat. Listing
of taxa in this category indicates that more information
is required and acknowledges the possibility that future
research will show that threatened classification is ap-
propriate.

9.2.9. Not Evaluated (NE)

A taxon is Not Evaluated when it is has not yet been evalu-
ated against the criteria.

%, o% of of o% o%
~e ~e ~e “~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 179 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 180 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(\

Q@ 6° a Bo

i
fs CHAPTER - 10 ry

ENVIRONMENT

QW

INDIAN BIODIVERSITY DIVERSE
LANDSCAPE

tries, rich in biodiversity and associated traditional

knowledge. With just 2.4% of the land area, India ac-
counts for nearly 7% of the recorded species even while
supporting almost 18% of human population.

| ndia is a recognised as one of the mega-diverse coun-

In terms of species richness, India ranks seventh in mam-
mals, ninth in birds and fifth in reptiles.

The varied Edaphic, Climatic and Topographic conditions
have resulted in a wide range of ecosystems and habi-
tats such as forests, grasslands, wetlands, coastal and
marine ecosystems, and deserts in India with greater bio-
diversity.

Do you know?

The spider’s body has an oil on it to keep the spider
free from sticking to it’s own web.

10.1. INDIA REPRESENTS:
a) Two Realms

b) Five Biomes

c) ‘Ten Bio-geographic Zones

d) Twenty five Bio-geographic provinces

a) Realms:

Biogeographic realms are large spatial regions within
which ecosystems share a broadly similar biota. Realm is
a continent or sub continent sized area with unifying fea-
tures of geography and fauna & flora.

The Indian region is composed of two realms. They are:

1) the Himalayan region represented by Palearctic Realm
and

2) the rest of the sub-continent represented by Malayan
Realm

Eight terrestrial biogeographic realms are
recognized.

Nearctic realm

Palearctic realm

Africotropical realm

Indo-Malayan realm

Ocenaia realm

Australian realm

Antarctic realm

SAAR WDB

Neotropical realm

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 181 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

b) Biomes of India:

The term biome means the main groups of plants and
animals living in areas of certain climate patterns. It
includes the way in which animals, vegetation and soil
interact together. The plants and animals living in the
area are adapted to that environment. The five biomes of
India are:

1) Tropical Humid Forests

2) Tropical Dry or Deciduous Forests (including Monsoon
Forests)

3) Warm deserts and semi-deserts
4) Coniferous forests and

5) Alpine meadows.

c) Bio-geographic Zones:

C_]
C_]
C_]
|
CI
at
Ce)
CI

Bio-geographic Zones India

Biogeography deals with the geographical distribution
of plants and animals. There are 10 biogeographic
zones which are distinguished clearly in India. They are
as follows—

1) Trans-Himalayas. An extension of the Tibetan plateau,
harboring high-altitude cold desert in Laddakh J&K)
and Lahaul Spiti (H.P) comprising 5.7 % of the coun-
try’s landmass.

2) Himalayas. The entire mountain chain running from
north-western to northeastern India, comprising a di-
verse range of biotic provinces and biomes, 7.2 % of
the country’s landmass.

3) Desert. The extremely arid area west of the Aravalli
hill range, comprising both the salty desert of Gujarat
and the sand desert of Rajasthan. 6.9% of the country’s
landmass.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

4) Semi-arid. The zone between the desert and the Dec-
can plateau, including the Aravalli hill range. 15.6 %
of the country’s landmass.

5) Western ghats. The hill ranges and plains running
along the western coastline, south of the Tapti river,
covering an extremely diverse range of biotic provinces
and biomes. 5.8% of the country’s landmass.

6) Deccan peninsula. The largest of the zones, covering
much of the southern and southcentral plateau with a
predominantly deciduous vegetation. 4.3 % of the
country’s landmass.

7) Gangetic plain. Defined by the Ganges river system,
these plains are relatively homogenous. 11% of the
country’s landmass.

8) North-east India. The plains and non-Himalayan hill
ranges of northeastern India, with a wide variation of
vegetation. 5.2% of the country’s landmass.

9) Islands. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay
of Bengal, with a highly diverse set of biomes. 0.03%
of the country’s landmass.

eS

10) Coasts. A large coastline distributed both to the west
and east, with distinct differences between the two;
Lakshadeep islands are included in this with the per-

cent area being negligible.

Biogeography is divided into branches:

i. Phyto-geography (plant geography) deals with
origin, distribution and environmental interrela-
tionships of plants.

ii. Zoogeography deals with the migration and distri-
bution of animals.

d) Bio-geographic provinces.

Bio-geographic Province is a ecosystematic or biotic subdi-
vision of realms. India is divided into 25 bio geographic
zones.

Biogeographic classification of India was done by
Rodgers and Panwar (1988), describing 10 biogeo-
graphic zones in India, further divided into 25 biogeo-
graphic provinces. The classification was done using
various factors such as altitude, moisture, topography,
rainfall, etc. Biogeographic zones were used as a basis
for planning wildlife protected areas in India.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 182 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Do you know?
The National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) has

agreed to construct a fourth underpass for animals
on national highway 6 (NH-6) between Sakoli and
Deori near the Nagzira Tiger Reserve (TR).

10.1.1. Biogeographic zones and Biogeographic
Provinces of India

Q@ 6° a Bo

S.No. | Biogeographic
Zones (10 nos)

Biogeographic
Provinces (25 nos)
1. Trans Himalaya | 1A:Himalaya -Ladakh
Mountains
1B: Himalaya -Tibetan
Plateau
1C: Trans - Himalaya
Sikkim
2A:Himalaya - North West
Himalaya
2B: Himalaya - West
Himalaya
2C: Himalaya - Central
Himalaya
2D:Himalaya - East
Himalaya
3. The Indian 3A: Desert - Thar

Desert 3B: Desert - Katchchh
4. The Semi Arid 4A: Semi - Arid - Punjab
Plains
4B: Semi - Arid - Gujarat
Rajputana
5. The Western 5A:Western Ghats -

Ghats Malabar Plains
5B:Western Ghats -Western
Ghats Mountains

2. The Himalaya

6. The Deccan 6A: Deccan Peninsular -
Peninsula Central Highlands
6B: Deccan Peninsular -
Chotta Nagpur

6C: Deccan Peninsular -
Eastern Highlands

6D: Deccan Peninsular -
Central Plateau

6E: Deccan Peninsular -
Deccan South

ENVIRONMENT

The Gangetic 7A:Gangetic Plain - Upper
Plains Gangetic Plains

7B:Gangetic Plain - Lower
Gangetic Plains

8A: Coasts - West Coast
8B: Coasts - East Coast
8C: Coasts - Lakshdweep

gA:North - East - Braham-
putra Valley

9B: North - East - North
East Hills

The Coasts

Northeast India

10. Islands 10A: Islands - Andamans

10B: Islands — Nicobars

Do you know?

Wrinkles help elephants keep their body temperature
down. Wrinkles increase the surface area, so that
more skin becomes wet when the animal bathes. All
the cracks and crevices trap moisture, which then
takes much longer to evaporate. A wrinkly elephant
keeps cooler for longer than it would with smooth
skin.

10.2. FAUNA

Animal Kingdom

Vertebrates In-Vertebrates
Fish Annelids
Amphibians Mollusks
Reptiles Arthropods
Birds Arachnids

Mamals Echinoderms
Protoza

Do you know?

Eels are sometimes mistaken for Sea Snakes. Eels are
part of the fish family and have gills for breathing. Sea
snakes do not have gills but lungs instead and need to
go to the surface for air.)

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 183 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

10.2.1. Vertebrates

Vertebrates are animals with backbones and spinal col-
umns. Vertebrates are the most advanced organisms on
Earth. Although vertebrates represent only a very small
percentage of all animals, their size and mobility often
allow them to dominate their environment.

Vertebrates

Animals with backbones

Amphibians

Mammals

Fishes

e Cold blooded

e Live in water

e Breathe under water using gills , not lungs
e Have scales and fins

e Lay eggs

Amphibians

© Cold blooded

e Live on land & water

e Webbed feet

e Breathe with lungs and gills
e Moist smooth skin

e Four legs (sometimes none)

e Lay eggs

QO O°@ 875 ENVIRONMENT
OR

Reptiles

Cold blooded

Have scales

Have dry skin

Usually lay eggs

Ear holes instead of ears

4 legs or no legs

Aves

Warm blooded

Have feathers and wings
Lay eggs

Have 2 legs

Ear holes instead of ears

Mammals

Warm blooded

Have hair or fur

Give birth to live young ones

Mammal mother nurse their young one with milk
Breathe with lungs

Mammals live on land have 4 legs (or 2 legs & 2 arms),
and ears that stick out.

Do you know?

Elephants’ ears act as cooling devices. They can meas-
ure up to 2 square metres and they are equipped with
an intricate web of blood vessels. When the animal
flaps its ears, the blood temperature lowers by as
much as 5°C.

10.2.2. Invertebrates

Invertebrates do not have backbones. More than 98% ani-

mal species in the world are invertebrates. Invertebrates

don’t have an internal skeleton made of bone. Many inver-
tebrates have a fluid-filled, hydrostatic skeleton, like the

jelly fish or worm. Others have a hard outer shell, like in-

sects and crustaceans.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 184 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Invertebrates

Animals without backbones

Annelids Mollusks

Crustaceans Arachnids

Echinoderms

Insects

Annelids

e Annelids have bodies that are divided into segments.
e They have very well-developed internal organs.

e Found almost anywhere in the world.

e They don’t have any limbs.

e E.g: earthworms, leeches, roundworms, etc.

Mollusks

e¢ Most mollusks have a soft, skin-like organ covered with
a hard outside shell.

e Some mollusks live on land, such as the snail and slug.

e Other mollusks live in water, such as the oyster, mussel,
clam, squid and octopus.

Echinoderms

e Echinoderms are marine animals that live in the ocean.

e Most echinoderms have arms or spines that radiate
from the center of their body.

¢ Common echinoderms include the sea star, sea urchin,
sand dollar and sea cucumber.

Protozoa

e Protozoa are simple, single-celled animals.

e They are the smallest of all animals.

¢ Most protozoa are microscopic.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e They do breathe, move and reproduce like multicelled
animals.

e E.g: amoebas, Flagellates,etc.

Arthropods

e Arthropods have limbs with joints that allow them to
move.

e They also have an exoskeleton, which is a hard, external
skeleton.

e Arthropods include the crustaceans and insects, arach-
nids.

Crustaceans

e live mostly in the ocean or other waters.

e Crustaceans have a hard, external shell which protects
their body

e Most commonly known crustaceans are the crab, lob-
ster and barnacle.
Insects

e Insects have an exoskeleton that covers their entire
body.

e An insect’s consists of 3 body parts and 6 legs and a
antennae

e E.g: beetle, butterfly, moth, dragonfly, bee, wasp and
praying mantis.

Arachnids

¢ Common arachnids are spiders, scorpions, ticks and
mites.

e Arachnids do not have antennae.

e Arachnids have 2 body parts and 4 pairs of legs.

10.3. FLORAL DIVERSITY

In terms of plant diversity, India ranks tenth in the world
and fourth in Asia. India represents nearly 11% of the
world’s known floral diversity.

Do you know?

Polar bears are marvellously adapted to their Arctic sur-
roundings. Their glossy ‘guard’ hairs and dense under-
fur, the thick layer of fat beneath their skin, and their
size protect them against the cold. The guard hairs shed
water easily, so that after a swim the polar bear can
shake itself like a dog to dry and warm itself quickly.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 185 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

PLANT KINGDOM

Cells and tissues
not highly organised

Cells and tissues organised
into functional structures

No vascular
tissues

2. Fungi Lacks Chlorophyll
3. Bacterial Lacks Chlorophyll

BRYO-
PHYTES

Liverworts
Mosses

10.3.1. Important floral groups found in India are
described below:

1. Algae

The green non differentiated plants (non - differentiated
into organs like root, stem and leaf.) possessing chlorophyll
are known as Algae. They usually grow in water or in
moist situations.

The fresh-water algae are generally green or blue-green in
colour, whereas the marine ones are red or brown. These
are autotrophic plants, as they can manufacture their own
food.

2. Fungi:

Non-green non differentiated plants characterised by total
absence of chlorophyll are called Fungi.

They grow either on dead, rotten organic matters as sap-
rophytes or live as parasites on other living bodies, which
are referred to as hosts.

Moulds and mushrooms are the familiar examples of sap-
rophytic fungi. The maximum diversity of fungi is in the
Western Ghats followed by the eastern Himalaya and the
western Himalaya.

3. Bacteria

Non-chlorophyllous micro-organisms which lead sapro-
phytic or parasitic existence. Many of them are pathogenic;
Saprophytic bacteria are rather beneficial. They are soil
borne and many of them are used in industries.

tissues

| Vascular |

Dispersed by
spores

Dispersed by
seeds

-—— wt—_

Seeds Seeds
not enclosed enclosed

PTERIDO-
PHYTES

Ferns
Horsetails

GYMNO-

ANGIO-
SPERMS
Flowering
plants

SPERMS
Conifers

4. Lichens

A lichen is a peculiar combination of an alga and a fungus-
the two live deriving mutual benefit.

They are group of greyish green plants which grow on
rocks, tree-trunks, dead wood, etc.
The algae manufactures food which becomes available to

the fungus, and the absorbs and retains water and thus
keeps the algal cells moist. A example of symbiosis.

They are most common in wetlands, rare in rivers and
streams and are not found in ground water.
5. Bryophytes

The plant body is differentiated into a small stem and sim-
ple leaves, but true roots are absent.

They usually grow in moist places. E.g. Liverworts, mosses

They are the second largest group of green plants in India
distributed largely in Eastern Himalaya, North-eastern
India, Western Himalaya and the Western Ghats.

Mosses constitute the major component of Indian bryoflora
followed by liverworts and hornworts.
6. Pteridophytes

The pteridophytes have well-differentiated plant bodies,
consisting of roots, stems and leaves. Moreover, they pos-
sess vascular bundles.

Most of them are terrestrial plants flourishing well in moist
and shady places, and some of them are aquatic.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 186 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

This group includes the vascular cryptogams like club-
mosses, horse-tails and ferns which are universally dis-
tributed all over the world.

The north-eastern region (including Eastern Himalaya) is
rich in pteridophytic diversity, followed by south India (in-
cluding Eastern and Western Ghats) and north India (in-
cluding Western Himalaya).

7. Gymnosperms

Gymnosperms (gymnos=naked, sperma=seed) are the
naked-seeded plants.

They have very simple flowers without accessory whorls
and stamens and carpels remain aggregated in cones.
Ovules are present on the surface of the carpels and are
directly pollinated by the pollen grains.

There is nothing like ovary, style and stigma, and naturally
there is no fruit.

e.g. Cycas, Pinus, Gnetum.

Pine is the largest family. Gnetum and Cycas are mostly
confined to North Eastern region, Eastern and Western
Ghats, and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.

Do you know?

Polar bears evolved relatively recently (about 200,000
years to possibly as long as 500,000 years ago) from
grizzly bears somewhere off eastern Russia or the
Alaskan Panhandle. They depend on sea ice for their
primary habitat for their food (mainly ringed seals
and bearded seals). As the world’s oceans have never
been frozen from the north to the south, polar bears
simply didn’t have the possibility to reach the Ant-
arctic, although it would have been a perfect home
for them.

8. Angiosperms:

Angiosperms (angeion=a case) are the closed-seeded
plants.

These are the most highly developed plants which bear
flowers having conspicuous accessory and essential whorls.
Carpels have the ovary, style and stigma.

With the stimulus of fertilization the ovary usually devel-
ops into the fruit and the ovules into seeds. Thus the seeds
remain within the fruits.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

India has more than 7% of the world’s known flowering
plants.

10.3.2. Floral endemism - order

1) peninsular India including western and Eastern Ghats
(about 2,600 species),

2) Eastern Himalaya and north-eastern region (about
2,500 species),

3) north-western Himalaya (about 800 species) and

4) Andaman & Nicobar Islands (about 250 species).

10.3.3. Crop genetic diversity

Agriculture remains one of the dominant drivers and
mainstay of economic growth in India. The large mosaic
of distinct agro-ecosystems, characterized by variations
in edaphic, climatic and geographic features, has contrib-
uted to diverse cropping patterns and systems across the
country.

India stands seventh in the world in terms of contribution
of species to agriculture and animal husbandry.

The national gene bank at National Bureau Of Plant Genetic
Resources (NBPGR), Delhi is primarily responsible for con-
servation of unique accessions on long-term basis, as base
collections for posterity, predominantly in the form of
seeds.

10.3.4. Livestock genetic diversity

India has vast resources of livestock and poultry, which
play a vital role in rural livelihood security. In terms of
population, India ranks first in buffaloes, second in cattle
and goats, third in sheep, fourth in ducks, fifth in chicken
and sixth in camels in the world.

Do you know?

The name ‘white rhinoceros’ is taken from the Afri-
kaans word describing its mouth: “weit”, meaning
“wide”. Early English settlers in South Africa misin-
terpreted the “weit” for “white”.

White rhinos are also sometimes called ‘the square-
lipped rhinoceros’. Their upper lip lacks the prehensile
‘hook’ of some of the other rhino species. The white
rhino is the largest species of land mammal after the
elephant.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 187 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

The genetic resources of farm animals in India are repre-
sented by a broad spectrum of native breeds of cattle, buf-
faloes, goats, sheep, swine, equines, camel and poultry.

Over the years, animal husbandry has intensified in India
with widespread introduction of exotic breeds. This has led
to the reduction in total genetic variability and population
size of many local breeds. The majority (85%) of the do-
mestic livestock in India is reared under low input produc-
tion systems.

10.4. WILDLIFE OF INDIA
10.4.1. Himalayan mountain system

The west Himalayas have low rainfall, heavy snowfall (tem-
perate conditions), whereas in east Himalayas, there is
heavy rainfall, snowfall only at very high altitudes, where
as at lower altitudes conditions are similar to the tropical
rain forests. Flora and fauna of both Himalayas differ.

(a) Himalayan foothills

Flora: Natural monsoon evergreen and semi-evergreen
forests; dominant species are sal, silk-cotton trees, giant
bamboos; tall grassy meadow with savannahs in tarai.

(2) Western Himalayas (High altitude region)

Flora: Natural monsoon evergreen and semi-evergreen
forests; rhododendrons; dwarf hill bamboo and birch for-
ests mixed with alpine pastures.

(3) Eastern Himalayas.

Flora. Oaks, magnolias, laurels and birches covered with
moss and ferns; coniferous forests of pine, fir, yew and
junipers with undergrowth of scrubby rhododendrons and
dwarf bamboos; lichens, moses, orchids, and other epi-
phytes dominant (due to high humidity and high rainfall).

10.4.2. Peninsular - Indian sub-region

It has two zones.

(i) peninsular India and its extension into the drainage
basin of the Ganges river system, and

(ii) desert region of Rajasthan-the Thar of Indian desert
region.

(a). Peninsular India.

It is home to tropical moist deciduous to tropical dry de-

ciduous and scrub vegetation depending upon the variation
in rainfall and humidity.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Flora: Sal in north and east extensions (higher rainfall)
and teak in southern plateau are dominant trees. West
Ghats have evergreen vegetation (flora and fauna similar
to evergreen rainforests of north eastern of India. In dry
areas of Rajasthan and Aravalli hills, trees are scattered
and thorny scrub species predominate. The forests give
way to more open savannah habit.

Do you know?

polar bears have the ability to slow down their me-
tabolism, after 7-10 days of not being able to feed, for
whatever reason and at any time of year, until food
becomes available again. This helps them adapt to the
uncertainties of food availability in the Arctic. In com-
parison, black or brown bears can slow down their
metabolism only in response to not feeding in the late
autumn, just before they enter their dens for the win-
ter. If food is not available in spring or summer, they
will simply starve to death.

(2) Indian desert.
Thar desert of Rajasthan has unique flora and fauna.

Flora: Throny trees with reduced leaves; cacti, other suc-
culents are the main plants.

10.4.3. Tropical rain forest region
Distributed in areas of western ghats and north east India.

Flora: Extensive grass lands interspersed with densely
forested gorges of evergreen vegetation known as sholas
occur in the Nilgiris (an offshoot of Western ghats). Sholas
also occur in Aanaimalai and Palani hills. The rain forests
of the Western ghats have dense and lofty trees with much
species diversity. Mosses, ferns, epiphytes, orchids, lianas
and vines, herbs, shrubs make diverse habitat. Ebony trees
predominate in these forests. A variety of tropical orchids
are found. Stratification in rain forests is very distinct-
three horizontal layers are distinguished.

10.4.4. Andaman and Nicobar Islands

Flora. These are home for tropical rain forests. Giant Dip-
terocarpus, Terminalia and Lagerstroemia are dominant.
Mangroves are also distributed in the coastal areas.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 188 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Do you know?

Penguins are warm blooded, Just like whales, pen-
guins have a layer of fat under their skin called “blub-
ber”. Overtop of this they are covered with fluffy
“down” feathers and overtop of those they have their
outer feathers which overlap to seal in warmth. Pen-
guins rub oil from a gland onto their feathers to help
make them waterproof and windproof.

QJ O° @ 875 ENVIRONMENT

\

10.4.5. Mangrove swamps of Sunderbans

Sunderbans are delta of the Ganges where both the Brah-
maputra and Ganges join and drain into the Bay of Bengal.

Flora. The lower tidal zones are pioneer trees like Son-
neratia and avicennia. Above this zone there are rhiz-
ophora, bruguiria and excaecaria-cereops forest (covering
nearly 70% of mangrove forest). Above this level there are
supporting forest of phoneix in association with excaecaria.
There are heriteria forest in the highest portion with thick
undergrowth of phoneix and neepa plams.

\

o, 9% 9% \
~e ~e ~e Oe Oo ~e

°

°

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 189 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 190 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY Q@, 0° A WDo ENVIRONMENT

O) O | CHAPTER - 11 | QW

SCHEDULE ANIMALS OF WPA 1972

11.1. SCHEDULE LIST-WPA, 1972 e Examples of animals listed in schedule 3 are hyaena,

Wildlife Protection Act (WPA), 1972 consists of 6 schedule hogdeer, nilgai, goral, sponges, barking deer, etc.

lists, which give varying degrees of protection. e Examples of animals listed in schedule 4 are man-

Poaching, smuggling and illegal trade of animals listed gooses, vultures, etc.

Schedule 1 to schedule 4 are prohibited.

Schedule 1 and part II of Schedule 2 schedule 5
e Animals listed in schedule 1 and part II of schedule 2 e Animals listed in schedule 5 are called “vermin” which

have absolute protection - offences under these are pre- can be hunted.

scribed the highest penalties. e Mice, rat, common crow and flying fox (fruit eating

e Examples of animals listed in schedule 1 are lion tailed bats) are the list of animals (only 4 nos) in schedule 5

macaque, rhinoceros, great indian bustard, narcondam . .
[i.e. vermin].

hornbill, nicobar megapode, black buck, etc.

e Examples of animals listed in schedule 2 are rhesus
macaque, dhole, Bengal porcupine, king cobra, flying | Schedule 6

squirrel, himalyan brown bear, etc. ¢ Cultivation, Collection, extraction, trade, etc. of Plants

and its derivatives listed in schedule 6 are prohibited.

Schedule 3 and schedule 4

e Red Vanda, blue Vanda, kuth, pitcher plant, beddomes
e Animals listed in schedule 3 and schedule 4 are also
. cycad and ladies slipper orchid are the list of plants
protected, but the penalties are lower compared to

schedule 1 and part 2 of schedule 2. listed in schedule 6 (Refer page - 154, 157).

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 191 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Description of Animals listed in Schedule 1 to 4 of WPA, 1972.

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

S. No. | Common Name

1. Andaman Wild
Pig

2. Bharal

3. Binturong

4. Brown antlered
Deer

5. Brown Beer

6. Capped Langur

Category

Least
Concern

Least
Concern

Vulnerable

Endangered

Critically
Endangered

Vulnerable

Range Description

Andaman

Bhutan, China,
Northern India,
Northern Myanmar,
Nepal, North Pakistan.

Blue Sheep - North
Himalaya & Trans
Himalaya - along the
border of Arunachal
Pradesh.

Ladak, Himachal
Pradesh, U.P., Sikkim
and Eastern
Arunachal Pradesh &
recently conformed in
Western Arunachal
Pradesh

India - Sikkim,
Bangladesh, Bhutan
Myanmar, China

South & South East
Asia, Manipur
(Southern end of
loktak lake) region of
N.E. India through
Myanmar.

India (Jammu and
Kashmir, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarkhant),
Nepal, Pakistan, China

Bangladesh, Bhutan
(N.E. India - A.P.,
Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Tripura)

Brahmaputra (Karbi
Anglong, Khasi, Garo,
Naga & Jaintia hills) &
Myanmar

Habitat & Ecology

Temperate to
Tropical Habitat

Open grass slopes
in high mountain
from 2500 - 5500
m avoid entering
forest area

Arboreal animal,
feed on fruits,
insects, birds.

Open, Grass
dominated habitat.

Temperate rain
forest. (Northern
India, Western
China)

Diurnal, arboreal,
broadleaf,
deciduous

& bamboo forest

Major threat

Habitat destruction
and hunting
pressure.

Competition with
livestock, habitat
destruction due to
livestock.

Habitat loss and
degradation.

Hunting, Medicinal
Product, Habitat loss.

“Hydroelectric Power
Project - loktak lake

Man - animal
conflict

Habitat destruction,
jhum cultivation,
monoculture, timber
and firewood
harvest. Traded for
meat purpose.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 192 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

10.

11.

12.

13.

S. No.

Common Name

Caracal desert
lynx

Cheetah

Chinese Pangolin

Indian Gazelle
(Chinkara)

Clouded Leopard

Crab eating
Macaque

Sand Cat

Category

Least
Concern

Vulnerable

Endangered

Least
Concern

Vulnerable

Least
Concern

Near
threatened

Range Description

Africa, Central Asia,
South West Asia into
India

1. Extint - Central -
India & Pakistan

2. Asiastic Cheetah
(critically endangered)
- Iran - only

Occur in Himalayan
foot hills in Eastern
Nepal, Bhutan,
Northern India, North
East Bangladesh (India
- Sikkim)

Western & Central
India through
Pakistan, South-West
Afghan. (Thar desert
remains strong hold)

Himalayan foot hill in
Nepal through
mainland South East
Asia - China

Occurs on Nicobar
Island of India, (Little
Nicobar & Great
Nicobar) where it
found up to 600 m.

Only found in true
desert. Northern
Africa, Southwest &
Central Asia

Habitat & Ecology

Semi - desert to
open tropical
grassland

Open Grassy
habitat, dry forest,
savanna woodland,
semi - desert -
absent in tropical
rain forest

Primary &
Secondary tropical
forest, lime stone
forest, bamboo
forest, grassland &
agricultural field.
Nocturnal animal

Inhabits arid area,
Sand deserts, Flat
plains & hills, dry
scrub & light
forest.

Arboreal, forest
habitat (Primary
every green tropical
rainforest, also in
dry deciduous forest
Himalaya - 2500 m.

Grassland,

Mangrove, swamp
forest and can be
found in
agricultural area
near forest.

Specialist of
sand desert,
localized around
spare regetation
which can
support small
rodent prey.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Major threat

Habitat, destruction,
hunting

Habitat loss,
fragmentation, loss
of prey - due to
human hunting
activities. livestock
damage - hunting by
man.

Habitat loss, hunting
for local use trade
skin, scales & meat

Habitat loss through
overgrazing,
conversion to
agriculture &
industrial
development

Habitat destruction.
Hunted for skin,
bones for medicine,
captive animal

Hunting, Habitat
loss.

Habitat degradation
major threat - by
human settlement
and livestock grazing


--- PAGE 193 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

S. No.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

Common Name
Dugong Dugong
(Sea Cow)

Ermine

Fishing Cat

Four horned
antelope

Ganges river
Dolphin

Category

Vulnerable

Least
Concern

Endangered

Vulnerable

Endangered

Range Description

Coastal Island

water belt East
Africa & Vanuate belt
latitude 27° N - South
of Eq (India -
Andaman & Nicobar,
Laccadives)

Throughout North
America, Europe, Asia,
Greenland, Canada,
Siberia, India.

Asia - Pakistan - Indus
Valley India - Nagpur,
Himalayan foothill &
Eastern India.
(Keoladeo National
Park)

2008 - Widely
distributed but

in scattered
population over
most of India - From
Himalaya foothills
to Peninsular

India.

(Nepal. India)

Indus Ganges -
Brahmaputra Megna,
Karnaphuli - Sangu
river system of south.
Asian subcontinent,
from upstream to
where they blocked
by barrier.

Habitat & Ecology

Coastal water,
wide shallow
mangroove &
sizeable sea grass
bed.

Forest edge
habitat, scrub,
alpine meadow,
marshes, riparian
woodland,
hedgerows.

Wetland (Swamp
and marshy),

Oxbow lake, reed
beds, mangroves.

Evergreen &
tropical dry forest.

Found in well-
wooded undulating
(or) hilly area and
never far from
water, they are
solitary & browse
& graze.

Cone in counter -
current pools
below channel
convergence
meanders. Can’t
tolerate salinity >
10 ppt.

Major threat

Habitat &
degradation loss

Indigenous use &
hunting, pollution

No major threat
Habitat destruction
due to timber loss.

Wetland destruction
45% of wetland
94% of globally
significant wetland
- threatened.

eg: Human
settlement,
agricultural
pollution, hunting &
Wood cutting.

Habitat destruction
through the
clearance of scrub &
forest for agriculture.

1. Water development
project

2. Fragmenting
of pop, dams,
barrages.

3. Pollutant loads.
4. Deliberate killing

5. Mortality in
fishing gear

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 194 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

19.

20.

21.

22(a)

22(b)

23.

S. No.

Common Name

India Gaur

Golden Cat

Golden Langur

Indian / Malabar
Gaint aquirtel

Grizzled giant
squirrel

Himalyan Ibex

Category

Vulnerable

Near
threatened

Endangered

Least
Concern

Near
threatened

Least
Concern

Range Description

Gaur historically
occured throughout
main land south.
South east asia,
Srilanka.

Himalayan foothills
into China and South
East Asia

Bhutan and North-
east India (Assam).
Forest beltwest Assam
between manas river
in east, sankosh -
Brahmaputra

Southwestern, Central,
Eastern Peninsular
India (W.G., E.G. &
Satpura) AP, Kar, TN,
M.P. Mah, Chatti, Jhar,
Gujar, Kerala

Southern India
(Kerala, TN) Srilanka

Central & Northeast
Afghanistan, China,
North (India) - Hima
of Jammu and
Kashmir & Himachal
Pradesh Hindu Kush
range (Karakoram,
Trans-Himalayan)

Habitat & Ecology

From sea level
upto least 2800m.
(hill & low lying
area.)

1. undisturbed
forest tact,

2. hilly terrain

3. availability of
water.

4. availability of
coarse grasses

Forest habitat
ranging from
tropical and
subtropical
evergreen to
mixed & dry
deciduous forest

Moist evergreen,
diptero carp,

riverine & moist
deciduous forest

Diuval - arboreal
sp. Tropical
evergreen, semi
evergreen & Moist
decidous forest.
High Cannopy

Tropical dry
decidous &
Montane forest

Mountain, open
alpine meadow &
crags (not in forest
zone)

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Major threat

Hunting, Habitat

degradation, forest
fragmentation with
human population.

Habitat loss to
deforestations, illegal
trading

Habitat destruction,
Hunting.

Habitat degradation
- agriculture and
plantation,
Monoculture, dam,
Hunting.

Habitat degradation
agriculture and
plantation,
Monoculture, dam,
Hunting.

Hunted for food.
Habitat loss due to
competition with
livestock.


--- PAGE 195 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

S. No.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

Common Name

Himalayan Thar

Hispid Hare

Hog budger

Hoolock
Gibbon

1) Western

2) Eastern

Leopard

Category

Near

threatened

Endangered

Near
threatened

Endangered

Vulnerable

Near
threatened

Range Description

Himalaya China
(Southern Tibet),
North India (J.K. to
Sikkim) & Nepal
(Uttarkhand, H.P).

From Uttar Pradesh
through Nepal, West
Bengal to Assam
(W.B., Assam,

Bihar, U.P.)

Central to South east
Asia. Mongolia, India
(Sikkim, Terai, Assam,
A.P.), China, Indonesia,
LaoPDR, Myanmar

Northeast India,
Bangladesh (A.P.,
Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Tripura,
Mizoram, Nagaland)
Upto South of
Brahamaputra & East
of Dibang

Southern China &
Chindwin river
Myanmar. Boundary
between (2) Hoolock
gibbon uncertain

in chindwin head
water.

India not found
(Expect
Eastern A.P.)

Southwest Asia,
Himalayan foothills,
India, China, Jawa,
Srilanka “Leopards
occur widely in forest
of India - sub
continent.

Habitat & Ecology

Steep rocky
mountain side
(3000-4000).
Grass, herb &
fruit.

Tall grassland
(Elephant Grass)

Diurnal, forested
area (tuberroot,
earthworm,
insects).

1) grass land -
India Terai
(Evergreen Forest)

Forest dweller,
locale, inhabit
tropical evergreen
(Tree to tree more)

Hill forest,
Mountainous, piro
dominated forest

Rainforest to
desert. India - all
forest type-tropical
rainforest to temp
deciduous and
alpine coniferous.

Major threat

Uncontrolled hunting
& deforestation,
habitat lose due to
livestock grazing.

Habitat loss, agri,
logging, flood control
and HD

Hunting by Dogs &
Man.

Habitat loss,
fragmentation,
human interferences
hunting,

Habitat loss,
fragmentation,
human interferences
hunting,

Habitat loss,
(deforestation)
peaching for illegal
trade.

Human attack on
people.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 196 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

20.

30.

31.

32.

33:

34.

35;

36.

S. No.

Common Name

Leopard Cat

Red Panda

Loin tailed
Macaque

Indo-pacific
Finlers porpoise

Red Slenderlori

Gray Slenderlori

Asian Caracal

(Lynx)

Malabar Civet

Sun Bear

Category

Least
Concern

Endangered

Endangered

Vulnerable

Endangered

Least
Concern

Least
Concern

Critically
Endangered

Vulnerable

Range Description

Widespread up in
Asia. Most of India
west into pak. Afgh,
through Himalayan
foothill - across China,
Russia.

Nepal, India, Bhutan,
Myanmar, Southern
China. (Meghalayan
Plateau - North east
India).

Endemic “Western
Ghat hills range in
South Western India
(Karnataka, Kerala,
Tamil Nadu)

Malabar West of India

Srilanka

Southern eastern
India (Andhra
Pradesh, Kar, Kerala,
TN) Srilanka

Africa, Centralasia,
Southwest Asia into
India

Endemic western ghat,
Coastal district of
Western Ghats.
Kanyakumari to
Wayanad, Coorg -
Karnataka

Southeast Asia,
North eastern India,
Southern China,
Bangladesh

Habitat & Ecology

Upto 3000m,
extent into river
valley - Tropical to
temp broad leaf,
coniferous,
grassland, cold
steppe to desert
Pakistan

Temparate Forest
- having bamboo
- thickest under
stories

Upper canopy of
primary tropical
evergreen
rainforest -
Monsoon forest in
hilly country

Coastal water,
Shallow bay,
Mangrove,
Swamps and
Estuaries.

Primarily
insectivorous

Near human
habitation

Semi desert, open
savanna to moist
wood land,
evergreen forest.

Lowland forest,
lowland swamp
and riparian forest
in coastal plain
district

Tropical forest
habitat,
Mangroves,
Swamp

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Major threat

Commercial
exploitation
for skin.

Leopard Cat X
Domestic

Cat - hybridisation
is also not threat.

Habitat loss,

Fragmentation
Poaching, inbreeding
depression.

Habitat
fragmentation
(Exotic plant - tea,
Eucalyptus, Coffee)

Susceptible to
entanglement in
gillnets. Pollution
boat traffic.

Habitat loss due to
road kills,
electrification,
Medicine uses.

Habitat destruction,
Hunting due to

its attack on
livestock

Habitat loss &
degradation.
Poaching for
civet oil

Habitation,
Commercial
Hunting.


--- PAGE 197 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

S. No.

37-

38.

39.

40.

4.

42

43.

44.

Common Name

Marbled Cat

Markhor

Mouse Deer

Himalayan Musk
Deer

Nilgiri Langur

Nilgiri Tahr

Indian Pangolin

Pygmy Hog

Category

Vulnerable

Near
threatened

Least
Concern

Endangered

Vulnerable

Endangered

Near
threatened

Critically
Endangered

Range Description

Tropical Indo-Malaya
westward along
Himalayan foot hills
- Nepal & China,
Sumatra Borneo.

Northeast Afghan,
Northern India (JJ &
kK), Pakistan,
Uspekistan. “Pirpanjal
range”, Banihal pass
on Jammu - Srinagar
highway.

India - from T.N. &
Kerala infar south
- north upto Rajasthan

Himalayan of Bhutan,
North India (Sikkim),
Nepal & China

Western Ghats in
South Western India
(Karnataka, Kerala,
TN)

5% of West Ghats in
South India (Kerala &
Tamil Nadu)

South asia, Eastern
part of pak to India
(Except North East
India). Himalayan to
extreme South. India
(TN, Kerala)

Northwest Bengal &
North - Western
Assam in India.
Himalayan foot hill
from Up to Assam

Habitat & Ecology

Moist - Mixed
decidous evergreen
tropical forest

Mountain terrain
600 m - 3600 m
- feeds on grasses
& leaves.

Tropical deciduous,
Moist evergreen &
Semi ever-green
forest of
Peninsular hill

Alpine
environment,
barren plateaus at
high altitude
meadows, fell
fields, shurblands
forest

Evergreen,
Semi-evergreen
Moist deciduous &
riparian forest in
lower altitude

High elevation,
grass covered hills,
open terrain

Tropical forest,
open land,
grasslands, etc.

High in human
settlement area.

Smallest & Rarest
wild pig in world.
Grassland - with
shrub & tree

Major threat

Deforestation - due
to oil palm, logging,
agriculture.

Hunting and Habitat
Alteration. (Armed
conflict).

Hunting (for Meat
purpose) - W.G. &
E.G.

1. Hunting for Meat.

2. Trade - Musk
gland - Cosmetic /
Pharmaceutical

Hunted for skin,
Medicine, Habitat
loss, Mining, dam,
road fills.

Habitat loss &
poaching.

Meat & Medicine.
(for boots & shoes)

Habitat loss,
affecting natural
succession.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 198 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

S. No.

Common Name

Greater onehorn
Rhino

Rusty spotted
Cat

Himalayan
Serow

Asia - small
clawled offer

Sloth Bear

Bengal slow lori

Travancore
Flying squirrel

Category

Vulnerable

Vulnerable

Near

threatened

Vulnerable

Vulnerable

Vulnerable

Near
Threatened

Range Description

Northern part - India
along Indus, Ganga,
Brahmaputra basin
includes Nepal,
Bhutan, Bangladesh,
Pakistan

India & Srilanka
(confined to south)

Southeast Bangladesh,
Himalaya (Bhutan,
Northern India -
Sikkim & Nepal),
North east India &
into west myanmar

India - Himalayan
foothills of H.P. (Kulu),
WB, Assam, A.P. & SI.
- Coorg (Karnataka),
Ashambu, Nilgiri,
Palani Hill (TN),
Kerala

India, Nepal, Bhutan,
Srilanka

(From Gujarat - to
NES) Western Ghats

Bangladesh,
Cambodia, China,
North - Eastern India
(A.P., Assam etc).

Restricted to W.G. of
Southern India and
Srilanka. kerala & T.N.
(from Brahmagiri
Wildlife Santuary,
Karnataka).

Habitat & Ecology

Riverine grassland
- Terai. Alluvial
grass land -
swamps & forest

Moist & dry
deciduous forest
types, scrub &
grassland - absent
in evergreen
forest.

Steep hills & rocky
places - limestone
region upto 3000
m & hill &
mountain foreat
area.

Wetland system

- having pools &
stagnant water.
Fresh water
swamp,
meandering river,
mangroves & tidal
tools.

Wet & dry tropical
forest, grasslands.
Lowland species -
1500 m W.. - upto
2000 m

Arboreal,
nocturnal species
- tropical
evergreen forest,
semi & moist
deciduous forest.

Arboreal &
Nocturnal
Evergreen,
decidous and
montane forest

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Major threat

Habitat loss,
Poaching for horn
- Medicinal use in
China.

Habitat loss due to
agriculture

Meat & tropics,
habitat destruction,
for agriculture,
fuelwood.

Habitat destruction.
Tea & Coffee
cultivation

Habitat loss,
poaching (harvesting
of forest produce,
Monoculture)

(Medicine) - fat of
bear

Habitat loss -
Farming, road
building, dam, power
line. Hunting -
Medicine.

Habitat loss due to
agriculture & human
settlement.


--- PAGE 199 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

S. No.

52.

53:

54-

55:

56.

57:

58.

59.

Common Name

Snubfin Dolphin

Snow leopard

Swamp Deer

Chiru

Tibetan Fox

Tibetan Gazelle

Kiang (Wild Ass)

Tiger

Category

Vulnerable

Endangered

Vulnerable

Endangered

Least
Concern

Near
threatened

Least
Concern

Endangered

Range Description

Southeast Asia, India
- Chilika lake.

High mountain of C.A,
Pamir, Karakorum,
Hindu Kush and
Himalayan Range.

India - “J.K., H.P.,
Sikkim, Uttarkhand).

Northern & Central
India, Southwestern
Nepal (Assam -
Sunderbans (Indo

- Gangetic)

China, India (J & K)

Tibetan Plateau, Ladak
area of India, China,
Nepal

Qinghai - Tibet
Plateau, India (ladak,
Sikkim).

Tibetan Plateau,
China, Northern Pak,
India, Nepal) Ladak &
Sikkim

Southwest Asia,
Central Asia, (Java &
Bali) - disappeared.

Asian Countries -
Bang, Bhutan,
Cambodia, China,
India, Indonesia, Laos,
Malaysia, Myanmar,
Nepal, Russia,
Thailand & Vietnam

Habitat & Ecology

Coastal area with
muddy, brackish
water at river
mouth.

Alphine & Sub
alphine ecological
zone favouring
steep terrain.

Open sal, with
grass understorey
and grassland
forms, true swamp
deer, Mangroves of
Sunderban.

High altitude
plain, hill plateau
& Montane valley

Upland plains,
hills - mostly spare
grassland devoid
of trees & shrub

High altitude
plains, hills also
grasses in wetland
margin.

Open terrain,
plains, alphine
meadows - where
grasses & sedges
abundant.

Forest of tropical
Asia

Major threat

Habitat loss and
degradation.

Reduce in prey,
illegal trade, people
conflict, lack of
conservation
capacity policy &
awarness.

Habitat loss - due to
conversion into
agriculture land.

Hunted for fur
(Shahtosh)

Quality - making
“shawls”

No Major threat

Habitat loss.

Hunting, disease
transmission from
domestic livestock.

Poaching, Man
animal conflict,
(bore anti-
inflammatory

property)

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 200 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Qe ss

Wo

ENVIRONMENT

60

61.

62.(a)

62.(b)

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

S. No.

Common Name

Urial

Indian Buffalo

Terrapin

Tricarinate Hill
Turtle

Gharial

India Softshell
Turtle

Green Turtle

Hawsbill Turtle

Leather Back
Turtle

Category

Vulnerable

Endangered

Critically
Endangered

Vulnerable

Critically
endangered

Vulnerable

Endangered

Critically
endangered

Vulnerable

Range Description

India - Only (laddak),
Central and South
West Asia.

S. Nepal, Southern
Bhutan, Western
Thailand, Northern
Myanmar, India
(Bastar region - M.P.,
Assam, AP, Meghalaya,
Orissa, Maharastra)

Bangladesh, India,
Cambodia, India,
Indonesia, Malaysia.

Bangladesh, India

India - Chambal River,
Girwa river. Pop - Son
River

Bihar, U.P.

Bangladesh, India
(Ganges River),
Pakistan

Throughout tropical
water, lesser -
subtropical. Indian
ocean - east, west,
mediterranean Sea,
Pacific ocean

Throughout tropical
water, larger extent
subtropical, Atlantic,
Indian, Pacific Ocean

Leather back are
distributed, with
nesting site on
tropical sandy beaches
& foraging range

that extent into temp /
sup polar.

Habitat & Ecology

Moderate to arid
habitat grassland.

Low - lying
Alluvial grassland,
deciduous forest

- with marshes &
rivers.

Terrestrial nest
sites, tidal area of
largest river
estuaries

Fully terrestrial

Terrestrial, Fresh
Water

Terrestrial, Fresh
Water

Highly migratory,
broad habitat
during their
lifetime.

Highly migratory,
broad habitat -
during life time.

Turtle inhabiting
tropical,
subtropical & sub
polar extensive
migration, different
feeding area at
different season.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

Major threat

Poaching,
Competition with
livestock.

Interbreeding with
feral & domestic
buffalo, hunting &
habitat loss.

Trade

Alternation of
habitat, Fishing,
Agriculture, grazing,
utilization

Trade in East Asian
Market

Harvest of egg &
Adult from nesting
beaches, retting,
trawling.

Tortoises shell trade
Egg collection, meat,

Destruction of
Nesting habitat,
Foraging habitat, oil
pollution,
hybridisation

Habitat destruction,
pollution, climate
change, Fisheries by
Catch.
