--- PAGE 350 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Soils develop in response to several factors:

1. Parent material: This refers to the rock and minerals
from which the soil derives. The natural of the parent
rock, which can be either native to the area or trans-
ported to the area by wind, water, or glacier, has a di-
rect effect on the ultimate soil profile.

2. Climate: This is measured by precipitation and tem-
perature. It results in partial weathering of the parent
material, which forms the substrate for soil.

3. Living organisms: These include the nitrogen-fixing
bacterial Rbizobium, fungi, insects, worms, snails, etc.,
that help to decompose litter and recycle nutrients.

4. Topography: This refers to the physical characteristics
of the location where the soil is formed. Topographic
factors that affect a soil’s profile include drainage, slope
direction, elevation and wind exposure.

With sufficient time, a mature soil profile reaches a state
of equilbrium. Feedback mechanisms involving both abiotic
and biotic factors work to preserve the mature soil profile.
The relative abundance of sand, silt, and clay is called the
soil texture.

Soil Components

Clay: very find particles. Compacts easily. Forms large,
dense clumps when wet. Low permeability to water; there-
fore, upper layers become waterlogged.

Gravel: Coarse particles. Consists of rock fragments.

Loam: About equal mixtures of clay, sand, slit, and humus.
Rich in nutrients. Holds water but does not become water-
logged.

Sand: Sedimentary material coarser than slit. Water flows
through too quickly for most crops. Good for crops and
plants requiring low amounts of water.

Slit: Sedimentary material consisting of very fine particles
between the size of sand and clay. Easily transported by
water.

e Soil is a natural body of mineral and organic constitu-
ents differentiated into horizons usually unconsolidated,
of variable depth which differs among themselves as
well as from the underlying parent material in morphol-
ogy, physical makeup, chemical properties and compo-
sition and biological characteristics.

e Soil profile: The vertical section of the soil showing the
various layers from the surface to the unaffected parent
material is known as a soil profile. The various layers
are known as horizons.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

There are 5 master horizons in the soil profile. Not all
soil profiles contain all 5 horizons; and so, soil profiles
differ from one location to another.

A horizon

E horizon

B horizon

C horizon

R horizon

Soil Profile

The 5 master horizons are represented by the letters:
O, A, E, B, and C.

O: The O horizon is a surface horizon that is comprised
of organic material at various stages of decomposition.
It is most prominent in forested areas where there is
the accumulation of debris fallen from trees.

A: The A horizon is a surface horizon that largely con-
sists of minerals (sand, silt, and clay) and with appreci-
able amounts of organic matter. This horizon is
predominantly the surface layer of many soils in grass-
lands and agricultural lands.

E: The E horizon is a subsurface horizon that has been
heavily leached. Leaching is the process in which soluble
nutrients are lost from the soil due to precipitation or
irrigation. The horizon is typically light in color. It is
generally found beneath the O horizon.

B: The B horizon is a subsurface horizon that has ac-
cumulated from the layer(s) above. It is a site of deposi-
tion of certain minerals that have leached from the
layer(s) above.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 351 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e C: The C horizon is a subsurface horizon. It is the least
weathered horizon. Also known as the saprolite, it is
unconsolidated, loose parent material.

e R: Unweathered rock exists below the parent material.

e Soil texture refers to the relative proportion of parti-
cles or it is the relative percentage by weight of the three
soil separates viz., sand, silt and clay or simply refers to
the size of soil particles.

e Loam: A type of soil texture with good water holding
capacity and drainage suitable for cultivation of variety
of crops.

e Soil structure: The arrangement and organization of
primary and secondary particles in a soil mass is known
as soil structure.

Saline soils

e Saline soils are characterised by higher amount of water
soluble salt, due to which the crop growth is affected.

Sodic soils

e Sodic soils are characterised by the predominance of
sodium in the complex with the exchangeable sodium
percentage exceeding 15 per cent and the pH more
than 8.5.

Acid soils

e Acid soils are characteristically low in pH ( < 6.0). Pre-
dominance of H + and Al3+ cause acidity resulting in
deficiency of P, K, Ca, Mg, Mo and B.

Sandy soils

e Sandy soils are containing predominant amounts of
sand resulting in higher percolation rates and nutrient
losses.

e Alkaline soil: A soil with pH above 7, usually above
8.5 are considered alkaline. Alkaline soils often occur
in arid regions that receive less than 25 inches of rain
per year.

e Calcariuos soil- Soils with kankar nodules in the plough
zone and subsoil.

e Alfisol: Soils with grey to brown surface horizons, me-
dium to high supply of bases and B horizons of illuvial
clay accumulation. These soils formed mostly under
forest or savanna vegetation in climates with slight to
pronounced seasonal moisture deficit.

e Aridisol: Minerals soils that have an aridic moisture
regime. These are desert soil.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

Podzolization:

e It is a process of soil formation resulting in the forma-
tion of Podzols and Podzolic soils.

e podzolization is the negative of calcification. The calci-
fication process tends to concentrate calcium in the
lower part of the B horizon, whereas podzolization
leaches the entire solum of calcium carbonates.

e The other bases along with calcium are also removed
and the whole soil becomes distinctly acidic. In fact,
the process is essentially one of the processes of acid
leaching.

The National Green Tribunal (NGT) has set up an
eight-member experts’ panel to study various aspects
of the proposed Rs.5,242 crore Renuka dam. It would

provide drinking water to Delhi and areas of Haryana
and Uttar Pradesh such as Faridabad and Noida. The
project will come up across the Giri river, a tributary
of the Yamuna, in Sirmaur district.

Laterization:

e The term laterite is derived from the word later mean-
ing brick or tile and was originally applied to a group
of high clay Indian soils found in Malabar hills of Ker-
ala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Maharashtra.

e It refers specifically to a particular cemented horizon in
certain soils which when dried, become very hard, like
a brick.

e Laterization is the process that removes silica, instead
of sesquioxides from the upper layers and thereby leav-
ing sesquioxides to concentrate in the solum.

Gleization:

e Itisa process of soil formation resulting in the develop-
ment of a glei (or gley horizon) in the lower part of the
soil profile above the parent material due to poor
drainage condition (lack of oxygen) and where water-
logged conditions prevail. Such soils are called hydro
orphic soils.

Salinization:

e It is the process of accumulation of salts, such as sul-
phates and chlorides of calcium, magnesium, sodium
and potassium, in soils in the form of a salty (salic)
horizon.

e It is quite common in arid and semi arid regions.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 352 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

It may also take place through capillary rise of saline
ground water and by inundation with seawater in ma-
rine and coastal soils.

Salt accumulation may also result from irrigation or
seepage in areas of impeded drainage.

Desalinization:

It is the removal of excess soluble salts by leaching from
horizons or soil profile (that contained enough soluble
salts to impair the plant growth) by ponding water and
improving the drainage conditions by installing artifi-
cial drainage network.

Solonization or Alkalization:

The process involves the accumulation of sodium ions
on the exchange complex of the clay, resulting in the
formation of sodic soils (Solonetz).

All cations in solution are engaged in a reversible reac-
tion with the exchange sites on the clay and organic
matter particles.

Solodization or dealkalization:

The process refers to the removal of Na+ from the ex-
change sites. This process involves dispersion of clay.
Dispersion occurs when Na+ ions become hydrated.

Much of the dispersion can be eliminated if Ca++ and or
Mg++ ions are concentrated in the water, which is used
to leach the soonest. These Ca and Mg ion can replace
the Na on exchange complex, and the salts of sodium are
leached out.

Desertification

Definition: Productive potential of arid or semiarid land
falls by at least 10% due to human activity and/or cli-
mate change.

Symptoms: Loss of native vegetation; increased wind
erosion; salinization; drop in water table; reduce surface
water supply.

Remediation: Reduce overgrazing; reduce deforestation;

reduce destructive froms of planting, irrigation, and
mining. Plant trees and grasses to hold soil.

Salinization

Definition: Water that is not absorbed into the soil and
evaporates leaves behind dissolved salts in topsoil.

Symptoms: Stuned crop growth; lower yield; eventual
destruction of plant life.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Remediation: Take land out of production for a while;
and/or install underground perforated drainage pipes;
flush soil with freshwater into separate lined evapora-
tion ponds; plant halophytes (salt-loving plants) such as
barley, cotton, sugar beet and/or semi-dwarf wheat.

Water logging

Definition: Saturation of soil with water resulting in a
rise in the water table.

Symptoms: Saline water envelops deep roots killing
plants; lowers productivity; eventual destruction of
plant life.

Remediation: Switch to less water-demanding plants in
areas susceptible to water logging; utilize conservation-
tillage farming; plant water logging-resistant trees with
deep roots; take and out of production for a while; and/
or install pumping stations with drainage pipes that
lead to catchment-evaporation basins.

Loam soils generally contain more nutrients and humus
than sandy soils, have better infiltration and drainage
than silty soils and are easier to till than clay soils.

If the topsoil is brown or black, it is rich in nitrogen and
is good for crops. If the topsoil is gray, yellow, or red, it
is low in organic matter and poor for crops.

Do you know?

The Pench Tiger Reserve (PTR) has launched a project
to involve people in saving tigers and forests under its
jurisdiction. Large-scale public participation is being
sought from villagers around five protected areas —
the Umred-Karhandla, Mansinghdeo, Tipeshwar,
Painganga Wildlife Sanctuaries and the Bor TR. The
project, an inititative of the Pench Tiger Conservation
Foundation, includes sensitization of women’s self-help
groups in 40 vulnerable villages around these PAs.

24.14 STAGES OF SOIL EROSION

Splash erosion

Splash erosion is the first stage of the erosion process.
It occurs when raindrops hit bare soil. The explosive
impact breaks up soil aggregates so that individual soil
particles are ‘splashed’ onto the soil surface.

Sheet erosion

Sheet erosion refers to the uniform movement of a thin
layer of soil across an expanse of land devoid of vegeta-
tive cover. Raindrops detach soil particles, which go into

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 353 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

solution as runoff occurs and are transported down-
stream to a point of deposition.

Rill erosion

When sheet flows begin to concentrate on the land sur-
face, rill erosion occurs. While sheet erosion is gener-
ally invisible, rill erosion leaves visible scouring on the
landscape. This type of erosion occurs when the dura-
tion or intensity of rain increases and runoff volumes
accelerate.

Do you know?

The Satkosia Wildlife Sanctuary has witnessed an in-
crease in crocodile population with about 123 gharials
and muggers found inhabiting the Mahanadi river

gorge.

Gully erosion

Rill erosion evolves into gully erosion as duration or
intensity of rain continues to increase and runoff vol-
umes continue to accelerate. A gully is generally defined
as a scoured out area that is not crossable with tillage
or grading equipment.

Ammonification: Production of ammonia as a result of
the biological decomposition of organic nitrogen com-
pounds.

Border cropping: is growing of crops on the border
areas of the plot or field

Ex; Safflower as border crop in potato

Border strip irrigation: It is an efficient method of
irrigation close growing crops. In this method the field
is divided by low flat levels into series of strips, each of
which is flooded separately.

Allelopathy: is defined as direct or indirect harmful
effect of one plant over the other crop species through
the exudation of toxic substances from the roots or the
decomposition of crop residues

C:N ratio: The ratio of the weight of organic C to the
weight of total N in the soil.

Check basin: It is a method of irrigation with beds and
channel for retaining water to form a pond

Heaving: Injury to plants caused by lifting upward of
the plant along with soil from it’s normal position in
temperate regions where snowfall is common

Contour farming: is the farming practice of ploughing
across a slope following its elevation contour lines.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Cover crops: crops which are grown to cover the soil
in order to reduce the loss of the moisture from the soil
due to leaching and erosion.

Critical stage of irrigation: the period or the stage of
development of lifecycle of the crop when it is most
sensitive to moisture stress, results in yield loss

Hard pan: It is a hard and impermeable layer formed
in the soil profile by accumulation of materials such as
salts, clay etc which impedes drainage

Growth regulators: Organic substances which in min-
ute amount may participate in the control of growth
processes Ex:Auxins, Cytokinins

Heliophytes: Plants of sun loving species, require in-
tense light for normal development Ex: Rice, Wheat,
Cotton, Sugarcane

Sciophytes: Plants which are shade loving and require
less light intensity

Heliotropism: It is the movement of the plant parts
towards the sun Ex: Sunflower

Geotropism: A growth movement in response to grav-
ity. Eg Groundnut peg penetration into the soil

Herbicide: A chemical used for killing or inhibiting the
growth of unwanted plants Ex: Atrazine

Insecticide: It is the chemical used for killing the in-
sects: Endosulfan

Hidden hunger: Is the condition where plants do not
exhibit visual symptoms of deficiency for the short sup-
ply of particular nutrients but will result in yield losses

Humus: A brown or black organic substance consisting
of partially or wholly decayed vegetable or animal mat-
ter that provides nutrients for plants and increases the
ability of soil to retain water

Mulching: Practice of covering the soil surface with
materials like plant residues, straw, leaves or plastic film
to reduce evaporation, restrict weed growth and main-
tain the soil temperature

Puddling: It is the ploughing operation carried out in
stagnated water conditions to create an impervious
layer below the plough pan

Shifting cultivation: It is the old practice of cutting
and clearing of forest for cultivating crops for a certain
period of time as long as the soils having fertility

Subsidiary farming: Settled Farming in river banks
and streams in addition to gathering & hunting

Subsistence farming: Raising the crops only for family
needs and not for commercial: “Grow it and eat it”

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 354 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

System of Rice Intensification (SRI)

e System of Rice Intensification (SRI) emerged in the

1980's as a synthesis of locally advantageous rice pro-
duction practices encountered in Madagascar by Fr
Henri de Laulanie

SRI is a combination of several practices those include
changes in nursery management, time of transplanting,
water and weed management. It emphasizes altering of
certain agronomic practices of the conventional way of
rice cultivation. All these new practices are together
known as System of Rice Intensification (SRI).

Principle - ‘More with Less’
SRI is not a fixed package of technical specifications, but
a system of production with four main components, viz.,

soil fertility management, planting method, weed con-
trol and water (irrigation) management. Rice yield in-

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

creased with less water and with reduction in chemical
inputs.

Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI)

Sustainable Sugarcane Initiative (SSI) is an innovative
set of agronomic practices that involves using less seeds,
raising seeds in a nursery, and following new planting
methods, with wider seed spacing, and better water and
nutrient management to increase the cane yields sig-
nificantly.

SSI methods can increase sugarcane yields by at least
20% with 30% less water and a 25% reduction in
chemical inputs.

The SSI method of sugarcane cultivation was evolved
from the principles of ‘More with Less’ followed in SRI
(System of Rice Intensification) and introduced in India
by the WWF-ICRISAT collaborative project in 2009.

%. 2% o% 0% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 355 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 357 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 358 ---
| CHAPTER - 25 |

ACTS AND POLCIES

QW

25.1. WILD LIFE PROTECTION ACT 1972

25.1.2. The Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972

India is the first country in the world to have made
provisions for the protection and conservation of envi-
ronment in its constitution. On 5th June 1972, environ-
ment was first discussed as an item of international
agenda in the U.N. Conference of Human Environment
in Stockholm and thereafter 5th June is celebrated all
over the world as World Environment Day.

Soon after the Stockholm Conference our country
took substantive legislative steps for environmental
protection. The Wildlife (Protection) Act was passed
in 1972, followed by the Water (Prevention and Con-
trol of Pollution) Act 1974, the Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980, Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1981 and subsequently the Environment (Protec-
tion) Act, 1986.

25.1.1. Constitutional Provisions

The provisions for environmental protection in the con-
stitution were made within four years of Stockholm
Conference, in 1976, though the 42nd amendment as
follows:

Article-48-A of the constitution provides:

“The state shall endeavour to protect and improve the
environment and to safeguard forest and wildlife of the
country.”

Article 51-A (g) Provides:

It shall be duty of every citizen of India to protect and
improve the natural environment including forests,
lakes, rivers and wildlife an to have compassion for liv-
ing creatures.”

Thus our constitution includes environmental protec-
tion and conservation as one of our fundamental duties.
Some of the important Acts passed by the Government
of India are discussed here.

The passing of the Wildlife Act of 1972 constitutes an
important landmark in the history of wildlife legislation
in the country.

This is because of the fact that the “Forest” including
“Wildlife” was then a State subject falling in Entry 20
List II of Seventh Schedule, Parliament had no power to
make law on the same except as provided in Articles
249,250 and 252 of the constitution.

Having regard to the importance of the matter, the Act
has been adopted by all the States except that of Jammu
and Kashmir which has a similar law enacted for the
purpose of wildlife protection. The operation of the Act
is mandatory in the Union Territories too.

The Wildlife (Protection) Act of 1972 provides the basic
framework to ensure the protection and management
of wildlife. The Act was amended subsequently in 1982,
1986, 1991 and 1993 to accommodate provision for its
effective implementation.

The rationale for passing Act as stated in its
Statement of Objects and Reasons are as follows:

The rapid decline of India’s wild animals and birds, one
of the richest and most varied wildlife resources of the
country has been a cause of grave concern.

Areas which were once teeming with wildlife have be-
come devoid of it and even in sanctuaries and National
Parks the protection afforded to wildlife needs to be
improved.

The Wild Birds and Animals Protection Act, 1935 has
become completely outdated.

This existing laws not only have become outdated but
also provide punishments, which are not commensu-
rate with the offence and financial benefits that occur
from poaching and trade in wildlife produce. Further,

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 359 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

such laws mainly relate to control of hunting and do
not emphasize the other factors which are also the
prime reasons for the decline of India’s wildlife namely
taxidermy and trade in wildlife and products there
from.

25.1.3. Salient features of the Act:

e The Wildlife Protection Act, 1972 is a product of process
which started long ago in 1887 for the protection of a
few wild birds and after addition of wild animals in 1912
and specified plants in 1919 it covered almost all the
wildlife resources which need protection and manage-
ment.

The rating of the Schedules I to V is in accordance with
the risk of survival of the wildlife (fauna) enlisted in
them. Animals included Schedule are provided for total
protection from hunting and the trade and commerce
related to such animals are strictly regulated. The
schedule VI has been added to include the specified
plant species to be protected by the Wildlife (Protec-
tion) Amendment Act of 1991.

. An expert committee, constituted by the Indian Board
of Wildlife considers amendments to the Act, as and
when necessary.

. With the amendment of the Act in 1991, powers of the
State Governments have been withdrawn almost to-
tally. Now the State Governments are not empowered
to declare any wild animal a vermin. Further by addi-
tion of provision, immunization of livestock within a
radius of 5 km from a National Park or sanctuary has
been made compulsory.

Do you know?

Management Effective Evaluation (MEE), MEE con-
ducted by the National Tiger Conservation Authority
and the Wildlife Institute of India is the assessment of
how well protected areas are being managed and their
effectiveness in conserving target flora and fauna, the
reserves were put into four categories — ‘very good’,
‘good’, ‘fair’ and ‘poor’.

25.2. ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION)
ACT, 1986

e As compared to all other previous laws on environment
protection, the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 isa
more effective and bold measure to fight the problem of
pollution.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

The genesis of the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986,
thus, is in Article 48A (Directive Principles of State
Policy) and Article 51A (g) (Fundamental Duties) of the
Indian Constitution.

The Act empowers the Central Government to take all
appropriate measures to prevent and control pollution
and to establish effective machinery for the purpose of
protecting and improving the quality of the environ-
ment and protecting controlling and abating environ-
mental pollution.

The Central Government or any other person duly au-
thorised is empowered to collect the samples of air,
water, soil or other substances as evidence of the of-
fences under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

The Act prescribes a special procedure for handling
hazardous substances and the concerned person has to
handle the hazardous substances according to the pro-
cedure of the Act.

The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 has relaxed the
rule of “Locus Standi” and because of such relaxation
even a common citizen can approach the Court provided
he has given a notice of sixty days of the alleged offence
and his intention to make a complaint to the Central
Government or any other competent authority.

This Act also empowers and authorises the Central Gov-
ernment to issue directions for the operation or process,
prohibition, closure, or regulation of any industry. The
Central Government is also authorised to stop, regulate
the supply of electricity or water or any other service
directly without obtaining the order of the Court in this
regard.

The Act consists of and deals with more stringent penal
provisions. The minimum penalty for contravention or
violation of any provision of the law is an imprisonment
for a term which may extend to five years or fine up to
one lakh rupees, or both. The Act also provides for the
further penalty if the failure or contravention continues
after the date of conviction. It is Rs. 5000/- per day. If
the failure of contravention continues beyond the period
of one year, then the offender is punished with impris-
onment for a term which may extend to seven years.

The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 grants im-
munity to the officers of the Government for any act
done under the provisions of this Act or under the pow-
ers vested in them or functions assigned to them under
this Act.

The Act debars the Civil Courts from having any juris-
diction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 360 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

an action, direction, order issued by Central Govern-
ment or other statutory authority under this Act.

e Under the Act, there will be supremacy of provision. In
other words, the provisions of this Act and the rules or
orders made under this Act shall have effect and su-
premacy over anything inconsistent contained in any
enactment other than this Act

25.3. NATIONAL FOREST POLICY 1988

e The principal aim of National Forest Policy, 1988 is to
ensure environmental stability and maintenance of eco-
logical balance including atmospheric equilibrium
which are vital for sustenance of all life forms, human,
animal and plant.

25.3.1. Objectives

e Conserving the natural heritage of the country by pre-
serving the remaining natural forests with the vast
variety of flora and fauna, which represent the remark-
able biological diversity and genetic resources of the
country.

e Checking soil erosion and denudation in the catch-
ments areas of rivers, lakes, reservoirs in the “interest
of soil and water conservation, for mitigating floods
and droughts and for the retardation of siltation of
reservoirs.

e Checking the extension of sand-dunes in the desert
areas of Rajasthan and along the coastal tracts.

e Increasing substantially the forest/tree cover in the
country through massive afforestation and social for-
estry programmes, especially on all denuded, degraded
and unproductive lands.

e Increasing the productivity of forests to meet essential
national needs.

e Encouraging efficient utilisation of forest produce and
maximising substitution of wood.

25.3.2. The major achievements of National

Forest Policy, 1988,

e Increase in the forest and tree cover.

e Involvement of local communities in the protection,
conservation and management of forests through Joint
Forest Management Programme.

e Meeting the requirement of fuel wood, fodder minor
forest produce and small timber of the rural and tribal
populations.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

¢ Conservation of Biological Diversity and Genetic Re-
sources of the country through ex-situ and in-situ con-
servation measures.

e Significant contribution in maintenance of environment
and ecological stability in the country.

25.4. BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002

e The Biological Diversity Act 2002 was born out of In-
dia’s attempt to realize the objectives enshrined in the
United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
1992 which recognizes the sovereign rights of states to
use their own Biological Resources.

e An Act to provide for conservation of biological diver-
sity, sustainable use of its components and fair and eq-
uitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the use of
biological resources, knowledge and for matters con-
nected therewith or incidental thereto.

25.4.1. Objectives

(i) Conservation of biological diversity;

(ii) Sustainable use of its components; and

(iii) Fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising from
the utilization of genetic resources.

e The Act envisages a three-tier structure to regulate ac-
cess to the biological resources, comprising of National
Biodiversity Authority (NBA), State Biodiversity Boards
(SBB) and Biodiversity Management Committees (BMC)
at the local level

Do you know?

The Wildlife Institute of India (WII) has recommended
notification of the areas ‘above’ wildlife sanctuaries as
a ‘silent zone’ by keeping the noise level of helicopters

within the limit of 50 db. This is the recommendation
in WII’s interim report with regard to height and noise
level for flights over the Kedarnath Wildlife Sanctuary
(KWLS).

25.5. THE SCHEDULED TRIBES AND
OTHER TRADITIONAL FOREST
DWELLERS (RECOGNITION OF
FOREST RIGHTS) ACT, 2006

e Forest Rights Act, 2006 provides for the restitution of
deprived forest rights across India, including both indi-
vidual rights to cultivated land in forestland and com-
munity rights over common property resources.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 361 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

The Act is significant as it provides scope and historic
opportunity of integrating conservation and livelihood
rights of the people.

The Union Finance Ministry has also slashed the Cen-
tre’s share of non-recurring expenditure from 100%
to 60%, for Project Tiger, leaving the remaining
amount for the respective states to manage. However,

in the case of special status states, which includes the
three Himalayan states of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu-
Kashmir and Uttarakhand and the Northeastern
states, the ratio is 90:10.

25.5.1. FRA is a potential tool

I.
Il.

Il.

il.

lil.

any

iv.

To empower and strengthen the local self governance
To address the livelihood security of the people

To address the issues of Conservation and management
of the Natural Resources and conservation governance
of India.

For the first time Forest Rights Act recognises and se-
cures

Community Rights in addition to their individual rights
Right to protect, regenerate or conserve or manage any
community forest resource which the communities
have been traditionally protecting and conserving for
sustainable use.

Right to intellectual property and traditional knowl-
edge related to biodiversity and cultural diversity

Rights of displaced communities & Rights over devel-
opmental activities

25.5.2. Salient Features

Nodal Agency for the implementation is MoTA.

This Act is applicable for Tribal and Other Traditional
Forest Dwelling Communities.

The Act provides for recognition of forest rights of other
traditional forest dwellers provided they have for at least
three generations prior to 13.12.2005 primarily resided
in and have depended on the forest or forest land for
bonafide livelihood needs. A “generation” for this pur-
pose would mean a period comprising of 25 years.

The maximum limit of the recognizing rights on forest
land is 4 ha.

National Parks and Sanctuaries have been included

along with Reserve Forest, Protected Forests for the
recognition of Rights.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

The Act recognizes the right of ownership access to
collect, use, and dispose of minor forest produce which
has been traditionally collected within or outside village
boundaries.

The Act has defined the term “minor forest produce” to
include all non-timber forest produce of plant origin,
including bamboo, brush wood, stumps, cane, tussar,
cocoons, honey, wax, lac, tendu or kendu leaves, me-
dicinal plants and herbs, roots, tubers and the like.

The Act provides for the forest right relating to Govern-
ment providing for diversion of forest land for the pur-
pose of schools, hospitals, anganwadis, drinking water
supply and water pipelines, roads, electric and telecom-
munication lines, etc.

The rights conferred under the Act shall be heritable
but not alienable or transferable and shall be registered
jointly in the name of both the spouses in the case of
married persons and in the name of the single head, in
the case of a household headed by a single person and
in the absence of a direct heir, the heritable right shall
pass on to the next of kin

The Act provides that no member of a forest dwelling
Scheduled Tribe or other traditional forest dwellers
shall be evicted or removed from forest land under his
occupation till the recognition and verification proce-
dure is completed.

As per the Act, the Gram Sabha has been designated as
the competent authority for initiating the process of
determining the nature and extent of individual or com-
munity forest rights or both that may be given to the
forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes and other traditional
forest dwellers.

Do you know?

The National Tiger conservation Authority (NTCA) has
recommended Nandhaur Wildlife Sanctuary (WLS) to
be the third tiger reserve in the Uttarakhand after
Rajaji and Corbett. The sanctuary is situated between
the Gola and Sarda rivers. It is part of the Terai Arc
landscape and the shivalik Elephant Reserve.

25.6 GREEN HIGHWAYS (PLANTATION,
TRANSPLANTATION, BEAUTIFICATION
& MAINTENANCE) POLICY - 2015

e India has a total 46.99 lakh kms of road length and out

of which over 96214 kms are National Highways, ac-
counting 2% of total road length. The Highways carry

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 362 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

about 40% of the traffic load. The Ministry has decided
to develop all of existing National Highways and 40,000
kms of additional roads in the next few years as Green
Highways.

e The vision is to develop eco-friendly National Highways
with participation of the community, farmers, NGOs,
private sector, institutions, government agencies and
the Forest Department.

e The objective is to reduce the impacts of air pollution
and dust as trees and shrubs along the Highways act as
natural sink for air pollutants and arrest soil erosion at
the embankment slopes. Plants along highway median
strips and along the edges reduce the glare of oncoming
vehicles which sometimes become cause of accidents.
The community involvement in tree plantation directly
benefits local people by generating employment. The
Panchayats, NGOs and other Self Help Groups (SHGs)
will be involved in the process of planting and mainte-
nance. The plant species selected will be region specific
depending on local conditions such as rainfall, climate
type of soil.

e 1% of the total project cost of all highways projects will
be kept aside for the highway plantation and its main-
tenance, about Rs. 1000 crore per year will be available
for plantation purpose. This policy will generate em-
ployment opportunities for about five lakh people from
rural areas.

e In the new policy, the provisions about the responsi-
bilities attached have also been clearly defined. Now it
will be the responsibility of the planting agency to en-
sure that the condition of the site is good enough for the
successful establishment of grasses.

e The monitoring of the plantation status has been in-
cluded as an integral part of the policy, strong monitor-
ing mechanism in place by using ISRO’s Bhuvan and
GAGAN satellite systems.

e For Highway projects to be environmentally sustainable,
it is necessary that the natural resources lost in the
process of Highway construction are restored in one
way or the other. This requires that ecological needs are
taken into consideration from the stage of project plan-
ning and designing to its execution. The Highways de-
veloped as green corridors not only sustain biodiversity
and regenerate natural habitat but also benefit all stake-
holders, from road users to local communities and spur
eco-friendly economic growth and development.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Do you know?

The National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) is
awaiting a final nod from the Ministry of Defense
(MoD) to start its drone-monitoring project for com-
bating wildlife poaching and human-animal conflict.
The NTCA has signed a memorandum of understand-
ing (MoU) with the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) to
start monitoring by drones in five tiger reserves (TRs)
— Panna, Corbett, Kaziranga, Sundarbans and Sathy-
amangalam, and the permission being sought is to fly
the drones only within the boundary of the core area
of these reserves.

25.7 CHEMICAL SAFETY

e Government has notified two rules viz. Manufacture,
Storage and Import of Hazardous Chemicals Rules, 1989
and Chemical Accidents (Emergency Planning, Prepar-
edness and Response) Rules, 1996 for ensuring chemical
safety in the Country. These Rules delineate the criteria
for identification of Major Accident Hazard (MAH) unit,
As per these Rules, an off- site emergency plan for a
district having MAH unit is required to be in place so
as to mitigate the impact of chemical accidents. As per
the information received from various Sate and Union
Territories, there are 1,861 MAH units in the Country,
located in 303 districts.

25.8 COASTAL REGULATION ZONE, 2011

In the 1991 Notification the CRZ area was classified as
CRZ-I (ecological sensitive),CRZ-II (built-up area), CRZ-III
(Rural area) and CRZ-IV (water area). In the 2011 Notifica-
tion the above classification is retained. The only change
is the inclusionof CRZ-IV, which includes the water areas
upto the territorial waters and the tidalinfluenced water
bodies.

For the very first time, a separate draft Island Protection
Zone Notification hasbeen issued for protection of the is-
lands of Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweepunder En-
vironment (Protection) Act, 1986.

CRZ-I

(i) Ecologically sensitive areas and the geomorphological
features that play aprimary role in maintaining the
integrity of the coast.
e Mangroves, in case mangrove area is more than

1000 square metres, a bufferarea of 50 metres shall
be provided;

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 363 ---
SHANKAR
[Br a5 Academy 09 oy
f Th Be A) ey te Rt tele GT ieee A

CRZ-I
(i) Ecologically sensitive areas and_ the
geomorphological features that play aprimary
role in maintaining the integrity of the coast.
e Mangroves, in case mangrove area is more
than 1000 square metres, a bufferarea of 50
metres shall be provided;

e Corals and coral reefs and associated
biodiversity;
e Sand Dunes;

e Mudflats which are biologically active;

e National parks, marine parks, sanctuaries,
reserve forests, wildlife habit at sand other
protected areas under the provisions of Wild
Life (Protection) Act, 1972, the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 or Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986; including Biosphere
Reserves encompassing;

e Salt Marshes;

e Turtle nesting grounds;

e Horse shoe crabs habitats;
e Sea grass beds;

e Nesting grounds of birds;

e Areas or structures of archaeological
importance and heritage sites;

(ii) The area between Low Tide Line and High Tide
Line.

CRZ-II

The areas which are developed upto or close to the
shoreline and falling within municipal limits.

CRZ-II

The areas that are relatively undisturbed and do not
fall under either in Category I or II and also include
rural and urban areas that are not substantially
developed.

All Rights Reserved. No pa

rt of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

CRZ-IV

The aquatic area from low tide line upto territorial
limits including the area of the tidal influenced water
body.

Significant provisions in the Coastal
RegulationZone Notification, 2011

(i) The entire water area which includes 12 nautical
miles in the sea and theentire water area of a
tidal water body such as creek, river, estuary will
be regulated by the Notification.

(ii) In order to safeguard livelihood and property ot
local communities including the infrastructure
along the coastal areas the hazard line has been
introduced which will be demarcated by the
offices of the Survey of India.

(iii) Keeping in view the environmental and social
issues, special dispensation has been provided to
Greater Mumbai, Kerala, Goa and Critically
Coastal Vulnerable Areas such as the Sunderban.

(iv) In view of the erosion experienced along the
coastal areas due to man-made interventions the
shoreline will be mapped using up-to-date
satellite images and the shorelines will then be
subsequently classified as ‘high eroding’* medium
eroding’ and ‘low or stable stretches’. No
foreshore development would be permissible in
high eroding areas.

(v) To meet the increasing demands of housing for
fishing communities and other traditional coastal
communities, the No Development Zone which is
of 200 metres from the High Tide Line is being
reduced to 100m.

ACTIVITIES PERMITTED AND
RESTRICTED IN CRZ

CRZ1

The activities permitted in CRZ-I under the 2011
Notification are

(i) No new construction shall be permitted in CRZ-I
except;



--- PAGE 364 ---
—————————

All O° oy
[a coe SE

relating to the Department of Atomic

Projects
Energy;
e Pipelines, conveying systems including
transmission lines;

Facilities that are essential for activities

permissible under CRZ-I;

e Installation of weather radar for monitoring of
cyclones movement and prediction by the
Indian Meteorological Department;

e Construction of trans-harbour sea link and

roads on stilts or pillars without affecting the

tidal flow of water, between LTL and HTL.

e Development of green field airport already
permitted at only Navi Mumbai;

(ii) Between Low Tide Line and High Tide Line in
areas which are not ecologically sensitive, the
following may be permitted;

e Exploration and extraction of natural gas;

e Construction of dispensaries, schools, public
rain shelter, community toilets, bridges, roads,
jetties, water supply, drainage, sewerage which
are required to meet the needs of traditional
inhabitants living within the biosphere
reserves after obtaining approval from
concerned CZMA.

e Salt harvesting by solar evaporation of
seawater;

¢ Desalination plants;

¢ Storage of non-hazardous cargo such as edible
oil, fertilizers and food grain within notified
ports;

¢ Construction of trans-harbour sea links, roads

on stilts or pillars without affecting the tidal
flow of water.

CRZ 2

Buildings are permissible on the landward side of the
existing road, authorized structure or hazardous line
where there are no authorised structures. Other
activities such as desalination plants and storage of
non-hazardous cargo are also permissible.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

The “ava of CRZ, 3 has undergone changes with
the CRZ 2018 notification

CRZ 4

In CRZ-IV areas, there is no restriction on the
traditional fishing and allied activities undertaken by
local communities. However, no untreated sewage,
effluents or solid waste shall be let off or dumped in
these areas. A comprehensive plan for treatment of
sewage generating from the city must be formulated.

CRZ Notification, 2018
Dr.ShaileshNayakCommittee (Secretary, Ministry of
Earth Sciences) constituted in June 2014 to examine
the various issues and concerns of Coastal States/UTs
and other stakeholders for recommending appropriate
changes in the CRZ Notification, 2011.

Government stated that CRZ Notification, 2018 will
meet the aspirations of Coastal communities besides
ensuring welfare of poor and vulnerable populations.
It will also add to creating additional opportunities
for affordable housing and the people at large looking
for shelter. Tourism has been one of the greatest
creators of livelihood and jobs. The new Notification
will boost tourism.

The Notification is so designed that it balances the
needs in such a way that both, promoting economic
growth and also theconservation principles of coastal
regions are fulfilled.

Salient Features:

(i) Allowing FSI as per current norms in CRZ areas:
As per CRZ, 2011 Notification, for CRZ-II (Urban)
areas, Floor Space Index (FSI) or the Floor Area
Ratio (FAR) had been frozen as per 1991
Development Control Regulation (DCR) levels. In
the CRZ, 2018 Notification, it has been decided to
de-freeze the same and permit FSI for
construction projects, as prevailing on the date
of the new Notification. This will enable
redevelopment of these areas to meet the
emerging needs.



--- PAGE 365 ---
aa

ANKAR eh
_— als a

(ii) Densely populated rural areas to be afforded
greater opportunity for development: For CRZ-I
(Rural) areas, two separate categories have now
been stipulated as below:

(a) CRZ-Ill A - These are densely populated rural
areas with a population density of 2161 per
square kilometre as per 2011 Census. Such
areas shall have a No Development Zone (N DZ)
of 50 meters from the HTL as against 200 me-
ters from the High Tide Line stipulated in the
CRZ Notification, 2011 since such areas have
similar characteristics as urban areas.

(b) CRZ-Ill B - Rural areas with population den-
sity of below 2161 per square kilometre as per
2011 Census. Such areas shall continue to have
an NDZ of 200 meters from the HTL.

(ii) Tourism infrastructure for basic amenities to be
promoted: Temporary tourism facilities such as
shacks, toilet blocks, change rooms, drinking
water facilities etc. have now been permitted in
Beaches. Such temporary tourism facilities are
also now permissible in the “No Development
Zone” (NDZ) of the CRZ-III areas as per the
Notification. However, a minimum distance of 10
m from HTL should be maintained for setting up
of such facilities.

(iv) CRZ Clearances streamlined: The procedure for
CRZ clearances has been streamlined. Only such
projects/activities, which are located in the CRZ-I
(Ecologically Sensitive Areas) and CRZ IV (area
covered between Low Tide Line and 12 Nautical
Miles seaward) shall be dealt with for CRZ
clearance by the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change. The powers for clearances
with respect to CRZ-II and III have been delegated
at the State level with necessary guidance.

(v) A No Development Zone (NDZ) of 20 meters has
been stipulated for all Islands: For islands close
to the main land coast and for all Backwater
Islands in the main land, in wake of space
limitations and unique geography of such
regions, bringing uniformity in treatment of such
regions, NDZ of 20 m has been stipulated.

All Rights Reserved.

No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

(vi) All Ecologically Sensitive Areas have been
accorded special importance: Specific guidelines
related to their conservation and management
plans have been drawn up as a part of the CRZ,
Notification.

(vii) Pollution abatement has been accorded special
focus: In order to address pollution in Coastal
areas treatment facilities have been made
permissible activities in CRZ-! B area subject to
necessary safeguards.

(viii) Defence and strategic projects have been
accorded necessary dispensation.

25.9 ISLAND PROTECTION ZONE
NOTIFICATION, 2011

Why is a separate Island Protection Zone Notification,
2011 required?

There are about 500 islands in Andaman & Nicobar
and about 30 in Lakshadweep.These two groups of
oceanic islands are home to some of the country’s
mostthriving biodiversity hotspots. The A&N Islands
are known for their terrestrial andmarine biodiversity
including forest area which covers 85% of the
Andaman andNicobar geographical area, while,
Lakshadweep is a coral island. The geographicalareas
of these islands are so small that in most of the cases
the 500 metresCoastal Regulation Zone regulations
overlap. Hence, a separate Notificationis being issued
which takes into account the management of the
entire island(except for four islands of A&N which
include North Andaman, Middle Andaman,South
Andaman and Great Nicobar).

The main objectives of the IPZ Notification, 2o11are:

e To ensure livelihood security to the fishing
communities, tribals and otherlocal
communities living in the coastal areas:

¢ To conserve and protect coastal stretches and:

e To promote development in a sustainable
manner based on scientificprinciples, taking
into account the dangers of natural hazards in

the coastalareas and sea level rise due to global
warming



--- PAGE 366 ---
SHANKAR
i a IAS ACADEMY

ne ee OE eaten be het he OD

Do you know?

The Centre has extended the relaxation of green
norms in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected
areas in the country till December 2018, The
central government had in May 201 granted

relaxations under section 2 of the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980, to help expedite the
creation of public utility infrastructure in 60 LWE
affected districts identified by the planning
commission for implementation of the integrated
Action Plan.

25.10 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
RULES, 2016

62 million tonnes of waste is generated annually in
the country at present, out of which 5.6 million
tonnes is plastic waste, 0.17 million tonnes is
biomedical waste, hazardous waste generation is 7.90
million tonnes per annum and 15 lakh tonne is
e-waste. The per capita waste generation in Indian
cities ranges from 200 grams to 600 grams per day.
43 million TPA is collected, 11.9 million is treated and
31 million is dumped in landfill sites, which means
that only about 75-80% of the municipal waste gets
collected and only 22-28 % of this waste is processed
and treated. “Waste generation will increase from 62
million tonnes to about 165 million tonnes in 2030”.

Scientific disposal of solid waste through segregation,
collection and treatment and disposal in an
environmentally sound manner minimises the
adverse impact on the environment. The local
authorities are responsible for the development of
infrastructure for collection, storage, segregation,
transportation, processing and disposal of MSW.

The Rules are now applicable beyond Municipal areas
and extend to urban agglomerations, census towns,
notified industrial townships, areas under the control
of Indian Railways, airports, airbase, Port and
harbour, defence establishments, special economic
zones, State and Central government organizations,
places of pilgrims, religious & historical importance.

The source segregation of waste has been mandated

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without Permission in writing.

, reuse
to channelize the waste to wealth by recovery;

and recycle.

Integration of waste pickers/ ragpickers and waste
dealers/ Kabadiwalas in the formal system should be
done by State Governments, and Self Help Group, or
any other group to be formed.

No person should throw, burn, or bury the solid
waste generated by him, on streets, open public
spaces outside his premises, or in the drain, or water
bodies.

Generator will have to pay ‘User a to waste
collector and for ‘Spot Fine’ for Littering and Non-

segregation.

Time frame

i. setting up solid waste processing facilities by all
local bodies having 100000 or more population:
within two years

ii. census towns below 100000 population, setting
up common or stand-alone sanitary landfills by
or for all local bodies having 0.5 million or more
population and setting up common or regional
sanitary landfills by all local bodies «3d census
towns under 0.5 million population-three years

iii. bio-remediation or capping of old and abandoned
dump sites-five years.

Duties of Waste generator

Every waste generator shall segregate and store the
waste generated by them in three separate streams
namely bio-degradable, non-bio-degradable and
domestic hazardous wastes in suitable bins and
handover segregated wastes to authorized rag-pickers
or waste collectors

Event organizer of more than 100 persons shall
intimate the local authority, at least three working
days in advance. Such person or the organizer of such
event shall ensure segregation of waste at source and
handing over of segregated waste to waste collector
or agency as specified by local authority.

All Resident Welfare and Market Associations, Gated
communities and institution with an area >5,000 Sq



--- PAGE 367 ---
Wie eth Aeintinee be

SHANK AIR es .
a IAS ACADEMY *F) ST Sei ers Gh
tent ain tes ieee :

mand all hotels and restaurant shall, withinone year
from the date of notification of these rules and in
partnership with the local authority by the generators
as prescribed in these rules, ensure segregation of
waste at source, facilitate collection of segregated
waste in separate streams, handover recyclable
material to either the authorized waste pickers or the
authorized recyclers. The biodegradable waste shall
be processed, treated and disposed of through
composting or bio-methanation within the premises
as far as possible. The residual waste shall be given
to the waste collectors or agency as directed by the
local authority.

The developers of Special Economic Zone, Industrial
Estate, Industrial park to earmark at least 5% of the
total area of the plot or minimum 5 plots/ sheds for
recovery and recycling facility.

Duties of Ministry of Urban Development

MoUD shall formulate National Policy and Strategy
on Solid Waste Management including policy on
Waste to Energy in consultation with stakeholders
within 6 months from the date of notification of these
Rules; review of the measures taken by the States and
local bodies, undertake training and capacity building
of local bodies and other stakeholders; providing
technical guidelines and project finance to States, UTs
and local bodies on solid waste management to
facilitate meeting timelines and standards

Promotion of marketing and utilization of
compost .
The Department of Fertilisers, Ministry of Chemicals
and Fertilizers shall provide market development
assistance on city compost andensure promotion of
comarketing of compost with chemical fertilizers in
the ratio of 3 to 4 bags: 6 to 7 bags by the fertilizer
companies to the extent compost is made available
for marketing to the companies.

The Ministry of Agriculture shall provide flexibility
in Fertiliser Control Order for manufacturing and
sale of compost , propagate utlisation of compost on
farm land set up laboratories to test quality of
compost produced by local authorities or their

authorized agencies and issue suitable guidelines for
maintaining the quality of compost and ratio of use
of compost visa-a-vis chemical fertilizers while
applying compost to farmland.

Promotion of waste to energy plant

Ministry of Power shall fix tariff or charges for the
power generated from the Waste to Energy plants
based on solid waste and ensurecompulsory purchase
of power generated from such Waste to Energy plants
by DISCOMs .

The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy Sources
shall facilitate infrastructure creation for Waste to
Energy plants and provide appropriate subsidy or
incentives for such Waste to Energy plants.

All industrial units using fuel and located within 100
km from an solid waste based RDF plant shall make
arrangements within six months from the date of
notification of these rules to replace at least 5 % of
their fuel requirement by RDF so produced.

Non recyclable waste having calorific value of 1500
K/cal/kg or more shall not be disposed of on landfills
and shall only be utilized for generating energy either
or through refuse derived fuel or by giving away as
feed stock for preparing refuse derived fuel.

Do you know?

The tiger population of Northeast India is
genetically different from the rest of the country.

2B1HAZARDOUS WASTE
MANAGEMENT RULES, 2016

Hazardous waste means any waste, which by reason
of characteristics, such as physical, chemical,
biological, reactive, toxic, flammable, explosive or
corrosive, causes danger to health, or environment.
It comprises the waste generated during the
manufacturing processes of the commercial products
such as industries involved in petroleum refining,
production of pharmaceuticals, petroleum, paint,
aluminium, electronic products etc. As per the
information furnished by CPCB in the year 2015, the

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reprod

uced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 368 ---
SHANKAR | :
(me 22 ISS ©
eset tetera ia

total hazardous waste generation in the country is
7.46 million metric tonnes per annum from about
44,000 industries.
Unscientific disposal of hazardous and other waste
through burning or incineration leads to emission of
toxic fumes comprising of Dioxins & Furans, Mercury,
heavy metals, causing air pollution and associated
health-related problems. Disposal in water bodies, or
in municipal dumps leads to toxic releases due to
leaching in land and water entailing into degradation
of soil and water quality. The workers employed in
such unscientific practices suffer from neurological
disorders, skin diseases, genetic defects, cancer etc.
Hence, there is a need for systematic management of
hazardous and other waste in an environmentally
sound manner by way of prevention, minimisation,
re-use, recycling, recovery, utilisation including co-
processing and safe disposal of waste.

Scientific disposal of hazardous waste through
collection, storage, packaging, transportation and
treatment, in an environmentally sound manner
minimises the adverse impact on human health and
on the environment. The hazardous waste can be
disposed at captive treatment facility installed by the
individual waste generators or at Common Hazardous
Waste Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facilities
(TSDFs).

For the first time, Rules have been made to
distinguish between Hazardous Waste and other
wastes. Other wastes include: Waste tyre, paper
waste, metal scrap, used electronic items, etc. and are
recognized as a resource for recycling and reuse.
These resources supplement the industrial processes
and reduce the load on the virgin resource of the

country.

The salient features

i. The ambit of the Rules has been expanded by
including ‘Other Waste’.

ii. Waste Management hierarchy in the sequence of
priority of prevention, minimization, reuse,
recycling, recovery, co-processing; and safe
disposal has been incorporated.

All Rights Reserved, No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

iii. All the forms under the rules for permission,

import/export, filing of annual returns,

transportation, etc. have been revised
significantly, indicating the stringent approach
for management of such hazardous and other
wastes with simultaneous simplification of
procedure.

iv. The basic necessity of infrastructure to safeguard
the health and environment from waste
processing industry has been prescribed as
Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs), specific to
waste type, which has to be complied by the
stakeholders and ensured by SPCB/PCC while
granting such authorisation.

v. Procedure has been simplified to merge all the
approvals as a single window clearance for
setting up of hazardous waste disposal facility
and import of other wastes.

vi. Co-processing as preferential mechanism over
disposal for use of waste as supplementary
resource, or for recovery of energy has been
provided.

vii. The approval process for co-processing of
hazardous waste to recover energy has been
streamlined and put on emission norms basis
rather than on trial basis.

viii. The process of export of waste under the Rules
has been streamlined by simplifying the
document-based procedure and by revising the
list of waste regulated for export.

ix. The basic necessity of infrastructure to safeguard
the health and environment from waste
processing industry has been prescribed as
Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs) specific to
waste type.

x. Responsibilities of State Government for
environmentally sound management of
hazardous and other wastes have been introduced
as follows:

¢ Toset up/ allot industrial space or sheds for
recycling, pre-processing and other utilization
jof hazardous or other waste



--- PAGE 369 ---
SHANKAR

e To register the workers involved in recycling,
pre-processing and other utilization activities.

e To form groups of workers to facilitate setting
up such facilities;

e To undertake industrial skill development

activities and ensure safety and health of
workers.

xi. List of processes generating hazardous wastes
has been reviewed taking into account
technological evolution in the industries.

xii. State Government is authorized to prepare
integrated plan for effective implementation of
these provisions, and have to submit annual
report to Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change.

xiii. State Pollution Control Board is mandated to
prepare an annual inventory of the waste
generated; waste recycled, recovered, utilised
including co-processed; waste re-exported and
waste disposed and submit to the Central
Pollution Control Board by the 30th day of
September every year.

25-11.1 Hazardous and Other Wastes
(Management& Trans boundary Movement)
Amendment Rules, 2019

Salient features:

¢ Solid plastic waste has been prohibited from

import into the country including in Special
Economic Zones (SEZ) and by Export Oriented
Units (EOU).

e Exporters of silk waste have now been given
exemption from requiring permission from the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change.

e Electrical and electronic assemblies and
components manufactured in and exported from
India, if found defective can now be imported back
into the country, within a year of export, without
obtaining permission from the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without Permission in writin
Z.

ml]
92) ENVIRONMENT

e Industries which do not require consent under
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act
1974 and Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act 1981, are now exempted from requiring
authorization also under the Hazardous and Other
Wastes (Management & Transboundary
Movement) Rules, 2016, provided that hazardous
and other wastes generated by such industries are
handed over to the authorized actual users, waste
collectors or disposal facilities.

2B1IZCONSTRUCTION AND
DEMOLITION WASTE
MANAGEMENT RULES, 2016

The salient features are:

Applies to everyone who generates construction and
demolition waste.

Duties of waste Generators

e Every waste generator shall segregate construction
and demolition waste and deposit at collection
centre or handover it to the authorised processing
facilities

e Shall ensure that there is no littering or deposition
so as to prevent obstruction to the traffic or the
public or drains.

e Large generators (who generate more than 20 tons
or more in one day or 300 tons per project in a
month) shall submit waste management plan and
get appropriate approvals from the local authority
before starting construction or demolition or
remodeling work,

e Large generators shall have environment
management plan to address the likely
environmental issues from construction,

demolition, storage, transportation process and
disposal / reuse of C & D Waste.

Large generators shall segregate the waste into

four streams such as concrete, soil, steel, wood
and plastics, bricks and mortar.


--- PAGE 370 ---
ANKAR AC

Duties of Service providers and Contractors

e The service providers shall prepare a
comprehensive waste management plan for waste
generated within their jurisdiction, within six
months from the date of notification of these rules,

e Shall remove all construction and demolition
waste in consultation with the concerned local
authority on their own or through any agency.

Timeframe for implementation

e Million plus cities (based on 2011 census of India),
shall commission the processing and disposal
facility within one-and-a-half years from date of
final notification of these rules

e 0.5 to 1 million cities, shall commission the
processing and disposal facility within two years
from date of final notification of these rules

e for other cities (< 0.5 million populations), shall
commission the processing and disposal facility
within three years from date of final notification

of these rules

Local Authority shall be responsible for proper
management of construction and demolition waste
within its jurisdiction including placing appropriate
containers for collection of waste, removal at regular
intervals, transportation to appropriate sites for
processing and disposal. Procurement of materials
made from construction and demolition waste shall
be made mandatory to a certain percentage (say 10-
20%) in municipal and Government contracts subject
to strict quality control.

Do you know?

The decline in vulture population has had other
indirect costs, too. Anecdotal evidence shows that
the population of secondary scavengers such as
dogs, jackals and rodents has been increasing. This
might be leading to increased expenditure on
diseases such as rabies, leptospirosis in humans
and canine distemper in tigers. Besides, the
increase in feral dogs’ population and the change
in their feeding habits might also have an impact
on the prey base for large wild cats like the tiger in
future.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

_s~se ee:

2513BI0-MEDICAL WASTE
MANAGEMENT RULES, 2016
Biomedical waste comprises human & animal
anatomical waste, treatment apparatus likeneedles,
syringes and other materials used in health care
facilities in the process of treatment and research.
This waste is generated during diagnosis, treatment
or immunisation in hospitals, nursing homes,
pathological laboratories, blood bank, etc. Total bio-
medical waste generation in the country is 484 TPD
from 1,68,869 healthcare facilities (HCF), out of
which 447 TPD is treated.
The hospitals servicing 1000 patients or more per
month are required to obtain authorisation and
segregate biomedical waste in to 10 categories, pack
five colour backs for disposal.
The quantum of waste generated in India is estimated
to be 1-2 kg per bed per day in a hospital and 600 gm
per day per bed in a clinic. 85% of the hospital waste
is non-hazardous, 15% is infectious/hazardous.
Mixing of hazardous results in to contamination and
makes the entire waste hazardous. Hence there is
necessity to segregate and treat. Improper disposal
increases risk of infection; encourages recycling of
prohibited disposables and disposed drugs; and
develops resistant microorganisms

Scientific disposal of Biomedical Waste through
segregation, collection and treatment in an
environmentally sound manner minimises the
adverse impact on health workers and on the
environment.

The salient features

(a) The ambit of the rules has been expanded to
include vaccination camps, blood donation
camps, surgical camps or any other healthcare
activity;

(b) Phase-out the use of chlorinated plastic bags,
gloves and blood bags within two years;

(c) Pre-treatment of the laboratory waste,
microbiological waste, blood samples and blood
bags through disinfection orsterilisation on-site
in the manner as prescribed by WHOor NACO;


--- PAGE 371 ---
SHANKAR 3
IAS ACADEMY™

Ve Mire RL dines is Went Illa MIRC med

(d) Provide training to all its health care workers and
immunise all health workers regularly;

(e) Establish a Bar-Code System for bags or
containers containing bio-medical waste for
disposal;

(f) Report major accidents;

(g) Existing incinerators to achieve the standards for

retention time in secondary chamber and Dioxin
and Furans within two years;

(h) Bio-medical waste has been classified in to 4

categories instead 10 to improve the segregation
of waste at source;

(i) Procedure to get authorisation simplified.
Automatic authorisation for bedded hospitals.
The validity of authorization synchronised with
validity of consent orders for Bedded HCFs. One
time Authorisation for Non-bedded HCFs;

(j) The new rules prescribe more stringent standards
for incinerator to reduce the emission of
pollutants in environment;

(k) Inclusion of emissions limits for Dioxin and
furans;

(1) State Government to provide land for setting up
common bio-medical waste treatment and
disposal facility;

(m) No occupier shall establish on-site treatment and
disposal facility, if a service of ‘common bio-
medical waste treatment facility is available at a
distance of seventy-five kilometer.

(n) Operator of a common bio-medical waste
treatment and disposal facility to ensure the
timely collection of bio-medical waste from the
HCFs and assist the HCFs in conduct of training

Amendment Rules, 2018

e Phase out chlorinated plastic bags (excluding blood
bags) and gloves by March 27, 2019.

e All healthcare facilities shall make available the
annual report on its website within a period of
two years (from 2018).

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission i ae
n in writing.

e Operators of common bio-medical waste treatment
and disposal facilities shall establish barcoding
and global positioning system for handling of bio-
medical waste in accordance with guidelines
issued by the CPCB.

e Every person having administrative control over
the institution generating biomedical waste shall
pre-treat it through sterilization on-site in the
manner as prescribed by WHO and then sent to
the Common bio-medical waste treatment facility
for final disposal.

25.14 E-WASTE MANAGEMENT RULES,
2016

17 lakh tonnes of E-waste is generated every year,
with an annual increase of 5 per cent of generation
of E-waste.

For the first time, the Rules will bring the producers
under Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR), along
with targets. The producers have been made
responsible for collection of E-waste and for its
exchange

Salient features

1. Manufacturer, dealer, refurbisher and Producer
Responsibility Organization (PRO) have been
introduced as additional stake holders in the
rules.

2. The applicability of the rules has been extended
to components, consumables, spares and parts of

EEE in addition to equipment as listed in Schedule
I.

3. Compact Fluorescent Lamp (CFL) and other
mercury containing lamp brought under the
purview of rules.

4. Collection mechanism based approach has been
adopted to include collection centre, collection
point, take back system etc for collection of
e-waste by Producers under Extended Producer
Responsibility (EPR).

5- Option has been given for setting up of PRO,
hse exchange, e- retailer, Deposit Refund
cheme as additional channel for implementation


--- PAGE 372 ---
AR ed ¢
[MBER LS > Oe

of EPR by Producers to ensure efficient Refund Scheme of the producer to the depositor
channelization of e-waste. of e-waste.

6. Provision for Pan India EPR Authroization by _ 13. Refurbisher need collect e-waste generated during
CPCB has been introduced replacing the state the process of refurbishing and channelise the
wise EPR authorization. waste to authorised dismantler or recycler

>. Collection and channelisation of e-waste in through its collection centre and ath ne tee
Extended Producer Responsibility - Authorisation authorization from SPCB.
shall be in line with the targets prescribed in 14. The roles of the State Government has been also
Schedule III of the Rules. The phase wise Collection introduced in the Rules in order to ensure safety,
Target for e-waste, which can be either in number health and skill development of the workers
or Weight shall be 30% of the quantity of waste involved in the dismantling and recycling
generation as indicated in EPR Plan during first operations.
two year of implementation of rules followed by 15. The transportation of e-waste shall be carried out
40%during third and fourth years, 50% during as per the manifest system whereby the
fifth and sixth years and 70% during seventh year transporter shall be required to carry a document
onwards. (three copies) prepared by the sender, giving the

8. Deposit Refund Scheme has been introduced as details.

= ae eee a Puen wherein the 46, Liability for damages caused to the environment
a pra. i a i | oe ane walle or third party due to improper management of
rire ior vl e-waste including provision for levying financial

electr sete di and :retutns 7 to be penalty for violation of provisions of the Rules has
consumer along with interest when the end-of life alan been taereduned.

electrical and electronic equipment is returned. . _. .
17. Urban Local Bodies (Municipal Committee/

Council/Corporation) has been assign the duty to
collect and channelized the orphan products to
authorized dismantler or recycler.

g. The e-waste exchange as an option has been
provided in the rules as an independent market
instrument offering assistance or independent
electronic systems offering services for sale and
purchase of e-waste generated from end-of-life
electrical and electronic equipment between
agencies or organizations authorised under these
rules.

Amendment Rules, 2018

e The e-waste collection targets under extended
producer responsibility (EPR) have been revised.
The phase-wise collection targets for e-waste in
weight shall be 10% of the quantity of waste
generation as indicated in the EPR Plan during
2017-18, with a 10% i i

channelise it for recycling or disposal and seek ~ os From 2023 —honrigiiei “am wae
authorization from SPCB. made 70% of the quantity of waste generation as

11. The dealer, if has been given the responsibility of indicated in the EPR Plan.
collection on behalf of the producer, need to
collect the e-waste by providing the consumer a

lize it to Producer.
box and cane _ e Under the Reduction of Hazardous Substances
12. Dealer or retailer or e-retailer shall refund t : (RoHS) provisions, cost for sampling and testing
amount as per take back system or Depost shall be borne by the government for conducting

10. The manufacturer is also now responsible to
collect e-waste generated during the manufacture
of any electrical and electronic equipment and

Separate e-waste collection targets have been
drafted for new producers

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.



--- PAGE 373 ---
SHANKAR Ree Ny
[ a IAS ACADEMY “Pee
the RoHS test. If the product does not comply with

ROHS provisions, then the cost of the test will be
borne by the Producers.

25.15 PLASTIC WASTE MAN
RULES, 2016 —

15, 000 tonnes of plastic waste is generated every day,
out of which 9, 000 tonnes is collected and processed,

but 6, 000 tonnes of plastic waste is not being
collected.

An eco-friendly product, which is a complete
substitute of the plastic in all uses, has not been
found till date. In the absence of a suitable alternative,
it is impractical and undesirable to impose a blanket
ban on the use of plastic all over the country. The real
challenge is to improve plastic waste management
systems.

Salient features

1. Increase minimum thickness of plastic carry bags
from 40 to 50 microns and stipulate minimum
thickness of 50 micron for plastic sheets also to
facilitate collection and recycle of plastic waste.

2. To promote use of plastic waste for road
construction as per Indian Road Congress
guidelines or energy recovery, or waste to oil etc.
for gainful utilization of waste

3. Rural areas have been brought in ambit of these
Rules since plastic has reached torural areas also.
Responsibility for implementation of the rules is
given to Gram Panchayat.

4. First time, responsibility of waste generators is
being introduced. Individual and bulk generators
like offices, commercial establishments, industries
are to segregate the plastic waste at source,
handover segregated waste, pay user fee as per
bye-laws of the local bodies.

5. Plastic products are left littered after the public
events (marriage functions, religious gatherings,
public meetings etc) held in open spaces. First
time, persons organizing such events have been
made responsible for management of waste
generated from these events.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission j i
In writing.

6. Use of plastic sheet for packaging, wrapping the
commodity except those plastic sheet’s thickness,
which will impair the functionality of the
product are brought under the ambit of these
rules. A large number of commodities are being
packed/wrapped into plastic sheets and
thereafter such sheets are left for littered,
Provisions have been introduced to ensure their
collection and channelization to authorised
recycling facilities.

7. Extended Producer Responsibility: Earlier, EPR
was left to the discretion of the local bodies. First
time, the producers and brand owners have been
made responsible for collecting waste generated
from their products. They have to approach local
bodies for formulation of plan/system for the
plastic waste management within the prescribed
time frame.

8. SPCBs will not grant/renew registration of plastic
bags, or multi-layered packaging unless the
producer proposes the action plan endorsed by
the concerned State Development Department.

g. Producers to keep a record of their vendors to
whom they have supplied raw materials for
manufacturing carry bags, plastic sheets, and
multi-layered packaging. This is to curb
manufacturing of these products in unorganised
sector.

10. The entry points of plastic bags/plastic sheets/
multi-layered packaging in to commodity supply
chain are primarily the retailers and street
vendors. They have been assigned the
responsibility of not to provide the commodities
in plastic bags/plastic sheets/multi-layered
packaging which do not conform to these rules.
Otherwise, they will have to pay the fine.

11. Plastic carry bag will be available only with
shopkeepers/street vendors pre-registered with
local bodies on payment of certain registration
fee. The amount collected as registration fee by
local bodies is to be used for waste management.

er ed been mandated to formulate the
guidelines for thermoset plastic (plastic difficult

12.


--- PAGE 374 ---
ANKAR et
to recycle). In the earlier Rules, there was no
specific provision for such type of plastic.

13. Manufacturing and use of non-recyclable multi-
layered plastic to be phased in two years.

Amendment Rules, 2018

e Phasing out of Multilayered Plastic (MLP) is now
applicable to MLP, which are non-recyclable, or
non-energy recoverable, or with no alternative

e Central registration system for the registration of
the producer/importer/ brand owner.

A national registry has been prescribed for
producers with a presence in more than two
states, a state-level registration has been
prescribed for smaller producers/brand owners
operating within one or two states.

e Explicit pricing of carry bags has been omitted.

25.16 WETLANDS (CONSERVATION
AND MANAGEMENT) RULES 2017

Wetlands (Conservation and Management) Rules,
2017 supersede the Wetlands (Conservation and
Management) Rules, 2010 for effective conservation
and management of wetlands in the country

Key features

Decentralisation of wetland management. Under the
new rules, the powers have been given to the State
governments so that protection and conservation can
be done at the local level. The central government has
mainly retained powers regarding monitoring.

The new rules have replaced the Central Wetlands
Regulatory Authority (CWRA) with the National
Wetland Committee, which has a merely advisory
role.

The State or UT Wetlands Authority will have to
prepare a list of all wetlands and also will develop a
comprehensive list of activities to be regulated and
permitted within notified wetlands and their zone of
influence.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

The new rules also prohibit encroachments on

wetlands, solid waste dumping, discharge of
ffluents from industries and

untreated waste and e
human settlements.

It prescribes that conservation and ma nagement
would be based on the principle of wise use, which is
to be determined by the Wetlands Authority.

Shortfalls

We have earlier read the definition of wetland given
by Ramsar convention earlier in this topic. The 2010
wetland rules followed the definition of Ramsar
convention.

However, the 2017 rules, in the definition of wetland
do not include river channels, paddy fields, man-
made water bodies/tanks specifically for drinking
water purposes and structures specifically
constructed for aquaculture, salt production,
recreation, and irrigation purposes.

By this new definition (exclusion of aforesaid
wetlands) close to 65 % wetland in the country will
lose the status of wetlands. The management and
protection awarded to river channels, man-made
wetlands will be no more effective as they are not
considered wetlands.

The definition of wetlands and its inclusion is done
by the respective state/ UT. This may lead to a lack
of uniformity in defining and conserving the
wetlands in the country.

The older provision of appealing to the National
Green Tribunal does not exist in the 2017 Rules.

There is also no timeline specified for phasing out
solid waste and untreated waste from being dumped
into wetlands.

The new rules do not take into account the Jagpal
Singh vs State of Punjab (2011) judgment of Supreme
Court for the restoration of encroached wetlands
throughout the country.

Key to wetland conservation is not just understanding
regimes of multiple uses but conserving and
managing the integrity of the wetland ecosystem.


--- PAGE 375 ---
ra

the largest area of wetland in the
ype say has the highest
tage of wetland in its own geographical
gh creda Keates

3.17 NATIONAL GREEN TRIBUNAL
(NGT)

» The Preamble of the act provides for the
establishment of a National Green Tribunal for the
effective and expeditious disposal of cases relating
to environmental protection and conservation of
forests and other natural resources, including
enforcement of any legal right relating to
environment and giving relief and compensation
for damages to persons and property and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto
(The National Green Tribunal Act, 2010).

« With the establishment of the NGT, India has
joined the distinguished league of countries that
have a dedicated adjudicatory forum to address
environmental disputes.

* India is third country in the world to full fleged
green tribunal followed by new Zealand and
Australia.

* The specialized architecture of the NGT will
facilitate fast track resolution of environmental
cases and provide a boost to the implementation
of many sustainable development measures.

* NGT is mandated to dispose the cases within six
months of their respective appeals.

® [For more details on national green tribunal refer
Shankar IAS academy's polity part II material}

25.18 THE OZONE DEPLETING
SUBSTANCES RULES

¢ The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and
Control)Rules, 2000 under the Environment
(Protection)Act, in July 2000.

e These Rules set the deadlines for phasing out of
various ODSs, besides regulating production, trade
import and export of ODSs and the product
containing ODS.

e The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and
Control) Rule, 2000 were amended in 2001, 2003,
2004 and 2005 to facilitate implementation of ODS
phase-out at enterprises in various sectors.

e These Rules prohibit the use of CFCs in
manufacturing various products beyond ist
January 2003

e except in metered dose inhaler and for other
medical purposes.

e Similarly, use of halons is prohibited after ist
January 2001 except for essential use. Other ODSs
such as carbon tetrachloride and methylchoroform
and CFC for metered dose inhalers can be used
upto ist January 2010.

e Further, the use of methyl bromide has been
allowed upto 1st January 2015. Since HCFCs are
used as interim substitute to replace CFC, these
are allowed upto ist January 2040.

o, © .% ¢,
ae fo ee ao fo eo

AllRights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in

any form or by any means, without permission in writing

19909060000 <0 um


--- PAGE 376 ---
O | CHAPTER - 26 | QW

INSTITUTIONS AND MEASURES

26.1 NATIONAL WILDLIFE ACTION PLAN
e The first National Wildlife Action Plan (NWAP) was
XV meeting of the Indian Board for Wildlife held in 1982. vation

vii Human Resource Development and Personnel Plan-
ning

The plan had outlined the strategies and action points
for wildlife conservation which are still relevant.

In the meanwhile, however, some problems have become

ix Conservation Awareness and Education
x Wildlife Tourism

xi Domestic Legislation and International Conventions

more acute and new concerns have become apparent,
requiring a change in priorities. Increased commercial
use of natural resources, continued growth of human
and livestock populations and changes in consumption
patterns are causing greater demographic impacts. Bio-
diversity conservation has thus become a focus of inter-
est. The National Forest Policy was also formulated in
1988, giving primacy to conservation.

e The first National Wildlife Action Plan (NWAP) of 1983
has been revised and the Wildlife Action Plan (2002-
2016) has been adopted.

xii Enhancing Financial Allocation for Ensuring Sus-
tained Fund Flow to the Wildlife Sector

xiii Integration of National Wildlife Action Plan with
Other Sectoral Programmes

26.2 NATIONAL AFFORESTATION AND
ECO-DEVELOPMENT BOARD

e The Ministry of Environment and Forests constituted
the National Afforestation and Eco-development Board
(NAEB) in August 1992. National Afforestation and Eco-
development Board has evolved specific schemes for
promoting afforestation and management strategies,
which help the states in developing specific afforestation
and management strategies and eco-development pack-
ages for augmenting biomass production through a
participatory planning process of Joint Forest Manage-
ment and microplanning

Strategy for Action

e Adopting and implementing strategies and needs out-
lined above will call for action covering the following
parameters:

i Strengthening and Enhancing the Protected Area
Network

ii Effective Management of Protected Areas National Afforestation Programme

e A National Afforestation Programme (NAfP) was
launched in 2002, which involves plantation in degraded
forests of the country.

="
me
my

i Conservation of Wild and Endangered Species and
Their Habitats

iv Restoration of Degraded Habitats outside Protected
Areas e NAfP isa flagship programme of National Afforestation

and Eco-development Board (NAEB) and provides phys-

ical and capacity building support to the Forest Develop-

ment Agencies (FDAs), which are the implementing

agencies.

v_ Control of Poaching, Taxidermy and Illegal Trade in
Wild Animal and Plant Species

He

vi Monitoring and Research

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 377 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

26.3 COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION

FUND MANAGEMENT AND
PLANNING AUTHORITY (CAMPA)

While according prior approval under the Forest (Con-
servation) Act, 1980 for diversion of forest land for non-
forest purpose, Central Government stipulates
conditions that amounts shall be realised from the user
agencies to undertake compensatory afforestation and
such other activities related to conservation and devel-
opment of forests, to mitigate impact of diversion of
forest land.

In April 2004, the central government, under the orders
of the Supreme Court, constituted the Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Author-
ity (CAMPA) for the management of money towards
compensatory afforestation, and other money recover-
able, in compliance of the conditions stipulated by the
central government and in accordance with the Forest
(Conservation) Act,

CAMPA as envisaged by the Supreme Court of India vide
its order dated 29/30.10.2002, could not become opera-
tional due to non-passing of Compensatory Afforesta-
tion Fund Bill 2008 in the Parliament. But it got lapsed.

In compliance of Orders passed by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court these amounts are deposited in the State-wise
accounts operated by an Ad-hoc Authority consisting of
two officials of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change one representative of the Comptroller
and Auditor General and one representative of the Chair-
person of the Central Empowered Committee.

In the absence of permanent institutional mechanism
more than Rs.40,000 crores have accumulated with the
said ad-hoc Body.

In order to provide for the establishment of funds under
the public accounts of India and the public accounts of
each State and crediting thereto the monies received
from the user agencies towards compensatory afforesta-
tion, additional compensatory afforestation, penal com-
pensatory afforestation, net present value and all other
amounts recovered from such agencies under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 Central Government intro-
duced the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015
in the LokSabha on 8th May 2015. The Bill also provides
for constitution of an authority at national level and at
each of the State and Union territory Administration for
administration of the funds and to utilise the monies so
collected for undertaking artificial regeneration (planta-
tions), assisted natural regeneration, protection of for-
ests, forest related infrastructure development, Green

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

India Programme, wildlife protection and other related
activities and for matters connected therewith or inci-
dental thereto.

Salient features

These Funds will receive payments for: (i) compensa-
tory afforestation, (ii) net present value of forest (NPV),
and (iii) other project specific payments. The National
Fund will receive 10% of these funds, and the State
Funds will receive the remaining 90%.

These Funds will be primarily spent on afforestation to
compensate for loss of forest cover, regeneration of for-
est ecosystem, wildlife protection and infrastructure
development.

The Bill also establishes the National and State Compen-
satory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authorities to manage the National and State Funds.

26.4 JOINT FOREST MANAGEMENT (JFM)

JFM is an initiative to institutionalize participatory gov-
ernance of country’s forest resources by involving the
local communities living close to the forest.

This is a co-management institution to develop partner-
ships between forest fringe communities and the Forest
Department (FD) on the basis of mutual trust and
jointly defined roles and responsibilities with regard to
forest protection and regeneration.

JFM started in consonance with the National Forest
Policy 1988, which has recognized the importance of
involving the local communities and the government
has issued necessary resolutions and guidelines subse-
quently to initiate such institutions and strengthen it
further.

Most of the states in India have adopted JFM and issued
resolutions permitting such partnership as per the pre-
scribed guidelines though the institutional structure
varies across the states.

Under JFM, both forest departments and local commu-
nities come to an agreement to form the committee to
manage and protect forests by sharing the costs and
benefits.

Forest departments take the initiative to form such
committees directly by talking to the local community
or through the help of NGOs working in specific areas.

NGOs are also involved for capacity building, informa-
tion dissemination, monitoring and evaluation and
often act as the facilitators in constituting these par-
ticipatory institutions.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 378 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

e One of the key objectives of the JFM programme is the
rehabilitation of degraded forestlands with people’s par-
ticipation involving Forest Protection Committees.

e JFM brings a win-win situation for both forest depart-
ments as well as the local communities in terms of
greater access to minor forest produces from these re-
generated forests.

26.5 SOCIAL FORESTRY

e The National Commission on Agriculture, Government
of India, first used the term ‘social forestry’ in 1976.

e Jt was then that India embarked upon a social forestry
project with the aim of taking the pressure off the for-
ests and making use of all unused and fallow land.

e Government forest areas that are close to human set-
tlement and have been degraded over the years due to
human activities needed to be afforested.

e Trees were to be planted in and around agricultural
fields. Plantation of trees along railway lines and road-
sides, and river and canal banks were carried out. They
were planted in village common land, Government
wasteland and Panchayat land.

5 F’s
e Social forestry also aims at raising plantations by the
common man so as to meet the growing demand for

food, fuel wood, fodder, fiber and fertilizer etc, thereby
reducing the pressure on the traditional forest area.

e With the introduction of this scheme the government
formally recognised the local communities’ rights to
forest resources, and encouraged rural participation in
the management of natural resources. Through the so-
cial forestry scheme, the government has involved com-
munity participation, as part of a drive towards
afforestation, and rehabilitating the degraded forest and
common lands.

Social forestry scheme can be categorized into
groups

Farm forestry

e Individual farmers are being encouraged to plant trees
on their own farmland to meet the domestic needs of
the family.

e Non-commercial farm forestry is the main thrust of
most of the social forestry projects in the country today.

e Itis to provide shade for the agricultural crops; as wind
shelters; soil conservation or to use wasteland.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Community forestry

e It is the raising of trees on community land and not on
private land as in farm forestry. All these programmes
aim to provide for the entire community and not for any
individual. The government has the responsibility of
providing seedlings, fertilizer but the community has
to take responsibility of protecting the trees.

Extension forestry

e Planting of trees on the sides of roads, canals and rail-
ways, along with planting on wastelands is known as
‘extension’ forestry, increasing the boundaries of for-
ests. Under this project there has been creation of wood
lots in the village common lands, government waste-
lands and panchayat lands.

Recreational forestry

e Raising of trees with the major objective of recreation
alone.

Do you know?

The atapaka Bird Sanctuary, part of the Kolleru Lake,
has been identified as the world’s largest home for the
spot-billed pelican.

26.6 NATIONAL BAMBOO MISSION

e The National Bamboo Mission is a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme with 100% contribution from Central Govern-
ment. It is being implemented by the Horticulture Divi-
sion under Department of Agriculture and Co-operation
in the Ministry of Agriculture, New Delhi.

e Bamboo Mission envisages integration of different Min-
istries/Departments and involvement of local people/
initiatives for the holistic development of bamboo sector
in terms of growth of bamboo through increase in area
coverage, enhanced yields and scientific management,
marketing of bamboo and bamboo based handicrafts,
generation of employment opportunities etc.

Objectives of the Mission

e To promote the growth of bamboo sector through an
area based regionally differentiated strategy;

e To increase the coverage of area under bamboo in po-
tential areas, with suitable species to enhance yields;

e To promote marketing of bamboo and bamboo based
handicrafts;

e To establish convergence and synergy among stakehold-
ers for the development of bamboo;

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 379 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

To promote, develop and disseminate technologies
through a seamless blend of traditional wisdom and
modern scientific knowledge;

To generate employment opportunities for skilled and
unskilled persons, especially unemployed youths.

Strategy of the Mission

Adopt a coordinated approach covering production and
marketing to assure appropriate returns to growers/
producers.

Promote Research and Development (R&D) of geneti-
cally superior clones of suitable species and technologies
for enhanced production.

Enhance acreage (in forest and non-forest areas) and
productivity of bamboo through species change and
improved cultural practices.

Promote partnership, convergence and synergy among
R&D and marketing agencies in public as well as private
sectors, at all levels.

Promote where appropriate, cooperatives and self-
help groups to ensure support and adequate return to
farmers.

Facilitate capacity-building and Human Resource De-
velopment.
Set up National, State and sub-State level structures, to

ensure adequate returns for the produce of the farmers
and eliminate middlemen, to the extent possible.

26.7 COMPREHENSIVE ENVIRON-

MENTAL POLLUTION INDEX (CEPI)

Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI)
is arational number to characterize the environmental
quality at a given location following the algorithm of
source, pathway, receptor and various parameters like
pollutant concentration, impact on human health and
level of exposure have been taken into consideration for
the calculation of pollution indices for air, water and
land.

The present CEPI is intended to act as an early warn-
ing tool. It can help in categorizing the industrial clus-
ters in terms of priority of planning needs for
interventions.

Qd O°@ Wo ENVIRONMENT

Classification of industrial clusters:

CEPI score

> 70 critically | detailed investigations and
polluted | appropriate remedial action

60 - 70 severely | surveillance and
polluted | implementation of pollution
control

e The Central and state Pollution Control Board, in col-
laboration with IIT, Delhi has applied the CEPI for en-
vironmental assessment of 88 Industrial Clusters across
the country. 43 such industrial clusters having CEPI
greater than 70, on a scale of 0 to 100, have been iden-
tified as critically polluted.

e The effective implementation of the remedial action
plan will help in pollution abatement and to restore the
environmental quality of respective industrial clusters
and its sustainable use.

e The polluted industrial clusters/areas shall be further
explored in order to define the spatial boundaries as
well as the extent of eco-geological damages.

e There are still some aspects that need to be improved
include, consistency in pollution monitoring data, selec-
tion of sampling locations for the environmental moni-
toring, and collection of data on adverse impact on
human population and other geo-ecological features due
to industrial pollution.

26.8 LIGHTING A BILLION LIVES (LABL)

e LaBL is a campaign by TERI that promotes the use of
solar lanterns specially designed and manufactured on
a decentralized basis.

e LaBL has been able to engage with government inter-
ventions under Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Madhya Pradesh
Rural Livelihood Project, Rasthriya Gramin Vikas Nidhi,
and has facilitated the spread of mobile telephony with
support from Department of Telecommunications, Gov-
ernment of India.

e LaBL has successfully engaged the private sector and
leveraged Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).

e This initiative has the potential to contribute towards
the realization of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) by improving energy access for the rural poor.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 380 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa B72 6 ENVIRONMENT

e Formation of more than 100 women-led Self Help
Groups (SHGs), and strengthening of around 150 SHGs
are among the impacts of this initiative.

e The campaign has demonstrated how Public-Private-
People partnerships can support rural development
schemes, particularly in the areas of health, education,
environment and women’s empowerment.

e The campaign has drawn support from public sector
units and corporate, among its various partners, to aid
the execution of the programme at the scale at which it
exists today.

26.9 ECO MARK

® a government scheme of labeling of environment
friendly products to provide accreditation and labelling
for household and other consumer products which meet
certain environmental criteria along with quality re-
quirements of the Bureau of Indian Standards for that
product.

e Objective - to recognize good environmental perfor-
mance as well as improvements in performance of the
unit

e Any product, which is made, used or disposed of in a
way that significantly reduces the harm to environ-
ment, could be considered as ‘Environment Friendly
Product’.

e The project would help in capacity building by conduct-
ing training, workshops, seminars, conference etc. on
the issues pertaining to the industry and environment
interface. This would facilitate the change in attitude of
the stakeholders and the industry on the need to sup-
port the proactive industry.

26.10 URBAN SERVICES ENVIRON-
MENTAL RATING SYSTEM (USERS)

e Project funded by UNDP executed by Ministry of Envi-
ronment and Forests and implemented by TERI.

e Aim - to develop an analytical tool to measure the per-
formance, with respect to delivery of basic services in
local bodies of Delhi and Kanpur. (identified as pilot
cities).

e Performance measurement (PM) tool was developed
through a set of performance measurement indicators
that are benchmarked against set targets using the
inputs-outputs efficiency outcomes framework.

26.11 BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION &
RURAL LIVELIHOOD IMPROVEMENT
PROJECT (BCRLIP)

Aim - conserving Biodiversity in selected landscapes,
including wildlife protected areas/critical conservation
areas while improving rural livelihoods through par-
ticipatory approaches.

Development of Joint Forest Management (JFM) and
eco-development in some states are models of new ap-
proaches to provide benefits to both conservation and
local communities.

The project intends to expand to other globally signifi-
cant sites in the country to strengthen linkages between
conservation and improving livelihoods of local com-
munities that live in the neighborhood of biodiversity
rich areas-as well as to enhance the local and national
economy.

The Project would be implemented as a Centrally Spon-
sored Scheme with five financiers (IDA loan, GEF grant,
contributions from Government of India, State Govern-
ments and beneficiaries), amounting to around Rs.
137.35 crores, spread over six years.

26.12 NATIONAL CLEAN ENERGY FUND

‘National Clean Energy Fund’ (NCEF) was constituted
in the public account of India in the Finance Bill 2010-11.

Objective - to invest in entrepreneurial ventures and
research & innovative projects in the field of clean en-
ergy technology.

The Central Board of Excise and Customs consequently
notified the Clean Energy Cess Rules 2010 under which
producers of specified goods namely raw coal, raw lig-
nite and raw peat were made liable to pay Clean Energy
Cess.

Any project with innovative methods to adopt to clean
energy technology and research & development shall be
eligible for funding under the NCEF.

Government assistance under the NCEF shall in no case
exceed 40% of the total project cost.

Indo-French Project to Study Effects of Climate Change
on Farming

The Indo-French Centre for the Promotion of Advanced
Research (CEFIPRA) launched a multi-disciplinary
Indo-French research project titled ‘Adaptation of Irri-
gated Agriculture to Climate Change (AICHA).’

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 381 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

The study aims at developing an integrated model for
analysing the impact of climate change on ground wa-
ter-irrigated agriculture in south India.

Berambadi village and surrounding areas in
Hangla hobli of Gundlupet taluk in Chamaraja nagar
district have been selected for a field study under the
project.

The project would explore adaptation strategies based
on innovative cropping systems and water resource
management policies, by considering a range of sce-
narios for agricultural systems and policies, to be tested
at the farm and the watershed scale.

The methodology will combine remote sensing, field
surveys and advanced numerical analysis with hydro-
logical, agronomical and economic modeling, and will
pay particular attention to sustainability and acceptabil-
ity issues.

26.13 NATIONAL MISSION FOR ELECTRIC

MOBILITY

A National Mission for Electric Mobility (NCEM) to pro-
mote electric mobility and manufacturing of electric
vehicles in India.

The setting up of NCEM has been influenced by the fol-
lowing three factors:

1.Fast dwindling petroleum resources

2.Impact of vehicles on the environment and climate
change

3.Worldwide shift of the automobile industry towards
more efficient drive technologies and alternative fuels
including electric vehicles

Barriers

Higher cost of Electric Vehicles, Challenges in battery
technology, Consumer mindset, Inadequate government
support

Objective to resolve these barriers by providing govern-
ment intervention/support, adoption of mission mode
approach for fast decision making and ensuring col-
laboration amongst various stakeholders.

The NCEM will be the apex body in the Government of
India for making recommendations in these matters.

26.14 SCIENCE EXPRESS - BIODIVERSITY

SPECIAL (SEBS)

SEBS is an innovative mobile exhibition mounted on a
specially designed 16 coach AC train, traveling across

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

India from 5 June to 22 December 2012 (180 days) to
create widespread awareness on the unique biodiversity
of the country.

SEBS is the fifth phase of the iconic and path-breaking
Science Express.

The SEBS is a unique collaborative initiative of Depart-
ment of Science & Technology (DST) and Ministry of
Environment & Forests (MoEF), Government of India.

The state-of-the-art exhibition aboard SEBS aims to
create wide-spread awareness on the unique biodiver-
sity of India, Climate Change, Water, Energy Conserva-
tion and related issues among various sections of the
society, especially students.

Do you know?

Under the leadership of NGO. aaranyak’s Greater ad-
jutant stork project team, 14 women self-help groups
of Dadara village in Kamrup district have formed a
‘Hargila (Greater adjutant stork) army’, for the con-
servation and protection of these birds.

26.15 ENVIRONMENT EDUCATION,

AWARENESS & TRAINING (EEAT)
SCHEME

EEAT a Central Scheme launched during the 6th Five
Year Plan in 1983-84 with the following objectives:

To promote environmental awareness among all sec-
tions of the society.

. To spread environment education, especially in the non-

formal system.

. To facilitate development of education/training materi-

als and aids in the formal education sector.

. To promote environment education through existing

educational/scientific institutions.

To ensure training and manpower development for
EEAT.

. To encourage NGOs, mass media and other concerned

organizations for promoting awareness about environ-
mental issues.

To use different media (audio & visual) for spreading
messages concerning environment and awareness and

. To mobilize people’s participation for preservation and

conservation of environment.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 382 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

26.16 NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT

AWARENESS CAMPAIGN (NEAC)

The NEAC was launched in 1986 with the objective of
creating environmental awareness at the national level.

It is a multi-media campaign which utilises conventional
and non-conventional methods of communication for
disseminating environmental messages.

Under this campaign, nominal financial assistance is
provided to registered NGOs, schools, colleges, univer-
sities, research institutions, women and youth organisa-
tions, army units, State Government Departments etc.
from all over the country for organising/ conducting
awareness raising activities.

These activities which include seminars, workshops,
training programmes, camps, rallies, exhibitions, com-
petitions, folk dances and songs, street theatre, puppet
shows, preparation and distribution of environmental
education resource materials etc., are followed by action
like plantation of trees, management of household
waste, cleaning of water bodies etc.

26.17 ECO-CLUBS (NATIONAL GREEN

CORPS)

e The main objectives of this programme are to educate

children about their immediate environment and im-
part knowledge about the eco-systems, their inter-de-
pendence and their need for survival, through visits and
demonstrations and to mobilise youngsters by instilling
in them the spirit of scientific inquiry into environmen-
tal problems and involving them in the efforts of envi-
ronmental preservation.

Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Envi-
ronment (GLOBE)

The GLOBE is an International Science and Education
Programme, which stress on hands-on participatory
approach. India joined this programme during the Au-
gust, 2000.

Q@ 6° a Bo

ENVIRONMENT

This programme, which unites students, teachers and
scientists all over the world, is aimed at school children.

The students of GLOBE schools are required to collect
data about various basic environmental parameters
under the supervision of a GLOBE trained teacher and
use it for explaining hypothesis as well as to enhance
their scientific understanding of the earth.

26.18 MANGROVES FOR THE FUTURE

Mangroves for the Future are a partnership-based ini-
tiative promoting investment in coastal ecosystems for
sustainable development.

Mission

to promote healthy coastal ecosystems through a part-
nership-based, people-focused, policy-relevant and in-
vestment-orientated approach, which builds and applies
knowledge, empowers communities and other stake-
holders, enhances governance, secures livelihoods, and
increases resilience to natural hazards and climate
change.

Member countries: India, Indonesia, Maldives, Pakistan,
Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Viet Nam. Outreach
countries: Bangladesh, Cambodia, Myanmar, Timor-
Leste. Dialogue countries: Kenya, Malaysia, Tanzania.

MFF provides a collaborative platform to help countries,
sectors and agencies in the MFF region tackle the grow-
ing challenges to coastal sustainability.

MFF has adopted mangroves as its flagship ecosystem
in recognition of the important role that mangrove for-
ests played in reducing the impact of the 2004 Indian
Ocean tsunami, and the severe effect on coastal liveli-
hoods caused by the loss and degradation of mangroves.

However MFF embraces all coastal ecosystems, includ-
ing coral reefs, estuaries, lagoons, wetlands, beaches
and seagrass beds.

%. 2% o% 0% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 383 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY QTd Oa Wo ENVIRONMENT

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 384 ---
| CHAPTER - 27 |

QW

ORGANIZATIONS

27.1 THE ANIMAL WELFARE BOARD

OF INDIA

The Animal Welfare Board of India is a statutory advi-
sory body on Animal Welfare Laws and promotes ani-
mal welfare in the country.

The Animal Welfare Board of India, the first of its kind
to be established by any Government in the world, was
set up in 1962, in accordance with Section 4 of the Pre-
vention of Cruelty to Animals Acts 1960.

Shrimati Rukmini Devi Arundale pioneered the setting
up of the Board, with its Headquaters at Chennai. She
guided the activities of the Board for nearly twenty
years till her demise in 1986.

Functions

To keep the law in force in India for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals under constant study and to advise
the government on the amendments to be undertaken
in any such law from time to time.

To advise the Central Government on the making of
rules under the Act with a view to preventing unneces-
sary pain or suffering to animals generally, and more
particularly when they are being transported from one
place to another or when they are used as performing
animals or when they are kept in captivity or confine-
ment.

To advise the Government or any local authority or
other person on improvements in the design of vehicles
so as to lessen the burden on draught animals.

To take all such steps as the Board may think fit for
amelioration of animals by encouraging, or providing
for the construction of sheds, water troughs and the like
and by providing for veterinary assistance to animals.

To advise the Government or any local authority or
other person in the design of slaughter houses or the

maintenance of slaughter houses or in connection with
slaughter of animals so that unnecessary pain or suf-
fering, whether physical or mental, is eliminated in the
pre- slaughter stages as far as possible, and animals are
killed, wherever necessary, in as humane a manner as
possible.

To take all such steps as the Board may think fit to
ensure that unwanted animals are destroyed by local
authorities, whenever it is necessary to do so, either
instantaneously or after being rendered insensible to
pain or suffering.

To encourage by the grant of financial assistance or
otherwise, the formation or establishment of Pinjara-
poles, rescue homes, animals shelters, sanctuaries and
the like, where animals and birds may find a shelter
when they have become old and useless or when they
need protection.

To co-operate with, and co-ordinate the work of asso-
ciations or bodies established for the purpose of pre-
venting unnecessary pain or suffering to animals or for
the protection of animals and birds.

To give financial assistance and other assistance to
Animal Welfare Organisations, functioning in any local
area or to encourage the formation of Animal Welfare
Organisations in any local area which shall work under
the general supervision and guidance of the Board.

To advise the Government on matters relating to the
medical care and attention which may be provided in
animal hospitals, and to give financial and other as-
sistance to animal hospitals whenever the Board think
it is necessary to do so.

To impart education in relation to the humane treat-
ment of animals and to encourage the formation of pub-
lic opinion against the infliction of unnecessary pain or
suffering to animals and for the promotion of animal

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 385 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

welfare by means of lectures books, posters, cinemato-
graphic exhibitions and the like.

To advise the Government on any matter connected
with animal welfare or the Prevention of infliction of
unnecessary pain or suffering on animals.

The Board consists of 28 Members. The term of office
of Members is for a period of 3 years.

27.2 CENTRAL ZOO AUTHORITY

The amendment made to the Wild Life (Protection) Act
in 1991 added a new chapter dealing with zoos to the
Act and allowed for the Central Government to consti-
tute an authority known as the Central Zoo Authority
to oversee the functioning and development of zoos in
the country. According to the provisions of this chapter,
only such zoos which were operated in accordance with
the norms and standards prescribed by the Central Zoo
Authority would be granted ‘recognition’ to operate by
the Authority.

Functions

The following are the functions of the Central Zoo Au-
thority as specified in the Act:

To specify the minimum standards for housing, upkeep
and veterinary care of animals kept in a zoo

To evaluate and assess the functioning of zoos with
respect to the standards or the norms as are prescribed

To recognize and derecognize zoos

4. To identify endangered species of wild animals for pur-

10.

11.

poses of captive breeding and assigning responsibility
in this regard to a zoo

To co-ordinate the acquisition, exchange and loaning
of animals for breeding purposes

To ensure maintenance of stud-books of endangered
species of wild animals bred in captivity

To identify priorities and themes with regard to display
of captive animals in a zoo

To co-ordinate training of zoo personnel in India and
abroad

. To co-ordinate research in captive breeding and edu-

cational programs for the purposes of zoos

To provide technical and other assistance to zoos for
their proper management and development on scien-
tific lines

To perform such other functions as may be necessary
to carry out the purposes of this Act with regard to
ZOOS

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Powers

e Recognition of zoos

Permission for acquisition of wild / captive animals
Cognizance of offences

Grant of licences, certificate of ownership, recognition,
etc

27.3 THE NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY

AUTHORITY (NBA) - CHENNAI.

The National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) was estab-
lished in 2003 to implement India’s Biological Diversity
Act (2002).

The NBA is a Statutory, Autonomous Body and it per-
forms facilitative, regulatory and advisory function for
the Government of India on issues of conservation, sus-
tainable use of biological resources and fair and equita-
ble sharing of benefits arising out of the use of biological
resources.

Objectives of the NBA

Anybody seeking any kind of intellectual property
rights on a research based upon biological resource or
knowledge obtained from India has to obtain prior ap-
proval of the NBA.

The NBA will impose benefit-sharing conditions.

For ensuring equitable sharing of benefits arising from
the use of biological resources and associated knowl-
edge, Sections 19 and 21 stipulate prior approval of
the National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) before their
access.

Ensures protection to the knowledge of local people
relating to biodiversity through measures such as reg-
istration of such knowledge.

Main functions:

(a) The National Biodiversity Authority may-

(a) advise the Central Government on matters relat-
ing to the conservation of biodiversity, sustainable
use of its components and equitable sharing of ben-
efits arising out of the utilization of biological re-
sources;

(b) advise the State Governments in the selection of
areas of biodiversity importance to be notified as
heritage sites and measures for the management of
such heritage sites;

(c) perform such other functions as may be necessary
to carry out the provisions of this Act.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 386 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(2) The National Biodiversity Authority may, on behalf of
the Central Government, take any measures necessary
to oppose the grant of intellectual property rights in
any country outside India on any biological resource
obtained from India or knowledge associated with such
biological resource which is derived from India.

Transfer of biological resource or knowledge

e No person who has been granted approval, shall trans-
fer any biological resource or knowledge associated to
others except with the permission of the National Bio-
diversity Authority

e The National Biodiversity Authority grants approval for
transfer, after making enquiries subject to certain terms
and conditions including the imposition of charges by
way of royalty or for reasons to be recorded in writing,
reject the application.

e The NBA gives public notice of approval granted under
this section

The State Biodiversity Boards (SBBs)

e The State Biodiversity Boards (SBBs) focus on advising
the State Governments on matters relating to the con-
servation of biodiversity, sustainable use of its compo-
nents and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out
of the utilization of biological resources;

e The SSBs also regulate, by granting of approvals or
otherwise requests for commercial utilization or bio-
survey and bio-utilization of any biological resource by
Indians.

e The local level Biodiversity Management Committees
(BMCs)

e The local level Biodiversity Management Committees
(BMCs) are responsible for promoting conservation,
sustainable use and documentation of biological diver-
sity and chronicling of knowledge relating to biological
diversity.

27.4 WILDLIFE CRIME CONTROL
BUREAU (WCCB)

e The Government of India constituted a statutory body,
the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau on 6th June 2007,
by amending the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. The
bureau would complement the efforts of the state gov-
ernments, primary enforcers of the Wildlife (Protec-
tion) Act, 1972 and other enforcement agencies of the
country.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Functions

(i) Collection, collation of intelligence and its dissemina-
tion and establishment of a centralized Wildlife Crime
data bank;

(ii) Co-ordination of actions by various enforcement au-
thorities towards the implementation of the provisions
of this Act.

(iii) Implementation of obligations under the various inter-
national Conventions and protocols

(iv) Assistance to concerned authorities in foreign countries
and concerned international organizations to facilitate
co-ordination and universal action for wildlife crime
control;

(v) Development of infrastructure and capacity building
for scientific and professional investigation;

(vi) Advice the Government of India on issues relating to
wildlife crimes having national and international ram-
ifications, and suggest changes required in relevant
policy and laws from time to time.

27.5 NATIONAL LAKE CONSERVATION
PLAN (NLCP)

e Ministry of Environment and Forests has been imple-
menting the National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP)
since 2001 for conservation and management of pol-
luted and degraded lakes in urban and semi-urban
areas

Objective

e to restore and conserve the urban and semi-urban lakes
of the country degraded due to waste water discharge
into the lake and other unique freshwater eco systems,
through an integrated ecosystem approach.

Activities Covered Under NLCP

e Prevention of pollution from point sources by intercept-
ing, diverting and treating the pollution loads entering
the lake. The interception and diversion works may in-
clude sewerage & sewage treatment for the entire lake
catchment area.

(i) In situ measures of lake cleaning such as de-silting,
de-weeding, bioremediation, aeration, bio-manipu-
lation, nutrient reduction, withdrawal of anoxic hy-
polimn ion, constructed wetland approach or any
other successfully tested eco-technologies etc de-
pending upon the site conditions.

(ii) Catchment area treatment which may include af-
forestation, storm water drainage, silt traps etc.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 387 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

(iii) Strengthening of bund, lake fencing, shoreline de-
velopment etc.

(iv) Lake front eco-development including public inter-
face.

(v) Solid waste managementz2 & provision of dhobi ghats
is generally not covered under NLCP.

(vi) Prevention of pollution from non-point sources by
providing low cost sanitation.

(vii) Public awareness and public participation.
(viii) Capacity building, training and research in the
area of Lake Conservation.
(ix) Any other activity depending upon location specific
requirements

27.6 NATIONAL GANGA RIVER BASIN
AUTHORITY (NGRBA)

e NGRBA was constituted on February 2009 under the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

e The NGRBA is a planning, financing, monitoring and
coordinating body of the centre and the states.

e The objective of the NGRBA is to ensure effective abate-
ment of pollution and conservation of the river Ganga
by adopting a river basin approach for comprehensive
planning and management.

e The Authority has both regulatory and developmental
functions. The Authority will take measures for effective
abatement of pollution and conservation of the river
Ganga in keeping with sustainable development needs.

These include
e Development of a river basin management plan;

e Regulation of activities aimed at prevention, control and
abatement of pollution in Ganga to maintain its water
quality, and to take measures relevant to river ecology
and management in the Ganga basin states;

Qd O°@ Wo ENVIRONMENT

Maintenance of minimum ecological flows in the river
Ganga;

Measures necessary for planning, financing and execu-
tion of programmes for abatement of pollution in the
river Ganga including augmentation of sewerage infra-
structure, catchment area treatment, protection of flood
plains, creating public awareness;

Collection, analysis and dissemination of information
relating to environmental pollution in the river Ganga;

Investigations and research regarding problems of en-
vironmental pollution and conservation of the river
Ganga;

Promotion of water conservation practices including
recycling and reuse, rain water harvesting, and decen-
tralised sewage treatment systems;

Monitoring and review of the implementation of various
programmes or activities taken up for prevention, con-
trol and abatement of pollution in the river Ganga;

Issue directions under section 5 of the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 for the purpose of exercising and
performing these functions and for achievement of its
objectives.

27.7 WILDLIFE TRUST OF INDIA

NGO founded: 1998

Aim: To conserve nature, especially endangered species
and threatened habitats, in partnership with communi-
ties and governments.

The Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) is committed to the
protection of India’s wildlife; it achieves this by working
in partnership with local communities and govern-
ments on a range of projects, from species rehabilitation
to the prevention of the illegal wildlife trade.

%. 2% o% 0% o% 0%
~e ~e ~e ~e ~e ~e

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 388 ---
www freeupscmaterials.org


--- PAGE 389 ---
www freeupscmaterials.org


--- PAGE 390 ---
| CHAPTER - 28 |

QW

INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS

28.1 MAJOR ENVIRONMENT
INTERNATIONAL CONVENTIONS
Nature conservation

1. United Nations Conference On Environment And De-
velopment (UNCED)

2. Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)
3. Ramsar Convention on Wetlands

4. Convention on International Trade in Endangered Spe-
cies of Fauna and Flora (CITES)

The Wildlife Trade Monitoring Network (TRAFFIC)

6. Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species
(CMS)

7. Coalition Against Wildlife Trafficking (CAWT)
8. International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTC)
g. United Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF)

10. International Union for Conservation of Nature and
Natural Resources (IUCN)

11. Global Tiger Forum (GTF)

Hazardous material
12. Stockholm Convention
13. Basel Convention

14. Rotterdam Convention

Land

15. United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
(UNCCD)

Marine environment

16. International Whaling Commission (IWC)

Atmosphere

17. Vienna convention and Montreal Protocol

18. United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC)

19. Kyoto Protocol

1. United Nations Conference On Environment
And Development (UNCED)

Also known as the Rio Summit, Rio Conference, Earth
Summit held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992.

The issues addressed included:

e Systematic scrutiny of patterns of production — par-
ticularly the production of toxic components, such as
lead in gasoline, or poisonous waste including radioac-
tive chemicals

e Alternative sources of energy to replace the use of fossil
fuels which are linked to global climate change

e New reliance on public transportation systems in order
to reduce vehicle emissions, congestion in cities and the
health problems caused by polluted air and smog

e The growing scarcity of water

The Earth Summit resulted in the following
documents:

e Rio Declaration on Environment and Development
e Agenda 21

e Forest Principles

Moreover, two important legally binding

agreements

1. Convention on Biological Diversity

2. Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
The Rio Declaration on Environment and Development,
often shortened to Rio Declaration, was a short document
produced at the 1992 United Nations “Conference on Envi-

ronment and Development” (UNCED), informally known
as the Earth Summit. The Rio Declaration consisted of

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 391 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

27 principles intended to guide future sustainable develop-
ment around the world.

Agenda 21

e Agenda 21 is an action plan of the United Nations (UN)
related to sustainable development and was an outcome
of the United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil,
in 1992.

e It is a comprehensive blueprint of action to be taken
globally, nationally and locally by organizations of the
UN, governments, and major groups in every area in
which humans directly affect the environment.

e The number 21 refers to an agenda for the 21st century.
Local Agenda 21

e The implementation of Agenda 21 was intended to in-
volve action at international, national, regional and local
levels. Some national and state governments have leg-
islated or advised that local authorities take steps to
implement the plan locally, as recommended in Chapter
28 of the document. Such programmes are often known
as ‘Local Agenda 21 or ‘LA21’.

Agenda 21 for culture

e During the first World Public Meeting on Culture, held
in Porto Alegre, Brazil in 2002, it came up with the idea
to draw up document guidelines for local cultural poli-
cies, a document comparable to what Agenda 21 meant
in 1992 for the environment.

e The Agenda 21 for culture is the first document with
worldwide mission that advocates establishing the
groundwork of an undertaking by cities and local gov-
ernments for cultural development.

Rio+5
e In1997, the General Assembly of the UN held a special

session to appraise five years of progress on the imple-
mentation of Agenda 21 (Rio +5).

e The Assembly recognized progress as ‘uneven’ and iden-
tified key trends including increasing globalization,
widening inequalities in income and a continued dete-
rioration of the global environment.

The Johannesburg Summit

e The Johannesburg Plan of Implementation, agreed at
the World Summit on Sustainable Development (Earth
Summit 2002) affirmed UN commitment to ‘full imple-
mentation’ of Agenda 21, alongside achievement of the
Millennium Development Goals and other international
agreements.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Rio +20

e “Rio+20” is the short name for the United Nations Con-
ference on Sustainable Development which took place
in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in June 2012 - twenty years
after the landmark 1992 Earth Summit in Rio.

e At the Rio+20 Conference, world leaders, along with
thousands of participants from the private sector,
NGOs and other groups, came together to shape how
we can reduce poverty, advance social equity and en-
sure environmental protection on an ever more
crowded planet.

e The official discussions focussed on two main themes:

1. how to build a green economy to achieve sustainable
development and lift people out of poverty; and

2. how to improve international coordination for sustain-
able development.

e AT Rio+20, more than $513 billion was pledged to build
a sustainable future. It signaled a major step forward
in achieving the future we want.

2. Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)

e CBD is a Legally binding Convention recognized for the
first time, that the conservation of biological diversity
is “a common concern of humankind” and is an integral
part of the development process. The agreement covers
all ecosystems, species, and genetic resources.

Objectives

e The conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable
use of its components and the fair and equitable shar-
ing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of ge-
netic resources, including by appropriate access to
genetic resources and by appropriate transfer of rele-
vant technologies, taking into account all rights over
those resources and to technologies, and by appropriate
funding.

Three main goals:
e The conservation of biodiversity
e Sustainable use of the components of biodiversity

e Sharing the benefits arising from the commercial and
other utilization of genetic resources in a fair and equi-
table way

The Convention acknowledges that substantial investments
are required to conserve biological diversity. It argues,
however, that conservation will bring us significant envi-
ronmental, economic and social benefits in return.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 392 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Do you know?

The current population of the Greater adjutant stork
is only 1,200, of which, 80 percent are found in Assam.
The bird’s habitat has been greatly impacted by
human development.

Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the
Convention on Biological Diversity

Biosafety refers to the need to protect human health and
the environment from the possible adverse effects of the
products of modern biotechnology.

The Convention clearly recognizes these twin aspects of
modern biotechnology.

1. Access to and transfer of technologies

2. Appropriate procedures to enhance the safety of bio-
technology technologies.

Objective

Is to contribute to ensuring an adequate level of protection
in the field of the safe transfer, handling and use of living
modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology
that may have adverse effects on the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into ac-
count risks to human health, and specifically focusing on
transboundary movements.

e The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety is an additional
agreement to the Convention on Biological Diversity.

e The Protocol establishes procedures for regulating the
import and export of LMOs from one country to an-
other.

e The Protocol also requires Parties to ensure that LMOs
being shipped from one country to another are handled,
packaged and transported in a safe manner.

e The shipments must be accompanied by documentation
that clearly identifies the LMOs, specifies any require-
ments for the safe handling, storage, transport and use
and provides contact details for further information.

There are two main sets of procedures, one for LMOs in-
tended for direct introduction into the environment,
known as the advance informed agreement (AIA) proce-
dure, and another for LMOs intended for direct use as food
or feed, or for processing (LMOs-FFP).

Advance Informed Agreement

e Under the AIA procedure, a country intending to export
an LMO for intentional release into the environment

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

must notify in writing the Party of import before the
first proposed export takes place.

e The Party of import must acknowledge receipt of the
notification within 90 days and must communicate its
decision on whether or not to import the LMO within
270 days.

e Parties are required to ensure that their decisions are
based on a risk assessment of the LMO, which must be
carried out in a scientifically sound and transparent
manner.

e Once a Party takes a decision on the LMO, it is required
to communicate the decision as well as a summary of
the risk assessment to a central information system, the
Biosafety Clearing-House (BCH).

LMOs- food or feed, or for processing

e Under the procedure for LMOs-FFP, Parties that decide
to approve and place such LMOs on the market are re-
quired to make their decision and relevant information,
including the risk assessment reports, publicly available
through the BCH.

Nagoya—Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol

e The Cartagena Protocol is reinforced by the Nagoya—
Kuala Lumpur Supplementary Protocol on Liability and
Redress.

e The Supplementary Protocol specifies response meas-
ures to be taken in the event of damage to biodiversity
resulting from LMOs.

e The competent authority in a Party to the Supplemen-
tary Protocol must require the person in control of the
LMO (operator) to take the response measures or it may
implement such measures itself and recover any costs
incurred from the operator.

Nagoya Protocol

The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and
the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from
their Utilization (ABS) to the Convention on Biological Di-
versity is a supplementary agreement to the Convention on
Biological Diversity.

It provides a transparent legal framework for the effective
implementation of one of the three objectives of the CBD.

Objective

Is the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from
the utilization of genetic resources, thereby contributing
to the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 393 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Obligations

The Nagoya Protocol sets out core obligations for its con-
tracting Parties to take measures in relation to access to
genetic resources, benefit-sharing and compliance.

Access obligations

¢ Domestic-level access measures are to:

e Create legal certainty, clarity and transparency

e Provide fair and non-arbitrary rules and procedures

e Establish clear rules and procedures for prior informed
consent and mutually agreed terms

e Provide for issuance of a permit or equivalent when
access is granted

e Create conditions to promote and encourage research
contributing to biodiversity conservation and sustain-
able use

e Pay due regard to cases of present or imminent emer-
gencies that threaten human, animal or plant health

e Consider the importance of genetic resources for food
and agriculture for food security

Benefit-sharing obligations

¢ Domestic-level benefit-sharing measures are to provide
for the fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising
from the utilization of genetic resources with the con-
tracting party providing genetic resources.

e Utilization includes research and development on the
genetic or biochemical composition of genetic re-
sources, as well as subsequent applications and com-
mercialization.

e Sharing is subject to mutually agreed terms.

e Benefits may be monetary or non-monetary such as
royalties and the sharing of research results.

Compliance obligations

Specific obligations to support compliance with the domes-
tic legislation or regulatory requirements of the contract-
ing party providing genetic resources, and contractual
obligations reflected in mutually agreed terms, are a sig-
nificant innovation of the Nagoya Protocol. Contracting
Parties are to:

e Take measures providing that genetic resources utilized
within their jurisdiction have been accessed in accord-
ance with prior informed consent, and that mutually
agreed terms have been established, as required by an-
other contracting party

¢ Cooperate in cases of alleged violation of another con-
tracting party’s requirements

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e Encourage contractual provisions on dispute resolution
in mutually agreed terms

e Ensure an opportunity is available to seek recourse
under their legal systems when disputes arise from mu-
tually agreed terms

e Take measures regarding access to justice

e Take measures to monitor the utilization of genetic re-
sources after they leave a country including by designat-
ing effective checkpoints at any stage of the value-chain:
research, development, innovation, pre-commercializa-
tion or commercialization

Traditional knowledge

e The Nagoya Protocol addresses traditional knowledge
associated with genetic resources with provisions on
access, benefit-sharing and compliance.

e It also addresses genetic resources where indigenous
and local communities have the established right to
grant access to them.

¢ Contracting Parties are to take measures to ensure
these communities’ prior informed consent, and fair
and equitable benefit-sharing, keeping in mind com-
munity laws and procedures as well as customary use
and exchange.

Importance

The Nagoya Protocol will create greater legal certainty and
transparency for both providers and users of genetic re-
sources by:

e Establishing more predictable conditions for access to
genetic resources.

e Helping to ensure benefit-sharing when genetic re-
sources leave the contracting party providing the ge-
netic resources

By helping to ensure benefit-sharing, the Nagoya Protocol
creates incentives to conserve and sustainably use genetic
resources, and therefore enhances the contribution of bio-
diversity to development and human well-being.

The Biodiversity Target

e It was adopted in May 2002 during the sixth Con-
ference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological
Diversity.

e The Target aimed to achieve, by 2010 ‘a significant re-
duction of the current rate of biodiversity loss at the
global, regional and national level as a contribution to
poverty alleviation and to the benefit of all life on
earth’.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 394 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Unfortunately, we were unable to meet the target. As
we are facing an ever-increasing biodiversity crisis, we
need a new, clear and realistic target to respond to it.

Strategic Plan For Biodiversity 2011-2020

In the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties,
held in 2010, in Nagoya, Aichi Prefecture, Japan, adopted
a revised and updated Strategic Plan for Biodiversity,
including the Aichi Biodiversity Targets, for the 2011-
2020 period.

The tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties
agreed to translate this overarching international
framework into national biodiversity strategies and ac-
tion plans within two years.

Additionally, the meeting decided that the fifth national
reports, due by 31 March 2014, should focus on the im-
plementation of the 2011-2020 Strategic Plan and pro-
gress achieved towards the Aichi Biodiversity Targets.

28.2 AICHI BIODIVERSITY TARGETS
Strategic Goal A:

Address the underlying causes of biodiversity loss by main-
streaming biodiversity across government and society

1.

By 2020, at the latest, people are aware of the values of
biodiversity and the steps they can take to conserve and
use it sustainably.

By 2020, at the latest, biodiversity values have been
integrated into national and local development and pov-
erty reduction strategies and planning processes and
are being incorporated into national accounting, as
appropriate, and reporting systems.

By 2020, at the latest, incentives, including subsidies,
harmful to biodiversity are eliminated, phased out or
reformed in order to minimize or avoid negative im-
pacts, and positive incentives for the conservation and
sustainable use of biodiversity are developed and ap-
plied, consistent and in harmony with the Convention
and other relevant international obligations, taking into
account national socio economic conditions.

By 2020, at the latest, Governments, business and
stakeholders at all levels have taken steps to achieve or
have implemented plans for sustainable production and
consumption and have kept the impacts of use of natu-
ral resources well within safe ecological limits.

Strategic Goal B:

Reduce the direct pressures on biodiversity and promote
sustainable use

QF 6° go

1.

ENVIRONMENT

By 2020, the rate of loss of all natural habitats, includ-
ing forests, is at least halved and where feasible brought
close to zero, and degradation and fragmentation is
significantly reduced.

By 2020 all fish and invertebrate stocks and aquatic
plants are managed and harvested sustainably, legally
and applying ecosystem based approaches, so that
overfishing is avoided, recovery plans and measures
are in place for all depleted species, fisheries have no
significant adverse impacts on threatened species and
vulnerable ecosystems and the impacts of fisheries on
stocks, species and ecosystems are within safe eco-
logical limits.

By 2020 areas under agriculture, aquaculture and for-
estry are managed sustainably, ensuring conservation
of biodiversity.

By 2020, pollution, including from excess nutrients, has
been brought to levels that are not detrimental to eco-
system function and biodiversity.

By 2020, invasive alien species and pathways are iden-
tified and prioritized, priority species are controlled or
eradicated, and measures are in place to manage path-
ways to prevent their introduction and establishment.

By 2015, the multiple anthropogenic pressures on coral
reefs, and other vulnerable ecosystems impacted by
climate change or ocean acidification are minimized,
so as to maintain their integrity and functioning.

Strategic Goal C:

To improve the status of biodiversity by safeguarding eco-
systems, species and genetic diversity

1.

By 2020, at least 17 per cent of terrestrial and inland
water, and 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas,
especially areas of particular importance for biodiver-
sity and ecosystem services, are conserved through
effectively and equitably managed, ecologically repre-
sentative and well connected systems of protected areas
and other effective area-based conservation measures,
and integrated into the wider landscapes and sea-
scapes.

By 2020 the extinction of known threatened species
has been prevented and their conservation status, par-
ticularly of those most in decline, has been improved
and sustained.

By 2020, the genetic diversity of cultivated plants and
farmed and domesticated animals and of wild relatives,
including other socio-economically as well as culturally
valuable species, is maintained, and strategies have

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 395 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

been developed and implemented for minimizing ge-
netic erosion and safeguarding their genetic diversity.

Strategic Goal D:

Enhance the benefits to all from biodiversity and ecosys-
tem services

1.

By 2020, ecosystems that provide essential services,
including services related to water, and contribute to
health, livelihoods and well-being, are restored and
safeguarded, taking into account the needs of women,
indigenous and local communities, and the poor and
vulnerable.

By 2020, ecosystem resilience and the contribution of
biodiversity to carbon stocks has been enhanced,
through conservation and restoration, including resto-
ration of at least 15 per cent of degraded ecosystems,
thereby contributing to climate change mitigation and
adaptation and to combating desertification.

By 2015, the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Re-
sources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits
Arising from their Utilization is in force and opera-
tional, consistent with national legislation.

Strategic Goal E:

Enhance implementation through participatory planning,
knowledge management and capacity building

1.

By

By 2015 each Party has developed, adopted as a policy
instrument, and has commenced implementing an ef-
fective, participatory and updated national biodiversity
strategy and action plan.

By 2020, the traditional knowledge, innovations and
practices of indigenous and local communities relevant
for the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity,
and their customary use of biological resources, are
respected, subject to national legislation and relevant
international obligations, and fully integrated and re-
flected in the implementation of the Convention with
the full and effective participation of indigenous and
local communities, at all relevant levels.

By 2020, knowledge, the science base and technologies
relating to biodiversity, its values, functioning, status
and trends, and the consequences of its loss, are im-
proved, widely shared and transferred, and applied.

2020, at the latest, the mobilization of financial re-
sources for effectively implementing the Strategic Plan
for Biodiversity 2011-2020 from all sources, and in ac-
cordance with the consolidated and agreed process in
the Strategy for Resource Mobilization, should increase
substantially from the current levels. This target will

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

be subject to changes contingent to resource needs as-
sessments to be developed and reported by Parties.

CoP 11 hyderabad

One of the most important outcomes of the CoP is the
commitment of the Parties to double the international
financial flows for Bio Diversity by 2015. This will trans-
late into additional financial flows to the developing
countries to the tune of about US $ 30 billion equivalent
to about Rs. 1,50,000 crore over the next 8 years.

India has committed US $50 million towards strength-
ening the institutional mechanism for biodiversity con-
servation in the country during its presidency of the
Convention on Biodiversity (CBD) called the Hyderabad
Pledge

The funds will be used to enhance technical and human
capabilities at the national and state-level mechanisms
to attain the CBD objectives.

The country has also earmarked funds to promote
similar capacity building in developing countries. India
formally took charge of the presidency of CBD from
Japan for the next two years on October 8 at the inau-
gural of the eleventh meeting of the Conference of Par-
ties (CoP 11) to CBD.

India has instituted together with UNDP Biodiversity
Governance Awards. The first such awards were given
during the CoP 11. It is now proposed to institute Rajiv
Gandhi International Award for Harnessing Biodiversity
for Livelihood.

28.3 RAMSAR CONVENTION ON

WETLANDS

The Convention on Wetlands [waterfowl convention] is
an intergovernmental treaty that provides the frame-
work for national action and international cooperation
for the conservation and wise use of wetlands and their
resources.

It was adopted in the Iranian city of Ramsar in 1971 and
came into force in 1975, and it is the only global envi-
ronmental treaty that deals with a particular ecosys-
tem.

Ramsar is not affiliated with the United Nations system
of Multilateral Environmental Agreements, but it works
very closely with the other MEAs and is a full partner
among the “biodiversity-related cluster” of treaties and
agreements.

World Wetlands Day, 2 February every year. Number of
Contracting Parties: 163

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 396 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

Mission

“The conservation and wise use of all wetlands through
local, regional and national actions and international co-
operation, as a contribution towards achieving sustainable
development throughout the world”.

“Three pillars” of the Convention

The Parties have committed themselves to:

¢ Work towards the wise use of all their wetlands through
national land-use planning, appropriate policies and
legislation, management actions, and public education;

e Designate suitable wetlands for the List of Wetlands of
International Importance (“Ramsar List”) and ensure
their effective management; and

¢ Cooperate internationally concerning transboundary
wetlands, shared wetland systems, shared species, and
development projects that may affect wetlands.

The “Ramsar List”

e At the time of joining the Convention, each Contracting
Party designates at least one site for inclusion in the List
of Wetlands of International Importance (the “Ramsar
List”).

e The addition of a site to the Ramsar List confers upon
it the prestige of international recognition and ex-
presses the government’s commitment to take all steps
necessary to ensure the maintenance of the ecological
character of the site.

Transboundary Ramsar Sites

e An ecologically coherent wetland extends across na-
tional borders and the Ramsar site authorities on both
or all sides of the border have formally agreed to col-
laborate in its management, and have notified the Sec-
retariat of this intent.

e This is a cooperative management arrangement and not
a distinct legal status for the Ramsar sites involved.

The Montreux Record

e Adopted by the Conference of the Contracting Parties
in Brisbane, 1996, accompanying the Guidelines for Op-
eration of the Montreux Record

e The Montreux Record is a register of wetland sites on
the List of Wetlands of International Importance where
changes in ecological character have occurred, are oc-
curring, or are likely to occur as a result of technologi-
cal developments, pollution or other human interference.

e It is the the principal tool of the Convention and is
maintained as part of the Ramsar List.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

Indian wetland and the Montreux Record

e Keoladeo National Park, Rajasthan and Loktak Lake,
Manipur have been included in Montreux Record in
1990 and in 1993 respectively

e Chilika Lake, Orissa included in Montreux Record in
1993 have been removed in November 2002. It is placed
on the Montreux Record due to problems caused by
siltation and sedimentation which was choking the
mouth of the lake; removed from the Record in 2002
following rehabilitation efforts for which the Chilika
Development Authority received the Ramsar Wetland
Conservation Award for 2002.

“IOPs”

Five global non-governmental organizations (NGOs) have
been associated with the treaty since its beginnings and
were confirmed in the formal status of International Or-
ganization Partners (IOPs) of the Convention.

1. BirdLife International (formerly ICBP)

2. IUCN - The International Union for the Conservation
of Nature

IWMI - The International Water Management Institute

4. Wetlands International (formerly IWRB, the Asian Wet-
lands Bureau, and Wetlands for the Americas)

5. WWE (World Wide Fund for Nature) International

The Changwon Declaration on human well-being and
wetlands

e The Changwon Declaration highlights positive action
for ensuring human well-being and security in the fu-
ture under the themes - water, climate change, people’s
livelihood and health, land use change, and biodiversity,

India and wetland convention

e India became a contracting party to the Ramsar Con-
vention in 1981 and has been implementing conserva-
tion programmes for wetlands, mangroves and coral
reefs.

e India presently has 26 sites designated as Wetlands of
International Importance.

e There is close coordination between implementing units
of Ramsar with that of CBD at the national level. India
took a lead role in the formulation of Ramsar guidelines
on integration of wetlands into river basin management.

e The National Conservation Strategy and Policy State-
ments on Environment and Development (1992) and
National Water Policy (2002) highlight conservation and
sustainable development of wetlands.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 397 ---
SHANKAR IAS ACADEMY

28.4. CITES

e Inthe early 1960s, international discussion began focus-
ing on the rate at which the world’s wild animals and
plants were being threatened by unregulated interna-
tional trade.

e The Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) is an interna-
tional agreement between governments entered into
force in 1975, and became the only treaty to ensure that
international trade in plants and animals does not
threaten their survival in the wild.

e Currently 176 countries are Parties to CITES.

e CITES is administered through the United Nations En-
vironment Programme (UNEP). A Secretariat, located
in Geneva, Switzerland, oversees the implementation of
the treaty and assists with communications between
countries.

Protecting Species from Unsustainable Trade

e Species for which trade is controlled are listed in one of
three Appendices to CITES, each conferring a different
level of regulation and requiring CITES permits or cer-
tificates.

Appendix I:

e Includes species threatened with extinction and pro-
vides the greatest level of protection, including restric-
tions on commercial trade. Examples include gorillas,
sea turtles, most lady slipper orchids, and giant pandas.

Appendix II:

e Includes species that although currently not threatened
with extinction, may become so without trade controls.
It also includes species that resemble other listed species
and need to be regulated in order to effectively control
the trade in those other listed species.

Appendix III:

e Includes species for which a range country has asked
other Parties to help in controlling international trade.
Examples include map turtles, walruses and Cape stag
beetles.

e Until CoP13, these meeting were held every two years;
since then, CoPs are held every three years.

e CoP16 is scheduled to occur from March 3-14, 2013 in
Bangkok, Thailand.
CITES Role in Conservation

e Over the last several decades, CITES has helped ensure
global conservation of species.

QF 6° go

ENVIRONMENT

e The Parties have adopted a 5-year strategic vision to
guide CITES through 2013.

The plan sets the following goals:

e Ensure compliance with and implementation and en-
forcement of the Convention.

e Secure the necessary financial resources and means for
the operation and implementation of the Convention.

¢ Contribute to significantly reducing the rate of biodi-
versity loss by ensuring that CITES and other multilat-
eral instruments and processes are coherent and
mutually supportive.

Do you know?

The International Solar Alliance (ISA) is all set to
usher in the introduction of solar energy technology
to drive biodiversity conservation and livelihood ac-
tivities at Chilika.

28.5. TRAFFIC: THE WILDLIFE TRADE
MONITORING NETWORK

e TRAFFIC is a joint conservation programme of WWF
and IUCN.

e It was established in 1976 by the Species Survival Com-
mission of IUCN, principally as a response to the entry
into force during the previous year of the Convention
on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora (CITES).

e TRAFFIC is an international network, consisting of
TRAFFIC International, based in Cambridge, UK with
offices on five continents.

e Since its founding, TRAFFIC has grown to become the
world’s largest wildlife trade monitoring programme,
and a global expert on wildlife trade issues.

e This non-governmental organization undertakes its ac-
tivities in close collaboration with governments and the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Spe-
cies of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) Secretariat.

Goal

e To ensure that trade in wild plants and animals is not
a threat to the conservation of nature.

Vision

e Is of a world in which trade in wild animals and plants

will be managed at sustainable levels without damaging
the integrity of ecological systems and in such a manner

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.


--- PAGE 398 ---
a~ IAS ACADEMY”

e Until CoP13, these meeting were held every two
years; since then, CoPs are held every three years.

e CoP16 is scheduled to occur from March 3-14, 2013
in Bangkok, Thailand.

CITES Role in Conservation

e Over the last several decades, CITES has helped
ensure global conservation of species.

e The Parties have adopted a 5-year strategic vision
to guide CITES through 2013.

The plan sets the following goals:

e Ensure compliance with and implementation and
enforcement of the Convention.

e Secure the necessary financial resources and
means for the operation and implementation of
the Convention.

e Contribute to significantly reducing the rate of
biodiversity loss by ensuring that CITES and other
multilateral instruments and processes are
coherent and mutually supportive.

Do you know?
The International Solar Alliance (ISA) is all set to

usher in the introduction of solar energy technology
to drive biodiversity conservation and livelihood
ivities at Chilika.

28.6. TRAFFIC: THE WILDLIFE TRADE
MONITORING NETWORK

¢ TRAFFIC is a joint conservation programme of
WWF and IUCN.

¢ It was established in 1976 by the Species Survival
Commission of IUCN, principally as a response to
the entry into force during the previous year of
the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES).

e TRAFFIC is an international network, consisting
of TRAFFIC International, based in Cambridge,
UK with offices on five continents.

e Since its founding, TRAFFIC has grown to become
the world’s largest wildlife trade monitoring

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any means, without permission in writing.

programme, and a global expert on wildlife trade
issues.

¢ This non-governmental organization undertakes

its activities in close collaboration with
governments and the Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and
Flora (CITES) Secretariat.

Goal

e To ensure that trade in wild plants and animals is
not a threat to the conservation of nature.

Vision

e Is of a world in which trade in wild animals and
plants will be managed at sustainable levels
without damaging the integrity of ecological
systems and in such a manner that it makes a
significant contribution to human needs, supports
local and national economies and helps to motivate
commitments to the conservation of wild species
and their habitats.

28.7,>CONVENTION ON THE
CONSERVATION OF MIGRATORY
SPECIES (CMS)

¢ The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory
Species of Wild Animals (also known as CMS or
Bonn Convention) aims to conserve terrestrial,
aquatic and avian migratory species throughout
their range.

e [tis an intergovernmental treaty, concluded under
the aegis of the United Nations Environment
Programme, concerned with the conservation of
wildlife and habitats on a global scale.

e The Convention’s has membership of 117 Parties
from Africa, Central and South America, Asia,
Europe and Oceania.

e The only global convention specializing in the
conservation of migratory species, their habitats
and migration routes, CMS complements and co-
operates with a number of other international
organizations, NGOs and partners in the media as
well as in the corporate sector.


--- PAGE 399 ---
www freeupscmaterials.org


--- PAGE 400 ---
SHANKAR OTE.

while others migrate regularly in annual
migration cycles

Bengal Florican exhibits transboundary
movements, and its migration exposes it to threats
such as land use changes, collision with power
transmission line at boundary area of India-Nepal
and probable power-line collisions.

Animal culture, the learning of non-human
species through socially transmitted behaviours,
is being linked to conservation action for the first
time. The Convention on the Conservation on
Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) has
been spearheading efforts to use scientific
knowledge on animal culture, to better protect
endangered wildlife.

28.8. COALITION AGAINST WILDLIFE
TRAFFICKING (CAWT)

e The Coalition Against Wildlife Trafficking (CAWT)
aims to focus public and political attention and
resources on ending the illegal trade in wildlife
and wildlife products.

¢ Initiated in 2005, CAWT is a unique voluntary
public-private coalition of like-minded
governments and organizations sharing a common
purpose.

Fa
A

The Coalition complements and reinforces existing
national, regional and international efforts, including
the work of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species, which monitors and regulates
international trade in endangered and threatened
species and their derivatives.

The CAWT organisation is not directly involved in
any enforcement activities.

28.9. THEINTERNATIONAL TROPICAL
TIMBER ORGANIZATION (ITTO)

° ITTO is an intergovernmental organization,
under UN (1986) promoting the conservation and
sustainable management, use and trade of
tropical forest resources. Its members represent
about 80% of the world’s tropical forests and
90% of the global tropical timber trade.

e Like all commodity organizations it is concerned
with trade and industry, but like an environmental
agreement it also pays considerable attention to
the sustainable management of natural resources.

e it manages its own program of projects and other
activities, enabling it to quickly test and
operationalize its policy work.

e ITTO develops internationally agreed policy
documents to promote sustainable forest
management and forest conservation and assists
tropical member countries to adapt such policies

CAWT is leveraging the combined strengths of

government and nongovernmental partners to:

¢ Improve Wildlife Law Enforcement by expanding
enforcement training and information sharing
and strengthening regional cooperative networks.

® Reduce consumer demand for illegally traded
wildlife by raising awareness of the impacts of
illegal wildlife trade on biodiversity and the
environment, livelihoods, and human health; its
links to organized crime; and the availability of
sustainable alternatives.

® Catalyse high-level political will to fight wildlife
trafficking by broadening support at the highest
political levels for actions to combat the illegal
trade in wildlife.

All Rights Reserved. No part of this material may be reproduced in any form or by any mean

to local circumstances and to implement them in
the field through projects.

In addition, ITTO collects, analyses and
disseminates data on the production and trade of
tropical timber and funds a range of projects and
other action aimed at developing industries at
both community and industrial scales.

28.10. UNITED NATIONS FORUM ON

FORESTS (UNFF)

e The Economic and Social Council of the United

Nations (ECOSOC), established the United
Nations Forum on Forests (UNFF) In October
2000, a subsidiary body with the main objective
to promote “the management, conservation and
sustainable development of all types of forests

s, without permission in writing.

