--- PAGE 1 ---
is

waa

fo te
|
aaa. “ \
NERS.

Se Sh oS as ae a a a

GOH CHENGLEONG H

'

: CCE ee
ei Lt

Saee| COHCHENG

————

. “Se See

tii il |i | ©}

Ee

LEON

SASS
> 1 ’
'

INDIA we LL
RS ESE REEEERK Aa
‘o« ROHRRGIAUS ;

2 Hy

--- PAGE 2 ---
Acknowledgements

The author and publishers are grateful to the following
permission to reproduce copyright photographs: Radio L
_ Times, Camera Press, Jabatan Penerangan Malaysia, GC.
_ Morgan, Philippine Tourist and Travel Association, Paul
_ Popper, Swiss National Tourist Office, J-K. St. Joseph US.
Information Service, Australian Tourist Commission,
"Institute of Geological Science. S.T. Fok, N.Z. High
~ Commission Malaysia, Royal Netherlands Meteorological
"Institute, Meteorologie National Paris, J. Mondaine. Royal
Observatory Hong Kong, Government Information Services
Hong Kong, Primary Production Department Singapore,
Australian News and Information Bureau, J. Allen Cash,
S.E.F Torino, National Film Board of Canada, Press
Information Bureau India, Central Office of Information
London, Elizabeth Meyer, Walkabout, Ministry of Culture
Singapore, Standard Triumph, United Nations and Society
r Cultural Relations with U.S.S.R.
Acknowledgements are credited with their respective
reproductions in the book. Every effort has been made to
) the holders of copyright to the reproductions, but
e cases Without success. To these, the author and
hers offer their apologies, trusting that they will accept

wing for

the

tions

department of the University of Oxford
.ctive of excellence in research, scholarship,

Contents

Metric Conversion Table a

PART I PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

1. The Earth and the Universe 1
Exploring the Universe, 1; The Solar System, 1;
# The shape of the Earth, 2, Evidence of the Earth’s
Sphericity, 2: The Earth’s Movements, 4; Day and
Night, 4; The Earth’s Revolution, 5; Dawn and
Twilight, 6; Mathematical Location of Places on
the Globe, 7; Latitude, 7; Longitude, 8; Longitude
and Time, 8: Standard Time and Time Zones, 9:
The International Date Line, 10; Questions and
Exercises, 10; Selected Cambridge Questions, 11.
2. The Earth’s Crust 12
The Structure of the Earth, 12; The Classification
of Rocks, 12; Igneous Rocks, 12 Sedimentary
Rocks, 13 Metamorphic Rocks, 13; The Influence
of Rock Types on Landscape, 14; Earth Move-
ments and the Major Landforms, 14; Types of
Mountains, 14; Types of Plateaux, 17; Types of
Plains, 18.
3. Vulcanism and Earthquakes 20
Landforms Associated with Vulcanic Activities,
20; Landforms of Igneous Intrusions, 20; The Ori-
gin of Volcanoes, 21; Types of Volcanoes, 22;
Extrusive Landforms, 22; Some Volcanic Erup-
tions, 23; The Distribution of Volcanoes in the
World, 24; Geysers and Hot Springs, 25; Ear-
thquakes, 26; Some Major Earthquakes, 26; The
Distribution of Earthquakes, 26; Questions and
Exercises, 26.
4. Weathering, Mass Movement and Groundwater
28
Weathering, 28; Mass Movement, 31; Groundwa-
ter, 33; The Water-Table, 34; Springs and Wells,

7. Arid or Desert Landforms 55
Types of Deserts, 55; The Mechanism of Arid Ero-
sion, 56 Landforms of Wind Erosion in Deserts,
57: Landforms of Wind Deposition in Deserts, 59:
Landforms due to Water Action in Deserts, 60:
Questions and Exercises, 6l.

8. Limestone and Chalk Landforms 62
Limestone and Chalk, 62; Characteristic Features
of a Karst Region, 62; The Major Limestone Reg-
ions of the World, 64; Human Activities in Karst
Regions, 64; Question and Exercises, 65.

9. Lakes 66
General, 66: The Formation and Origin of Lakes.
66: Lakes and Man, 69; Questions and Exercises,
Flin

10. Coastal Landforms 72
The Action of Waves, Tides and Currents, 72; The
Mechanism of Marine Erosion, 72; Coastal Fea-
tures of Erosion, 73; Coastal Features of Deposi-

tion, 75; Types of Coasts, 76; Coastlines of
Emergence., 77; Questions and Exercises, 78.
11. Islands and Coral Reefs 79

General, 79; Coral Reefs, 80; Types of Coral
Reefs, 81; The Probable Origin of Coral Reefs, 82;
Questions and Exercises 83.

12. The Oceans 84
Exploring the Oceans, 84; The Relief of the
Ocean, 85; The Deposits of the Ocean Floor, 86;
Salinity of the Ocean, 86; The Temperature of
Ocean Water, 86; The Movements of Ocean Cur-
rents, 87; The Circulation of the Atlantic Ocean,
88; The Circulation of the Pacific Ocean, 89; The
Indian Ocean Circulation, 90; Questions and
Exercises, 90; Selected Cambridge Questions. 91.

--- PAGE 3 ---
106: Precipitation, 108; Rainfall, 108; Pressure
Fee winds, 109; Land and Sea Breezes
| Monsoons, 111; Fohn Wind or Chinook Wind,
11: Cyclonic Activity, 112; Climatic Types and
ral Vegetation, 113; World Climatic Types,
and Exercises, 115; Selected Cam-

Hot, Wet Equatorial Climate 116
116; Climate, 116; Vegetation, 118,
Affecting the Development of Equatorial
Questions and Exercises, 120.
‘Monsoon and Tropical Marine
122
Seasons of the Tropical Mon-
The Retreating Monsoon, 124;
Climate, 124; Tropical Monsoon
ricultural Development in Mon-

Animal Life of the
fe in the Savanna, 131;
Development of the

136; Desert
7; Ques-

144; Economic Development of the Mediter-

tion, : L
145: Questions and Exercises,

ranean Regions,
147.
20. The Temperate Continental (Steppe) Climate

148
Distribution, 148; Climate, 148; Natural Vegeta-
tion, 150; Economic Development, 151; Questions ,
and Exercises, 153.

21. The Warm Temperate Eastern Margin (China _}

Type) Climate 155

Distribution, 155; Climate, 155; Natural Vegeta-

tion, 158; Economic Development, 158; Question

and Exercises, 161.

22. The Cool Temperate Western Margin (British

Type) Climate 163

Distribution, 163; Climate, 163; Natural Vegeta-

tion, 165; Economic Development, 165; Questions

and Exercises, 169.

23. The Cool Temperate Continental (Siberian)

Climate 170

Distribution, 170; Climate, 170; Natural Vegeta-

tion, 172) Economic Development, 173; Ques-

tions and Exercises, 175.

24. The Cool Temperate Eastern Margin (Lauren-

tian) Climate 176

Distribution, 176; Climate, 166; Economic

Development, 178; Fishing, 179; Questions and

Exercises, 181.

25. The Arctic or Polar Climate 183

Distribution, 183; Climate, 183; Tundra Vegeta-

tion, 184; The Importance and Recent Develop-—
ment of the Arctic Region, 185, Questtions and —
ee 186; Selected Cambridge Questions,

Conversion Scales for Temperature and Rainfall

40

10

10

110 120 130

100

10

oF = 20+32

160

150

140

130

120

110

E

3

a

ae!

5 38

Me 2)
m2
co
= &
a
(Ss)

ee

i. 2

E

3.2808 feet

= 0.6214 miles

1m.
1km.
1 foot

0.3048 m.

1mile = 1.6093 km.

tacre = 0.4047 hectares

eee hectare = 2.4711 acres
‘sq.km. =100 hectares = 247.1054 acres = 0.3861 sq. mile

‘acres = 2.5900 sq.km. = 258.9988 hectares

--- PAGE 4 ---
Part 1: Physical Geography

Chapter 1 The Earth and the Universe

Exploring the Universe
On a fine bright night when you look up at the sky.
it seems to be studded with stars. Little do you

realise that each of the stars is far bigger than the
earth on which we live. Some of the larger ones
have been estimated to be many millions of times the
size of the earth. These stars are not scattered
regularly in space; they occur in clusters, better
described as galaxies or nebulas. Each galaxy may
contain as many as 100 million stars. It is believed
that the earth’s own galaxy (the Milky Way) alone
contains as many as 100,000 million stars,

The stars appear small to us even through a
telescope because they are so far away. The light
from the nearest star travelling at the speed of light
(ie. 186,000 miles per second) takes something like
four years to reach us. A ray of light from the sun
takes. about eight minutes to reach the earth. Light
takes only a second to reach us from the moon.

The Solar System

The solar system comprises the Sun and its nine
planets’ (Fig. 1.) which are believed to have been
developed from the condensation of gases and other
lesser bodies. All the planets revolve round the Sun
in elliptical orbits. Like the earth, they shine only
by the reflected light of the sun. The Sun has a
surface temperature of 6,000°C. (10,800°F.) and
increases to 20 million°C. (36 million°F.) in the
interior, All over its surface are fiery gases that

leap up in whirls of glowing flames like a voleano
in eruption. In size, the Sun is almost unimaginable.
It is about 300,000 times as big as the earth!

Amongst the nine planets, Mercury is the smallest
and closest to the sun, only 36 million miles away.
It thus completes its orbit in a much shorter space
of time than does Earth. A year in Mercury is
only 88 days. Venus, twice the distance away from
the sun, is the next closest planet. It is often con-
sidered as ‘Earth's twin’ because of their close
proximity in size, mass (weight) and density. But no
other planet is in any way comparable to Barth which
has life and all the living things we see around us.
Like many other planets, the Earth has a natural*
satellite, the Moon, 238,900 miles away, that revolves
eastward around the Earth once in every 27 days.

The fourth planet from the sun is Mars which
has dark patches on its surface and is believed by
most professional astronomers to be the next planet
after Earth to have the possibility of some plant
life, Much attention has been focused on Mars to
explore the possibilities of extending man’s influence
to it. Next comes Jupiter, the largest planet in the
solar system. Its surface is made up of many gases
like hydrogen, helium, and methane. It is dis-
tinguished from other planets by its circular light
and dark bands, and the twelve satellites that circle
round it. As it is more than 485 million miles from
the Sun, its surface is very cold, probably about
-200°F. (-130°C.).

eee 1,783,000,000 miles —-,

pho pen oe seesen ao 485,000,000 mites~-—,

itt?

EARTH
MANS: JUPITER

downloaded from: shashidthakur23.blog.com Fig. 1 The Solar System—the Sun and the nine Planets

--- PAGE 5 ---
urn which has three

Another unique planet is Sat is the

rings and nine satellites around it. In size, it

second largest after Jupiter. It is so far from the
Sun that it takes 29 years to complete its orbit.

S h planet, Uranus, was not known to
re net the late eighteenth century when
it was first seen as a faint bluish-green disc through
a very powerful telescope. It is another giant planet,
50 times larger than Earth and 15 times as heavy.
Unlike other planets, Uranus orbits around the sun

in a clockwise direction from east to west with five
satellites revolving round it.

The two outermost planets in the solar system,
Neptune and Pluto are just visible with telescopes.
Their discoveries were the result of mathematical
calculations on their irregular gravitational effects
on neighbouring planetary bodies. Neptune closely
resembles Uranus, except that it has only two known
satellites and is probably much colder. Pluto is
smaller than Earth. As the orbits of the planets are
not circular but elliptical, the distance of Pluto from
the Sun during perihelion (i.e. when it is closest to
the Sun) is 2,766 million miles, and at aphelion
(Le. when it is farthest from the Sun) is 4,566 million
miles. A year in Pluto is no less than 247 years on
earth! Due to their very recent discovery and their
extreme remoteness from the earth, very little
is so far known about these last two planets.

The Shape of the Earth

. In the olden days, sailors feared to venture far into
the distant ocean because they thought the earth
was as flat as a table. They thought that when they
Feached the edge of the earth, they would slip down
perish in the bottomless ocean. This is, of

se, Not true, From years of accumulated know-
8& experience and observations in different parts
we know that the earth js round. Its
f has established fact, proved, and

; equatorial
diameter is

Evidence of the Earth’s Sphericity
There are many ways to prove that the earth is }
spherical. The following are some of them.
1. Circum-navigation of the earth. The first Voyage |
around the world by Ferdinand Magellan and his f
crew, from 1519 to 1522 proved beyond doubt that |
the earth is spherical. No traveller going round the }
world by land or sea has ever encountered an abrupt i
edge, over which he would fall. Modern air routes
and ocean navigation are based on the assumption
that the earth is round (Fig. 2).

{b) Abrupt drop at the edge of a table-like
earth

2. The circular horizon. The distant horizon
viewed from the deck of a ship at sea, or from a cliff
pogend 18 always and everywhere circular in shape.
ei Rees widens with increasing altitude
an only be seen o i . This
‘elie gis Ye on a spherical body.

B} Ship’s visibility. When a ship appears over the

flee horizon, the top of the mast is seen first before
ie ull. In the same Way, when it leaves harbout,

eaten Over the curved surface is equally i

A FLAT EARTH

Fig. 4 (b) A flat earth, the entire ship is seen at once
on a flat surface

Fig. 3 (a) Increasing altitude widens the circular hori-
zon. Viewed from Y the horizon would be
AB but from a higher viewpoint (X) a wider
horizon (C, D) would be seen

4. Sunrise and sunset. The sun rises and sets at
different times in different places. As the earth
rotates from west to east, places in the east see the
sun earlier than those in the west. If the earth were
flat, the whole world would have sunise and sunset
at the same time. But we know this is not so.
Fig. 5 illustrates this.

(b) Visible horizon remains the same regardless
of altitude. If the earth were flat the
horizon seen from either Y or X would be
the same

gradual. If the earth were flat, the entire ship would
be seen or obscured all at once. This is apparent
from Fig, 4.

Fig. 5 (a) Sun rises and sun sets at different times
for different places

A CURVED EARTH

line of sight

we em me me we

A SPHERICAL EARTH

Fig. 4 (a) The mast of a ship is seen before the hull

on curved horizon set at the same time

(b) The whole world will have sun rise or sun

--- PAGE 6 ---
5, The lunar eclipse. The shadow cast by the
earth on the moon during the lunar eclipse is always
circular. It takes the outline of an arc of a circle.
Only a sphere can cast such a circular shadow.
6. Planetary bodies are spherical. All observations
from telescopes reveal that the planetary bodies,
the Sun, Moon, satellites and stars have circular
outlines from whichever angle you see them. They
are strictly spheres. Earth, by analogy, cannot be
the only exception.
7. Driving poles on level ground on a curved earth.
Engineers when driving poles of equal length at
regular intervals on the ground have found that they
do not give a perfect horizontal level. The centre
pole normally projects slightly above the poles at
either end because of the curvature of the earth, as
illustrated in Fig. 6. Surveyors and field engineers
therefore have to make certain corrections for this
inevitable curvature, i.e. 8 inches to the mile.

‘centre pole projects above others:

Fig. 6 (a) The centre pole projects well above the
Poles at either end on a curved surface

The Earth’s Movement
Man is always conscious of the ‘apparent movement
of the sun’ and little realizes that the earth on which
he stands is constantly in motion, When the sun
disappears, he says that the sun sets and when it
emerges, he says that the sun rises. He is not the
least aware that the sun, in fact, does not rise or set,
it is ‘we’ who rise and we who set’! The earth moves
see a two distinct Ways: it rotates on its own
. vest to east once in every 24 hours, causing
y and night; it also revolves round the sun in a0

bit once j 5
Pictures taken from high a ce In every 365: days. causing the seasons
and th Be tie 36
Satellites show clearly the eae!
38 pethaps the most Day and Night

pront of the en the earth rotates on i

: ts i one
Portion of the earth’s pn exis, only

surface comes into the rays of

The earth viewed
from the moon.
The picture was
taken on the Apollo
8 mission of 1968
which prepared the
way for the moon
landing

Camera Press

ns

the sun and experiences daylight. The other portion
which is away from the sun’s rays will be in darkness.
As the earth rotates from west to east, every part of
the earth’s surface will be brought under the sun
at some time or other. A part of the earth’s surface
that emerges from darkness into the sun’s rays
experiences sunrise. Later, when it is gradually
obscured from the sun’s beams it experiences sunset.
The sun is, in fact, stationary and it is the earth which
rotates. The illusion is exactly the same as when we
travel in a fast-moving train. The trees and houses
around us appear to move and we feel that the
train is stationary. Fig. 7 explains the earth’s
Totation and the causes of day and night.

The Earth's Revolution .
When the earth revolves round the sun, it spins on
an elliptical orbit at a speed of 18.5 miles per second

Fig. 7 (a) Kuala Lumpur emerges from darkness
into daylight at sun rise when the earth
rotates into the sun’s rays

(b) The sun is directly overhead at Kuala
Lumpur or midday

(c) Kuala Lumpur passes from daylight into
darkness at sunset when the earth rotates
away from the sun

(d) Kuala Lumpur is directly away from the
sun at mid-night

or 66,600 m.p.h. One complete revc!ution takes
365+ days or a year. As it is not possible to show
a quarter of a day in the calendar, a normal year is
taken to be 365 days, and an extra day is added
every four years as a Leap Year.

1. Varying Lengths of Day and Night

The axis of the earth is inclined to the plane of the

ecliptic (the plane in which the earth orbits round

the sun) at an angle of 664°, giving rise to different

seasons and varying lengths of day and night (Fig. 8).

If the axis were perpendicular to this plane, all parts

of the globe would have equal days and nights at

all times of the year, but we know this is not so.

In the northern hemisphere in winter (December)
as we go northwards, the hours of darkness steadily
increase. At the Arctic Circle (66}°N.), the sun
never ‘rises’ and there is darkness for the whole day
in mid-winter on 22 December. Beyond the Arctic
Circle the number of days with complete darkness
increases, until we reach the North Pole (90°N.)
when half the year will have darkness. In the summer
(June) conditions are exactly reversed. Daylight
increases as we go polewards. At the Arctic Circle,
the sun never ‘sets’ at mid-summer (21 June) and
there is a complete 24-hour period of continuous
daylight. In summer the region north of the Arctic
Circle is popularly referred to as “Land of the Mid-
night Sun’. At the North Pole, there will be six
months of continuous daylight. Fig. 8(a) illustrates
the revolution of the earth and its inclination to the
plane of the ecliptic which cause the variation in
the length of day and night at different times of
the year.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Fig. 8 (a) The revolution of the earth and its efffects on
seasons and the varia tions of lengths of day
and night

- (b) A simplified diagram showing the
_ movement of the sun and thes Piseabes

darkness is
3 ay

d equinoxes meaning ‘equal nighty
two days all parts of the Worl
have equal days and nights After the Mag
equinox the sun appears to move north and js ven
tically overhead at the Tropic of Cancer (234°N.y On

about 21 June. This is known as the June or
solstice, when the no ‘
its longest day and shortest night. By about 22
December, the sun will be overhead at the Tyo fe
of Capricorn (231°S.). This is the winter solstice
when the southern hemisphere will have its longeg
day and shortest night. The Tropics thus mark the
limits of the overhead sun, for beyond these, the sup
is never overhead at any time of the year, Syoh
regions are marked by distinct seasonal changes_
spring, summer, autumn and winter. Beyond the
Arctic Circle (66}°N.) and the Antarctic Circle
(66!°S.) where darkness lasts for 6 months and
daylight is continuous for the remaining half of the
year, it is always cold; for even during the short
summer the sun is never high in the sky. Within the
tropics, as the midday sun varies very little from its
vertical position at noon daily, the four seasons. are
almost indistinguishable. Days and nights are al-

most equal all the year round Fig. 8(b).

3. Seasonal Changes and their Effects on Temperature
Summer is usually associated with much heat and
brightness and winter with cold and darkness. Why
should this be so? In summer, the sun is higher in
the sky than in winter. When the sun is overhead
a re fall almost vertically on the earth, con-
ie ae heat on a small area; temperature
Hae hs summers are always warm.
ee i : a Tays of the sun, come through
‘i Seas ess directly and have much of their
Reeh Oa ve atmospheric impurities and water
. S rays fall faintly and spread over

a great area. There is thus li
s little ine
peratures remain low. ioe ae

days are terme
because on these

In addition, days are longer than nights in summer

Ae ahs he, are shorter and less heat is lost.
gee 821M in total heat received and tem-
Sih tei in summer. Shorter days and longer
T account for the reverse effects.

Dawn and Twilight

The brief peri ‘ ‘
il ee between sunrise and full daylight

termed twilight. This is caused by the

rthern hemisphere wil] head

and that between sunset and complet —

during the periods of ‘light 4
egy PelO dawn and twilight —
Teceives diffused or refracted light from

the sun whilst it is still below the horizon. Since the
sun rises and sets in a vertical path at the equator
the period during which refracted light is received
js short. But in temperate latitudes, the sun rises
and sets in an oblique path and the period of refracted
light is longer. It is much longer still at the poles,
so that the winter darkness is really only twilight
most of the time. (Fig. 9).

(a)

twilight or dawn _

retracted night

zone of diffused or

night mts ‘ 8

Fig. 9 Dawn and Twilight
(a) at the equator
(b) in temperate latitude

At the equator the sun rises and sets almost vertically
so the time it takes to pass through the ‘twilight zone’
(A, B) will be shorter than for temperate latitudes where
the sun rises and sets obliquely. Here the time taken

to pass through the twilight zone (C, D) is longer

Mathematical Location of Places

On the Globe :

The earth’s surface is so vast that unless a mathe-
Matical method can be used, it is impossible to
locate any place on it. For this reason, imaginary

lines have been drawn on the globe. One set running
east and west, parallel to the equator, are called lines
of latitude. The other set runs north and south
passing through the poles and are called lines of
longitude (Fig. 10). The intersection of latitude
NP. (b)

NLP. (a)

SP.

Fig. 10 (a) Parallels of latitude
(b) Meridians of longitude

and longitude pin-points any place on the earth’s
surface, (Fig. llc.). For example Delhi is 28°37
N. and 77°10’ E.; London is 51°30’ N. and
0°5’W, and Sydney is 33°55 S. and 151°12 E. We
shall examine more closely how latitude and longitude
are determined and the role they play in mathematical

geography.

Latitude
Latitude is the angular distance of a point on the
earth’s surface, measured in degrees from the centre
of the earth as shown in Fig. 10(a). It is parallel to a
line, the equator, which lies midway between the
poles, These lines are therefore called parallels of
latitude, and on a globe are actually circles, becoming
smaller polewards. The equator represents 0° and
the North and South Poles are 90°N. and 90°S.
Between these points lines of latitude are drawn at
intervals of 1°. For precise location on a map,
each degree is sub-divided into 60 minutes and each
minute into 60 seconds. The most important lines
of latitude are the equator, the Tropic of Cancer
(234°N.), the Tropic of Capricorn (234°S.), the Arctic
Circle (66}°N.) and the Antarctic Circle (664°S.).
As the earth is slightly flattened at the poles, the
linear distance of a degree of latitude at the pole is
a little longer than that at the equator. For example
at the equator (0°) it is 68.704 miles, at 45° it is
69.054 miles and at the poles it is 69.407 miles.
The average is taken as 69 miles. This is a useful
figure and can be used for calculating distances to
any place. Bombay is 18-55° N; it is therefore 18-55 x
69 or 1280 miles from the equator. With the aid of
your atlas find the approximate distance of the follow-

ei

--- PAGE 8 ---
Paris, New York, Buenos Aires, and Auckland.

sR
Fig. 11 (a) The latitude of 38°N. is the angular
distance of a point on the earth's surface north of the
centre of the earth

SP.
(b) The longitude of 135°W. is the angular

distance west of the Prime Meridian
NP

(c) The precise location of
place X is latitude 52°N,
and longitude 27°W. where
they intersect

Longitude is an angular distance, measured in

the equator east or west of the Prime
Meridian, as indicated in Fig. 11(b). On
is shown as a series of semi-circles
pole passing through the
also called meridians. Un-

ing places from the equator: Singapore, Calcutta,

the Royal Astronomical Observatory F

pea ah near London. This is the Prime Meridian
(0°) from which all other meridians radiate eastwards
and westwards up to 180°. Since the earth is Spherica
and has a circumference calculated at 25,000 Miles, in
linear distance each of the 360 degrees of longity ds
is 25,000+360 or 69:1 miles. As the parallels of
latitude become shorter polewards, so the Meridiang
of longitude, which converge at the poles, enclose g
narrower space. The degree of longitude therefore
decreases in length. It is longest at the equato,
where it measures 69.172 miles. At 25° it is 62.7
miles, at 45° it is 49 miles, at 75° 18 miles ang at
the poles 0 mile. There is so much difference j,
the length of degrees of longitude outside the tropics,
that they are not used for calculating distances as
in the case of latitude. But they have one very
important function, they determine local time in
relation to G.M.T. or Greenwich Mean Time, which
is sometimes referred to as World Time.

Longitude and Time
Local Time. Since the earth makes one complete
revolution of 360° in one day or 24 hours, it Passes
through 15° in one hour or 1° in 4 minutes. The
earth rotates from west to east, so every 15° we Z0
eastwards, local time is advanced by 1 hour. Con-
versely, if we go westwards, local time is retarded
by 1 hour. We may thus conclude that places east
of Greenwich see the sun earlier and gain time,
whereas places west of Greenwich see the sun later
and lose time. If we know G.M.T., to find local
time, we merely have to add or subtract the difference
in the number of hours from the given longitude,
as illustrated below. A simple memory aid for this
will be East-Gain—Add (E.G.A.) and West-Lose-
Subtract (W.L.S.). You could coin your own rhymes
for the abbreviations. Hence when it is noon, in
London (Longitude 0°SW.), the local time for
Madras (80°E.) will be 5 hours 20 minutes ahead
of London or 5.20 pm. But the local time
for New York (74°W) will be 4 hours 56 minutes
behind London or 7.04 a.m. We can put it in another
way, when Londoners are having lunch, Indians will
have dinner and New Yorkers will have breakfast.
(Fig. 12). This is difficult to believe, but it is true.
The rotation of the earth round the sun means that
at any point in time different places will experience
a different time of day.
There are many ways of determining the longitude
of a place, The simplest way is to compare the
local time with G.M.T. by listening to B.B.C. radio

74°W

: (WEST-LOSE-SUBTRACT)

NEW YORK

I 4nrs. 56 mins.
!

7.04 a.m.

BREAKFAST

EGA |
(EAST-GAIN-ADD) |

= +5 hrs. 20 mins.

DINNER Fig. 12 Longitude and time —

when it is noon in London,
it is 5.20 p.m. in Madras

| (80° E.) and 7.04 a.m. in New
| York (74° W.).
I

For example: the captain of a ship in the midst of
the ocean wants to find out in which longitude his
ship lies. If G.M.T. is 8.00 a.m. and it is noon in
the local region, it means that he is four hours
ahead of Greenwich, and must be east of Greenwich.
His longitude is 4 x 15° or 60°E.

Standard Time and Time Zones

If each town were to keep the time of its own meridian,
there would be much difference in local time between
one town and the other. 10 a.m. in Georgetown,
Penang would be 10.10 in Kota Bharu (a difference of
2#° in longitude). In larger countries such as Canada,
US.A., China, India and U.S.S.R. the confusion
arising from the differences alone would drive the
people mad. Travellers going from one end of the
country to the other would have to keep changing
their watches if they wanted to keep their appoint-
ments. This is impracticable and very inconvenient.

To avoid all these difficulties, a system of standard
time is observed by all countries. Most countries
adopt their standard time from the central meridian
of their countries. The Indian Government has accep-
ted the meridian of 82:5° east for the standard time
which is Shrs. 30 mins, ahead of Greenwich Mean Time.
The whole world has in fact been divided into 24
Standard Time Zones, each of which differs from
the next by 15° in longitude or one hour in time.
Most countries adhere to this division but due to
the peculiar shapes and locations of some countries,
Teasonable deviations from the Standard Time Zones
cannot be avoided (Fig. 13).

Larger countries like U.S.A. Canada and

U.S.S.R. which have a great east-west stretch have

to adopt several time zones for practical purposes.

U.S.S.R. the largest country, which extends through

almost 165° of longitude is divided into eleven time

zones. When it is 10.00 pm. on a Monday night
in Leningrad, it will be almost 7.00 a.m. the following
Tuesday morning in Vladivostock. Travellers along
the Trans-Siberian Railway have to adjust their
watches almost a dozen times before they reach
their destination. Both Canada and U.S.A. have
five time zones—the Atlantic, Eastern, Central,
Mountain and Pacific Time Zones. The difference
between the local. time of the Atlantic and Pacific
coasts is nearly five hours (Fig. 13).

Fig. 13 The five time zones of North America

--- PAGE 9 ---
Strait, Fiji,
confusion of day and dat

groups that
of them kee}

onal Date Line
going ins time from Green-
I he reaches the meridian 180°E. when he
“42 hours ahead of G.M.T. Similarly in
- westwards, he loses 12 hours when he reaches
There is thus a total difference of 24 hours
day between the two sides of the 180°
This is the International Date Line where
nges by exactly one day when it is crossed.
er crossing the date line from east 10 west 1 With the aid of annotated diagrams, attempt
pe OF the loss in time he has made); tg prove that the earth is spherical. Give as
Bins LS saa noe oe a ae many reasons as you can.
e of the gain in e he en -
it is midnight, Friday on the

International Date Line is shown in Fig. 14.

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

: : 2. Explain with the aid of fairly accurate dia-
crossing the line eastwards, he gains grams, how the tilt of the earth’s axis on its
be eau aes ie! orbital plane around the sun causes:
periences the same calendar date twice: a) the seasons
oa seal eae os the variations in the length of day and
Cin BavIE AU ne night
Ocean to the Pacific Ocean and (©) the altitude of the midday sun to change
ae au ee at different times of the year.
Fee 3. Explain the differences between any three of
the following:
(a) perihelion and aphelion
(b) parallels of latitude and meridians of
longitude
(c) the earth’s rotation and the earth’s re-
volution
(d) solstice and equinox
(e) Standard Time and Greenwich Mean
Time

4. Explain any three of the following terms
connected with the earth and its planetary
relations:

i. galaxy
ii. Pime Meridian
iii. elliptical orbit

- International Date Line

Tonga and other islands to preven;
e in some of the islang
are cut through by the meridian. Some
p Asiatic or New Zealand standard time
others follow the American date and time. The

lll ain Di

her: Give an explanatory account of the

Or; Work out the following.

ii. When it is 2.00 p.m. in Greenwich, what

(a) Sydney (long. 151°E.) ‘
i. What is the approximate distance in a (b) Chicago, (long. 87°30°W.)
straight line between Cairo (lat. 30°0 N., (c) Bombay (long. 73°E.)
long. 31°S’E.) and Durban (lat. 29°57°S., iii, The captain of a ship observed that it
long. 30°59°E.)? was local noon. He turned on the radio
and listened to the 7.00 a.m. B.B.C.

is the local time of news. What was his longitude?

SELECTED QUESTIONS FROM CAMBRIDGE OVERSEAS SCHOOL CERTIFICATE PAPERS

1.

5

(a) Explain the meaning of the terms ‘Equinox’ and ‘Solstice’.
(b) With the aid of diagrams, show how they are related to the movements of the earth. (1967)
Answer the following:
(a) Describe any three experiments or observations which support the belief that the earth is roughly a
sphere.
(b) Explain why mean temperatures for London are lowest in winter.
(c) Explain why the local clock time in the Samoa Islands (171°W.) was noon on lst November when in
the Fiji Islands (178°E.), it was 11.00 a.m. on 2nd November. (1966) : :
Explain the following:
(a) Polar air routes follow great circles.
(b) When it is noon at Cairo (30°E.), the local time in New York (75°W.) is 5.00 a.m.
(c) On 21st March at noon, it was observed that the shadow cast by a wall 4 ft. 8 ins. high poin
ward and was 7 in. long. The observer was able to calculate his latitude to be about 7°N. (1965)
Select nvo of (a), (b), (c) and draw diagrams to illustrate your answers:
(a) i. Calculate the longitude of the position of a ship whose navigation officer observes that
Mean Time is 14.16 hours when the local time is noon.
ii. Explain the geographical facts which enable you to make the calculation.
(b) Explain fully why 25th December in New Zealand may be one of the hottest days of the year.
(c) Why must a traveller, when crossing North America from New York to the west coast,

watch at special places. (1964)
With the aid of annotated diagrams, explain the following:
(a) The apparent daily movement of the sun and its changes during the year as observed
i. at the Equator.
ii, ata place SO°N.
(b) The relationship between latitude and the angle of elevation of the noonday
Explain the effect of:
(a) Latitude on temperature.
(b) Latitude on the length of day and night.
(c) Either: Altitude on temperature.
Or: Longitude on time. (1961)

sun.

--- PAGE 10 ---
The Earth's Crust

the geography of the external
earth, it is essential that we have

ies within the earth’s crust. It is
know exactly how the earth was
million years ago. but from the
iptions, earthquake waves,
crustal borings the follow-

UPPER MANTLE

Fig. 16 A section showing how the continent (SIAL)
floats on the denser SIMA

here is estimated to be as high as 3,500°F., and the
core is subject to extremely high pressure. Under
such conditions, the core could be expected to be ina
liquid state. But recent studies through earthquake
waves have suggested that the innermost part of the
Core is probably a crystalline or solid mass.

Parts of the earth’s crust are immersed by oceans
and seas. These form the hydrosphere. Extending
skywards for over fifteen miles, the earth is enveloped
by a mass of gases which make up the atmosphere.

The Classification of Rocks

The earth’s crust is made up of various types of rocks,
differing from one another in texture, structure,
colour, permeability, mode of occurrence and degree
of Tesistance to denudation. A knowledge of these
Tocks is of paramount importance to geologists,
who study the composition and physical history of
the earth, but the geographer, too, needs a basic
knowledge of the most common rocks and their

_felationship with landforms. Rocks also form the
basis for soil, and determine to some extent the type
of natural vegetation and land use, SO we must have

a fair acquaintance with the rocks around us.

ly speaking, all rocks may be classified
three Major groups—igneous, sedimentary and
orphic, according to their origin and ap-

ee

are said to be Acid igneous rocks, such as

granite, are less dense and are lighter in colour
than basic rocks. These contain a greater proportion
of basic oxides, e.g. of iron, aluminium or magnesium.
and are thus denser and darker in colour. 3

In terms of origin there are two main classes of
igneous rocks.

1. Plutonic rocks. These are igneous rocks, formed
at some depth in the earth’s crust. They have cooled
and solidified slowly so that large, easily-recognized
crystals have been able to form. These intrusive
rocks, such as granite, diorite and gabbro, are
exposed at the surface by the processes of denudation
and erosion.

2. Volcanic rocks. These are molten rocks poured
out of volcanoes as lavas. They solidify rapidly on
the earth’s surface and the crystals are small.

Basalt is a common volcanic or extrusive rock
and forms lava flows, lava sheets and lava plateaux,
e.g. those of Antrim in Northern Ireland, the Deccan
Plateau in India and the Columbia-Snake Plateau in
U.S.A. Some kinds of basalt solidify in a very
peculiar manner to form long polygonal columns.
A well-known example is the columnar basalt of the
Giant’s Causeway in Antrim. Some of the molten
lava may push its way to the surface through clefts
and passages, solidifying as vertical dykes or hori-
zontal sills. Their origin and occurrence will be
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3.

Most igneous rocks are extremely hard and
resistant. For this reason, they are quarried for
road-making and polished as monuments and grave-
stones.

Sedimentary Rocks

Sedimentary rocks are formed from sediment ac-
cumulated over long periods, usually under water.
They are distinguished from the other rock types
in their characteristic layer formation and are
termed stratified rocks. The strata may vary in
thickness from a few inches to many feet. The rocks
may be coarse or fine-grained, soft or hard. The
materials that form sedimentary rocks may be
brought by streams, glaciers, winds or even animals.
They are non-crystalline and often contain fossils
of animals, plants and other micro-organisms. Sedi-
mentary rocks are thus the most varied in their
formation of all rocks. Sedimentary rocks are
classified according to their 4g¢ and different kinds
of rocks formed during the same period are grouped
together. It is more useful to know the characteristics
f the various kinds of rocks.

Sedimentary rocks may be
major categories in accordance with theis
composition
1. Mechanically formed sedimentary
rocks have been formed from the accumulation of

These

rocks.

materials derived from other rocks which have
been cemented together. Sands are probably
the most familiar sedimentary rocks. They are

made from sand grains, often quartz fragments
derived from granites. Their texture, composition
and colour vary tremendously. Many types of
sandstones have been quarried for building purposes
or for making grindstones. A coarser type of sand-
stone is known as grit. When larger pebbles are
firmly cemented to form a rock it is called cong

rate when the pebbles are rounded, or ! : when
the fragments are angular. The finer sedimentary
materials form clay, widely used for brick-making.
shale or mudstone. Sand and gravel may occur in
uncemented form.

2. Organically formed sedimentary rocks. These
rocks are formed from the remains of living organisms
such as corals or shellfish, whose fleshy parts have
been decomposed, leaving behind the hard shells.
The most common rocks formed in this way are of
the calcareous type. They include limestones and
chalk.

The carbonaceous rocks are also organically

formed but from vegetative matter—swamps and
forests. The pressure of overlying sediments has
compressed the plant remains into compact masses
of carbon which eventually become peat. lignite or
coal, all of which bear great economic value.
3. Chemically formed sedimentary rocks. Such
rocks are precipitated chemically from solutions of
one kind or another. Rock salts are derived from
strata which once formed the beds of seas or lakes.
Gypsum or calcium sulphate is obtained from the
evaporation of salt lakes, such as the Dead Sea,
which have a very high salinity. In similar ways,
potash and nitrates may be formed.

Metamorphic Rocks

All rocks whether igneous or sedimentary may
become metamorphic or changed rocks under great
heat and pressure. Their original character and
appearance may be greatly altered by such forces,
particularly during intense earth movements. In this
manner, clay may be metamorphosed into slate,
limestone into marble, sandstone into quartzite.

granite into gneiss, shale into schist and coal into