--- PAGE 1 ---
is

waa

fo te
|
aaa. “ \
NERS.

Se Sh oS as ae a a a

GOH CHENGLEONG H

'

: CCE ee
ei Lt

Saee| COHCHENG

————

. “Se See

tii il |i | ©}

Ee

LEON

SASS
> 1 ’
'

INDIA we LL
RS ESE REEEERK Aa
‘o« ROHRRGIAUS ;

2 Hy

--- PAGE 2 ---
Acknowledgements

The author and publishers are grateful to the following
permission to reproduce copyright photographs: Radio L
_ Times, Camera Press, Jabatan Penerangan Malaysia, GC.
_ Morgan, Philippine Tourist and Travel Association, Paul
_ Popper, Swiss National Tourist Office, J-K. St. Joseph US.
Information Service, Australian Tourist Commission,
"Institute of Geological Science. S.T. Fok, N.Z. High
~ Commission Malaysia, Royal Netherlands Meteorological
"Institute, Meteorologie National Paris, J. Mondaine. Royal
Observatory Hong Kong, Government Information Services
Hong Kong, Primary Production Department Singapore,
Australian News and Information Bureau, J. Allen Cash,
S.E.F Torino, National Film Board of Canada, Press
Information Bureau India, Central Office of Information
London, Elizabeth Meyer, Walkabout, Ministry of Culture
Singapore, Standard Triumph, United Nations and Society
r Cultural Relations with U.S.S.R.
Acknowledgements are credited with their respective
reproductions in the book. Every effort has been made to
) the holders of copyright to the reproductions, but
e cases Without success. To these, the author and
hers offer their apologies, trusting that they will accept

wing for

the

tions

department of the University of Oxford
.ctive of excellence in research, scholarship,

Contents

Metric Conversion Table a

PART I PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY

1. The Earth and the Universe 1
Exploring the Universe, 1; The Solar System, 1;
# The shape of the Earth, 2, Evidence of the Earth’s
Sphericity, 2: The Earth’s Movements, 4; Day and
Night, 4; The Earth’s Revolution, 5; Dawn and
Twilight, 6; Mathematical Location of Places on
the Globe, 7; Latitude, 7; Longitude, 8; Longitude
and Time, 8: Standard Time and Time Zones, 9:
The International Date Line, 10; Questions and
Exercises, 10; Selected Cambridge Questions, 11.
2. The Earth’s Crust 12
The Structure of the Earth, 12; The Classification
of Rocks, 12; Igneous Rocks, 12 Sedimentary
Rocks, 13 Metamorphic Rocks, 13; The Influence
of Rock Types on Landscape, 14; Earth Move-
ments and the Major Landforms, 14; Types of
Mountains, 14; Types of Plateaux, 17; Types of
Plains, 18.
3. Vulcanism and Earthquakes 20
Landforms Associated with Vulcanic Activities,
20; Landforms of Igneous Intrusions, 20; The Ori-
gin of Volcanoes, 21; Types of Volcanoes, 22;
Extrusive Landforms, 22; Some Volcanic Erup-
tions, 23; The Distribution of Volcanoes in the
World, 24; Geysers and Hot Springs, 25; Ear-
thquakes, 26; Some Major Earthquakes, 26; The
Distribution of Earthquakes, 26; Questions and
Exercises, 26.
4. Weathering, Mass Movement and Groundwater
28
Weathering, 28; Mass Movement, 31; Groundwa-
ter, 33; The Water-Table, 34; Springs and Wells,

7. Arid or Desert Landforms 55
Types of Deserts, 55; The Mechanism of Arid Ero-
sion, 56 Landforms of Wind Erosion in Deserts,
57: Landforms of Wind Deposition in Deserts, 59:
Landforms due to Water Action in Deserts, 60:
Questions and Exercises, 6l.

8. Limestone and Chalk Landforms 62
Limestone and Chalk, 62; Characteristic Features
of a Karst Region, 62; The Major Limestone Reg-
ions of the World, 64; Human Activities in Karst
Regions, 64; Question and Exercises, 65.

9. Lakes 66
General, 66: The Formation and Origin of Lakes.
66: Lakes and Man, 69; Questions and Exercises,
Flin

10. Coastal Landforms 72
The Action of Waves, Tides and Currents, 72; The
Mechanism of Marine Erosion, 72; Coastal Fea-
tures of Erosion, 73; Coastal Features of Deposi-

tion, 75; Types of Coasts, 76; Coastlines of
Emergence., 77; Questions and Exercises, 78.
11. Islands and Coral Reefs 79

General, 79; Coral Reefs, 80; Types of Coral
Reefs, 81; The Probable Origin of Coral Reefs, 82;
Questions and Exercises 83.

12. The Oceans 84
Exploring the Oceans, 84; The Relief of the
Ocean, 85; The Deposits of the Ocean Floor, 86;
Salinity of the Ocean, 86; The Temperature of
Ocean Water, 86; The Movements of Ocean Cur-
rents, 87; The Circulation of the Atlantic Ocean,
88; The Circulation of the Pacific Ocean, 89; The
Indian Ocean Circulation, 90; Questions and
Exercises, 90; Selected Cambridge Questions. 91.

--- PAGE 3 ---
106: Precipitation, 108; Rainfall, 108; Pressure
Fee winds, 109; Land and Sea Breezes
| Monsoons, 111; Fohn Wind or Chinook Wind,
11: Cyclonic Activity, 112; Climatic Types and
ral Vegetation, 113; World Climatic Types,
and Exercises, 115; Selected Cam-

Hot, Wet Equatorial Climate 116
116; Climate, 116; Vegetation, 118,
Affecting the Development of Equatorial
Questions and Exercises, 120.
‘Monsoon and Tropical Marine
122
Seasons of the Tropical Mon-
The Retreating Monsoon, 124;
Climate, 124; Tropical Monsoon
ricultural Development in Mon-

Animal Life of the
fe in the Savanna, 131;
Development of the

136; Desert
7; Ques-

144; Economic Development of the Mediter-

tion, : L
145: Questions and Exercises,

ranean Regions,
147.
20. The Temperate Continental (Steppe) Climate

148
Distribution, 148; Climate, 148; Natural Vegeta-
tion, 150; Economic Development, 151; Questions ,
and Exercises, 153.

21. The Warm Temperate Eastern Margin (China _}

Type) Climate 155

Distribution, 155; Climate, 155; Natural Vegeta-

tion, 158; Economic Development, 158; Question

and Exercises, 161.

22. The Cool Temperate Western Margin (British

Type) Climate 163

Distribution, 163; Climate, 163; Natural Vegeta-

tion, 165; Economic Development, 165; Questions

and Exercises, 169.

23. The Cool Temperate Continental (Siberian)

Climate 170

Distribution, 170; Climate, 170; Natural Vegeta-

tion, 172) Economic Development, 173; Ques-

tions and Exercises, 175.

24. The Cool Temperate Eastern Margin (Lauren-

tian) Climate 176

Distribution, 176; Climate, 166; Economic

Development, 178; Fishing, 179; Questions and

Exercises, 181.

25. The Arctic or Polar Climate 183

Distribution, 183; Climate, 183; Tundra Vegeta-

tion, 184; The Importance and Recent Develop-—
ment of the Arctic Region, 185, Questtions and —
ee 186; Selected Cambridge Questions,

Conversion Scales for Temperature and Rainfall

40

10

10

110 120 130

100

10

oF = 20+32

160

150

140

130

120

110

E

3

a

ae!

5 38

Me 2)
m2
co
= &
a
(Ss)

ee

i. 2

E

3.2808 feet

= 0.6214 miles

1m.
1km.
1 foot

0.3048 m.

1mile = 1.6093 km.

tacre = 0.4047 hectares

eee hectare = 2.4711 acres
‘sq.km. =100 hectares = 247.1054 acres = 0.3861 sq. mile

‘acres = 2.5900 sq.km. = 258.9988 hectares

--- PAGE 4 ---
Part 1: Physical Geography

Chapter 1 The Earth and the Universe

Exploring the Universe
On a fine bright night when you look up at the sky.
it seems to be studded with stars. Little do you

realise that each of the stars is far bigger than the
earth on which we live. Some of the larger ones
have been estimated to be many millions of times the
size of the earth. These stars are not scattered
regularly in space; they occur in clusters, better
described as galaxies or nebulas. Each galaxy may
contain as many as 100 million stars. It is believed
that the earth’s own galaxy (the Milky Way) alone
contains as many as 100,000 million stars,

The stars appear small to us even through a
telescope because they are so far away. The light
from the nearest star travelling at the speed of light
(ie. 186,000 miles per second) takes something like
four years to reach us. A ray of light from the sun
takes. about eight minutes to reach the earth. Light
takes only a second to reach us from the moon.

The Solar System

The solar system comprises the Sun and its nine
planets’ (Fig. 1.) which are believed to have been
developed from the condensation of gases and other
lesser bodies. All the planets revolve round the Sun
in elliptical orbits. Like the earth, they shine only
by the reflected light of the sun. The Sun has a
surface temperature of 6,000°C. (10,800°F.) and
increases to 20 million°C. (36 million°F.) in the
interior, All over its surface are fiery gases that

leap up in whirls of glowing flames like a voleano
in eruption. In size, the Sun is almost unimaginable.
It is about 300,000 times as big as the earth!

Amongst the nine planets, Mercury is the smallest
and closest to the sun, only 36 million miles away.
It thus completes its orbit in a much shorter space
of time than does Earth. A year in Mercury is
only 88 days. Venus, twice the distance away from
the sun, is the next closest planet. It is often con-
sidered as ‘Earth's twin’ because of their close
proximity in size, mass (weight) and density. But no
other planet is in any way comparable to Barth which
has life and all the living things we see around us.
Like many other planets, the Earth has a natural*
satellite, the Moon, 238,900 miles away, that revolves
eastward around the Earth once in every 27 days.

The fourth planet from the sun is Mars which
has dark patches on its surface and is believed by
most professional astronomers to be the next planet
after Earth to have the possibility of some plant
life, Much attention has been focused on Mars to
explore the possibilities of extending man’s influence
to it. Next comes Jupiter, the largest planet in the
solar system. Its surface is made up of many gases
like hydrogen, helium, and methane. It is dis-
tinguished from other planets by its circular light
and dark bands, and the twelve satellites that circle
round it. As it is more than 485 million miles from
the Sun, its surface is very cold, probably about
-200°F. (-130°C.).

eee 1,783,000,000 miles —-,

pho pen oe seesen ao 485,000,000 mites~-—,

itt?

EARTH
MANS: JUPITER

downloaded from: shashidthakur23.blog.com Fig. 1 The Solar System—the Sun and the nine Planets

--- PAGE 5 ---
urn which has three

Another unique planet is Sat is the

rings and nine satellites around it. In size, it

second largest after Jupiter. It is so far from the
Sun that it takes 29 years to complete its orbit.

S h planet, Uranus, was not known to
re net the late eighteenth century when
it was first seen as a faint bluish-green disc through
a very powerful telescope. It is another giant planet,
50 times larger than Earth and 15 times as heavy.
Unlike other planets, Uranus orbits around the sun

in a clockwise direction from east to west with five
satellites revolving round it.

The two outermost planets in the solar system,
Neptune and Pluto are just visible with telescopes.
Their discoveries were the result of mathematical
calculations on their irregular gravitational effects
on neighbouring planetary bodies. Neptune closely
resembles Uranus, except that it has only two known
satellites and is probably much colder. Pluto is
smaller than Earth. As the orbits of the planets are
not circular but elliptical, the distance of Pluto from
the Sun during perihelion (i.e. when it is closest to
the Sun) is 2,766 million miles, and at aphelion
(Le. when it is farthest from the Sun) is 4,566 million
miles. A year in Pluto is no less than 247 years on
earth! Due to their very recent discovery and their
extreme remoteness from the earth, very little
is so far known about these last two planets.

The Shape of the Earth

. In the olden days, sailors feared to venture far into
the distant ocean because they thought the earth
was as flat as a table. They thought that when they
Feached the edge of the earth, they would slip down
perish in the bottomless ocean. This is, of

se, Not true, From years of accumulated know-
8& experience and observations in different parts
we know that the earth js round. Its
f has established fact, proved, and

; equatorial
diameter is

Evidence of the Earth’s Sphericity
There are many ways to prove that the earth is }
spherical. The following are some of them.
1. Circum-navigation of the earth. The first Voyage |
around the world by Ferdinand Magellan and his f
crew, from 1519 to 1522 proved beyond doubt that |
the earth is spherical. No traveller going round the }
world by land or sea has ever encountered an abrupt i
edge, over which he would fall. Modern air routes
and ocean navigation are based on the assumption
that the earth is round (Fig. 2).

{b) Abrupt drop at the edge of a table-like
earth

2. The circular horizon. The distant horizon
viewed from the deck of a ship at sea, or from a cliff
pogend 18 always and everywhere circular in shape.
ei Rees widens with increasing altitude
an only be seen o i . This
‘elie gis Ye on a spherical body.

B} Ship’s visibility. When a ship appears over the

flee horizon, the top of the mast is seen first before
ie ull. In the same Way, when it leaves harbout,

eaten Over the curved surface is equally i

A FLAT EARTH

Fig. 4 (b) A flat earth, the entire ship is seen at once
on a flat surface

Fig. 3 (a) Increasing altitude widens the circular hori-
zon. Viewed from Y the horizon would be
AB but from a higher viewpoint (X) a wider
horizon (C, D) would be seen

4. Sunrise and sunset. The sun rises and sets at
different times in different places. As the earth
rotates from west to east, places in the east see the
sun earlier than those in the west. If the earth were
flat, the whole world would have sunise and sunset
at the same time. But we know this is not so.
Fig. 5 illustrates this.

(b) Visible horizon remains the same regardless
of altitude. If the earth were flat the
horizon seen from either Y or X would be
the same

gradual. If the earth were flat, the entire ship would
be seen or obscured all at once. This is apparent
from Fig, 4.

Fig. 5 (a) Sun rises and sun sets at different times
for different places

A CURVED EARTH

line of sight

we em me me we

A SPHERICAL EARTH

Fig. 4 (a) The mast of a ship is seen before the hull

on curved horizon set at the same time

(b) The whole world will have sun rise or sun

--- PAGE 6 ---
5, The lunar eclipse. The shadow cast by the
earth on the moon during the lunar eclipse is always
circular. It takes the outline of an arc of a circle.
Only a sphere can cast such a circular shadow.
6. Planetary bodies are spherical. All observations
from telescopes reveal that the planetary bodies,
the Sun, Moon, satellites and stars have circular
outlines from whichever angle you see them. They
are strictly spheres. Earth, by analogy, cannot be
the only exception.
7. Driving poles on level ground on a curved earth.
Engineers when driving poles of equal length at
regular intervals on the ground have found that they
do not give a perfect horizontal level. The centre
pole normally projects slightly above the poles at
either end because of the curvature of the earth, as
illustrated in Fig. 6. Surveyors and field engineers
therefore have to make certain corrections for this
inevitable curvature, i.e. 8 inches to the mile.

‘centre pole projects above others:

Fig. 6 (a) The centre pole projects well above the
Poles at either end on a curved surface

The Earth’s Movement
Man is always conscious of the ‘apparent movement
of the sun’ and little realizes that the earth on which
he stands is constantly in motion, When the sun
disappears, he says that the sun sets and when it
emerges, he says that the sun rises. He is not the
least aware that the sun, in fact, does not rise or set,
it is ‘we’ who rise and we who set’! The earth moves
see a two distinct Ways: it rotates on its own
. vest to east once in every 24 hours, causing
y and night; it also revolves round the sun in a0

bit once j 5
Pictures taken from high a ce In every 365: days. causing the seasons
and th Be tie 36
Satellites show clearly the eae!
38 pethaps the most Day and Night

pront of the en the earth rotates on i

: ts i one
Portion of the earth’s pn exis, only

surface comes into the rays of

The earth viewed
from the moon.
The picture was
taken on the Apollo
8 mission of 1968
which prepared the
way for the moon
landing

Camera Press

ns

the sun and experiences daylight. The other portion
which is away from the sun’s rays will be in darkness.
As the earth rotates from west to east, every part of
the earth’s surface will be brought under the sun
at some time or other. A part of the earth’s surface
that emerges from darkness into the sun’s rays
experiences sunrise. Later, when it is gradually
obscured from the sun’s beams it experiences sunset.
The sun is, in fact, stationary and it is the earth which
rotates. The illusion is exactly the same as when we
travel in a fast-moving train. The trees and houses
around us appear to move and we feel that the
train is stationary. Fig. 7 explains the earth’s
Totation and the causes of day and night.

The Earth's Revolution .
When the earth revolves round the sun, it spins on
an elliptical orbit at a speed of 18.5 miles per second

Fig. 7 (a) Kuala Lumpur emerges from darkness
into daylight at sun rise when the earth
rotates into the sun’s rays

(b) The sun is directly overhead at Kuala
Lumpur or midday

(c) Kuala Lumpur passes from daylight into
darkness at sunset when the earth rotates
away from the sun

(d) Kuala Lumpur is directly away from the
sun at mid-night

or 66,600 m.p.h. One complete revc!ution takes
365+ days or a year. As it is not possible to show
a quarter of a day in the calendar, a normal year is
taken to be 365 days, and an extra day is added
every four years as a Leap Year.

1. Varying Lengths of Day and Night

The axis of the earth is inclined to the plane of the

ecliptic (the plane in which the earth orbits round

the sun) at an angle of 664°, giving rise to different

seasons and varying lengths of day and night (Fig. 8).

If the axis were perpendicular to this plane, all parts

of the globe would have equal days and nights at

all times of the year, but we know this is not so.

In the northern hemisphere in winter (December)
as we go northwards, the hours of darkness steadily
increase. At the Arctic Circle (66}°N.), the sun
never ‘rises’ and there is darkness for the whole day
in mid-winter on 22 December. Beyond the Arctic
Circle the number of days with complete darkness
increases, until we reach the North Pole (90°N.)
when half the year will have darkness. In the summer
(June) conditions are exactly reversed. Daylight
increases as we go polewards. At the Arctic Circle,
the sun never ‘sets’ at mid-summer (21 June) and
there is a complete 24-hour period of continuous
daylight. In summer the region north of the Arctic
Circle is popularly referred to as “Land of the Mid-
night Sun’. At the North Pole, there will be six
months of continuous daylight. Fig. 8(a) illustrates
the revolution of the earth and its inclination to the
plane of the ecliptic which cause the variation in
the length of day and night at different times of
the year.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Fig. 8 (a) The revolution of the earth and its efffects on
seasons and the varia tions of lengths of day
and night

- (b) A simplified diagram showing the
_ movement of the sun and thes Piseabes

darkness is
3 ay

d equinoxes meaning ‘equal nighty
two days all parts of the Worl
have equal days and nights After the Mag
equinox the sun appears to move north and js ven
tically overhead at the Tropic of Cancer (234°N.y On

about 21 June. This is known as the June or
solstice, when the no ‘
its longest day and shortest night. By about 22
December, the sun will be overhead at the Tyo fe
of Capricorn (231°S.). This is the winter solstice
when the southern hemisphere will have its longeg
day and shortest night. The Tropics thus mark the
limits of the overhead sun, for beyond these, the sup
is never overhead at any time of the year, Syoh
regions are marked by distinct seasonal changes_
spring, summer, autumn and winter. Beyond the
Arctic Circle (66}°N.) and the Antarctic Circle
(66!°S.) where darkness lasts for 6 months and
daylight is continuous for the remaining half of the
year, it is always cold; for even during the short
summer the sun is never high in the sky. Within the
tropics, as the midday sun varies very little from its
vertical position at noon daily, the four seasons. are
almost indistinguishable. Days and nights are al-

most equal all the year round Fig. 8(b).

3. Seasonal Changes and their Effects on Temperature
Summer is usually associated with much heat and
brightness and winter with cold and darkness. Why
should this be so? In summer, the sun is higher in
the sky than in winter. When the sun is overhead
a re fall almost vertically on the earth, con-
ie ae heat on a small area; temperature
Hae hs summers are always warm.
ee i : a Tays of the sun, come through
‘i Seas ess directly and have much of their
Reeh Oa ve atmospheric impurities and water
. S rays fall faintly and spread over

a great area. There is thus li
s little ine
peratures remain low. ioe ae

days are terme
because on these

In addition, days are longer than nights in summer

Ae ahs he, are shorter and less heat is lost.
gee 821M in total heat received and tem-
Sih tei in summer. Shorter days and longer
T account for the reverse effects.

Dawn and Twilight

The brief peri ‘ ‘
il ee between sunrise and full daylight

termed twilight. This is caused by the

rthern hemisphere wil] head

and that between sunset and complet —

during the periods of ‘light 4
egy PelO dawn and twilight —
Teceives diffused or refracted light from

the sun whilst it is still below the horizon. Since the
sun rises and sets in a vertical path at the equator
the period during which refracted light is received
js short. But in temperate latitudes, the sun rises
and sets in an oblique path and the period of refracted
light is longer. It is much longer still at the poles,
so that the winter darkness is really only twilight
most of the time. (Fig. 9).

(a)

twilight or dawn _

retracted night

zone of diffused or

night mts ‘ 8

Fig. 9 Dawn and Twilight
(a) at the equator
(b) in temperate latitude

At the equator the sun rises and sets almost vertically
so the time it takes to pass through the ‘twilight zone’
(A, B) will be shorter than for temperate latitudes where
the sun rises and sets obliquely. Here the time taken

to pass through the twilight zone (C, D) is longer

Mathematical Location of Places

On the Globe :

The earth’s surface is so vast that unless a mathe-
Matical method can be used, it is impossible to
locate any place on it. For this reason, imaginary

lines have been drawn on the globe. One set running
east and west, parallel to the equator, are called lines
of latitude. The other set runs north and south
passing through the poles and are called lines of
longitude (Fig. 10). The intersection of latitude
NP. (b)

NLP. (a)

SP.

Fig. 10 (a) Parallels of latitude
(b) Meridians of longitude

and longitude pin-points any place on the earth’s
surface, (Fig. llc.). For example Delhi is 28°37
N. and 77°10’ E.; London is 51°30’ N. and
0°5’W, and Sydney is 33°55 S. and 151°12 E. We
shall examine more closely how latitude and longitude
are determined and the role they play in mathematical

geography.

Latitude
Latitude is the angular distance of a point on the
earth’s surface, measured in degrees from the centre
of the earth as shown in Fig. 10(a). It is parallel to a
line, the equator, which lies midway between the
poles, These lines are therefore called parallels of
latitude, and on a globe are actually circles, becoming
smaller polewards. The equator represents 0° and
the North and South Poles are 90°N. and 90°S.
Between these points lines of latitude are drawn at
intervals of 1°. For precise location on a map,
each degree is sub-divided into 60 minutes and each
minute into 60 seconds. The most important lines
of latitude are the equator, the Tropic of Cancer
(234°N.), the Tropic of Capricorn (234°S.), the Arctic
Circle (66}°N.) and the Antarctic Circle (664°S.).
As the earth is slightly flattened at the poles, the
linear distance of a degree of latitude at the pole is
a little longer than that at the equator. For example
at the equator (0°) it is 68.704 miles, at 45° it is
69.054 miles and at the poles it is 69.407 miles.
The average is taken as 69 miles. This is a useful
figure and can be used for calculating distances to
any place. Bombay is 18-55° N; it is therefore 18-55 x
69 or 1280 miles from the equator. With the aid of
your atlas find the approximate distance of the follow-

ei

--- PAGE 8 ---
Paris, New York, Buenos Aires, and Auckland.

sR
Fig. 11 (a) The latitude of 38°N. is the angular
distance of a point on the earth's surface north of the
centre of the earth

SP.
(b) The longitude of 135°W. is the angular

distance west of the Prime Meridian
NP

(c) The precise location of
place X is latitude 52°N,
and longitude 27°W. where
they intersect

Longitude is an angular distance, measured in

the equator east or west of the Prime
Meridian, as indicated in Fig. 11(b). On
is shown as a series of semi-circles
pole passing through the
also called meridians. Un-

ing places from the equator: Singapore, Calcutta,

the Royal Astronomical Observatory F

pea ah near London. This is the Prime Meridian
(0°) from which all other meridians radiate eastwards
and westwards up to 180°. Since the earth is Spherica
and has a circumference calculated at 25,000 Miles, in
linear distance each of the 360 degrees of longity ds
is 25,000+360 or 69:1 miles. As the parallels of
latitude become shorter polewards, so the Meridiang
of longitude, which converge at the poles, enclose g
narrower space. The degree of longitude therefore
decreases in length. It is longest at the equato,
where it measures 69.172 miles. At 25° it is 62.7
miles, at 45° it is 49 miles, at 75° 18 miles ang at
the poles 0 mile. There is so much difference j,
the length of degrees of longitude outside the tropics,
that they are not used for calculating distances as
in the case of latitude. But they have one very
important function, they determine local time in
relation to G.M.T. or Greenwich Mean Time, which
is sometimes referred to as World Time.

Longitude and Time
Local Time. Since the earth makes one complete
revolution of 360° in one day or 24 hours, it Passes
through 15° in one hour or 1° in 4 minutes. The
earth rotates from west to east, so every 15° we Z0
eastwards, local time is advanced by 1 hour. Con-
versely, if we go westwards, local time is retarded
by 1 hour. We may thus conclude that places east
of Greenwich see the sun earlier and gain time,
whereas places west of Greenwich see the sun later
and lose time. If we know G.M.T., to find local
time, we merely have to add or subtract the difference
in the number of hours from the given longitude,
as illustrated below. A simple memory aid for this
will be East-Gain—Add (E.G.A.) and West-Lose-
Subtract (W.L.S.). You could coin your own rhymes
for the abbreviations. Hence when it is noon, in
London (Longitude 0°SW.), the local time for
Madras (80°E.) will be 5 hours 20 minutes ahead
of London or 5.20 pm. But the local time
for New York (74°W) will be 4 hours 56 minutes
behind London or 7.04 a.m. We can put it in another
way, when Londoners are having lunch, Indians will
have dinner and New Yorkers will have breakfast.
(Fig. 12). This is difficult to believe, but it is true.
The rotation of the earth round the sun means that
at any point in time different places will experience
a different time of day.
There are many ways of determining the longitude
of a place, The simplest way is to compare the
local time with G.M.T. by listening to B.B.C. radio

74°W

: (WEST-LOSE-SUBTRACT)

NEW YORK

I 4nrs. 56 mins.
!

7.04 a.m.

BREAKFAST

EGA |
(EAST-GAIN-ADD) |

= +5 hrs. 20 mins.

DINNER Fig. 12 Longitude and time —

when it is noon in London,
it is 5.20 p.m. in Madras

| (80° E.) and 7.04 a.m. in New
| York (74° W.).
I

For example: the captain of a ship in the midst of
the ocean wants to find out in which longitude his
ship lies. If G.M.T. is 8.00 a.m. and it is noon in
the local region, it means that he is four hours
ahead of Greenwich, and must be east of Greenwich.
His longitude is 4 x 15° or 60°E.

Standard Time and Time Zones

If each town were to keep the time of its own meridian,
there would be much difference in local time between
one town and the other. 10 a.m. in Georgetown,
Penang would be 10.10 in Kota Bharu (a difference of
2#° in longitude). In larger countries such as Canada,
US.A., China, India and U.S.S.R. the confusion
arising from the differences alone would drive the
people mad. Travellers going from one end of the
country to the other would have to keep changing
their watches if they wanted to keep their appoint-
ments. This is impracticable and very inconvenient.

To avoid all these difficulties, a system of standard
time is observed by all countries. Most countries
adopt their standard time from the central meridian
of their countries. The Indian Government has accep-
ted the meridian of 82:5° east for the standard time
which is Shrs. 30 mins, ahead of Greenwich Mean Time.
The whole world has in fact been divided into 24
Standard Time Zones, each of which differs from
the next by 15° in longitude or one hour in time.
Most countries adhere to this division but due to
the peculiar shapes and locations of some countries,
Teasonable deviations from the Standard Time Zones
cannot be avoided (Fig. 13).

Larger countries like U.S.A. Canada and

U.S.S.R. which have a great east-west stretch have

to adopt several time zones for practical purposes.

U.S.S.R. the largest country, which extends through

almost 165° of longitude is divided into eleven time

zones. When it is 10.00 pm. on a Monday night
in Leningrad, it will be almost 7.00 a.m. the following
Tuesday morning in Vladivostock. Travellers along
the Trans-Siberian Railway have to adjust their
watches almost a dozen times before they reach
their destination. Both Canada and U.S.A. have
five time zones—the Atlantic, Eastern, Central,
Mountain and Pacific Time Zones. The difference
between the local. time of the Atlantic and Pacific
coasts is nearly five hours (Fig. 13).

Fig. 13 The five time zones of North America

--- PAGE 9 ---
Strait, Fiji,
confusion of day and dat

groups that
of them kee}

onal Date Line
going ins time from Green-
I he reaches the meridian 180°E. when he
“42 hours ahead of G.M.T. Similarly in
- westwards, he loses 12 hours when he reaches
There is thus a total difference of 24 hours
day between the two sides of the 180°
This is the International Date Line where
nges by exactly one day when it is crossed.
er crossing the date line from east 10 west 1 With the aid of annotated diagrams, attempt
pe OF the loss in time he has made); tg prove that the earth is spherical. Give as
Bins LS saa noe oe a ae many reasons as you can.
e of the gain in e he en -
it is midnight, Friday on the

International Date Line is shown in Fig. 14.

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

: : 2. Explain with the aid of fairly accurate dia-
crossing the line eastwards, he gains grams, how the tilt of the earth’s axis on its
be eau aes ie! orbital plane around the sun causes:
periences the same calendar date twice: a) the seasons
oa seal eae os the variations in the length of day and
Cin BavIE AU ne night
Ocean to the Pacific Ocean and (©) the altitude of the midday sun to change
ae au ee at different times of the year.
Fee 3. Explain the differences between any three of
the following:
(a) perihelion and aphelion
(b) parallels of latitude and meridians of
longitude
(c) the earth’s rotation and the earth’s re-
volution
(d) solstice and equinox
(e) Standard Time and Greenwich Mean
Time

4. Explain any three of the following terms
connected with the earth and its planetary
relations:

i. galaxy
ii. Pime Meridian
iii. elliptical orbit

- International Date Line

Tonga and other islands to preven;
e in some of the islang
are cut through by the meridian. Some
p Asiatic or New Zealand standard time
others follow the American date and time. The

lll ain Di

her: Give an explanatory account of the

Or; Work out the following.

ii. When it is 2.00 p.m. in Greenwich, what

(a) Sydney (long. 151°E.) ‘
i. What is the approximate distance in a (b) Chicago, (long. 87°30°W.)
straight line between Cairo (lat. 30°0 N., (c) Bombay (long. 73°E.)
long. 31°S’E.) and Durban (lat. 29°57°S., iii, The captain of a ship observed that it
long. 30°59°E.)? was local noon. He turned on the radio
and listened to the 7.00 a.m. B.B.C.

is the local time of news. What was his longitude?

SELECTED QUESTIONS FROM CAMBRIDGE OVERSEAS SCHOOL CERTIFICATE PAPERS

1.

5

(a) Explain the meaning of the terms ‘Equinox’ and ‘Solstice’.
(b) With the aid of diagrams, show how they are related to the movements of the earth. (1967)
Answer the following:
(a) Describe any three experiments or observations which support the belief that the earth is roughly a
sphere.
(b) Explain why mean temperatures for London are lowest in winter.
(c) Explain why the local clock time in the Samoa Islands (171°W.) was noon on lst November when in
the Fiji Islands (178°E.), it was 11.00 a.m. on 2nd November. (1966) : :
Explain the following:
(a) Polar air routes follow great circles.
(b) When it is noon at Cairo (30°E.), the local time in New York (75°W.) is 5.00 a.m.
(c) On 21st March at noon, it was observed that the shadow cast by a wall 4 ft. 8 ins. high poin
ward and was 7 in. long. The observer was able to calculate his latitude to be about 7°N. (1965)
Select nvo of (a), (b), (c) and draw diagrams to illustrate your answers:
(a) i. Calculate the longitude of the position of a ship whose navigation officer observes that
Mean Time is 14.16 hours when the local time is noon.
ii. Explain the geographical facts which enable you to make the calculation.
(b) Explain fully why 25th December in New Zealand may be one of the hottest days of the year.
(c) Why must a traveller, when crossing North America from New York to the west coast,

watch at special places. (1964)
With the aid of annotated diagrams, explain the following:
(a) The apparent daily movement of the sun and its changes during the year as observed
i. at the Equator.
ii, ata place SO°N.
(b) The relationship between latitude and the angle of elevation of the noonday
Explain the effect of:
(a) Latitude on temperature.
(b) Latitude on the length of day and night.
(c) Either: Altitude on temperature.
Or: Longitude on time. (1961)

sun.

--- PAGE 10 ---
The Earth's Crust

the geography of the external
earth, it is essential that we have

ies within the earth’s crust. It is
know exactly how the earth was
million years ago. but from the
iptions, earthquake waves,
crustal borings the follow-

UPPER MANTLE

Fig. 16 A section showing how the continent (SIAL)
floats on the denser SIMA

here is estimated to be as high as 3,500°F., and the
core is subject to extremely high pressure. Under
such conditions, the core could be expected to be ina
liquid state. But recent studies through earthquake
waves have suggested that the innermost part of the
Core is probably a crystalline or solid mass.

Parts of the earth’s crust are immersed by oceans
and seas. These form the hydrosphere. Extending
skywards for over fifteen miles, the earth is enveloped
by a mass of gases which make up the atmosphere.

The Classification of Rocks

The earth’s crust is made up of various types of rocks,
differing from one another in texture, structure,
colour, permeability, mode of occurrence and degree
of Tesistance to denudation. A knowledge of these
Tocks is of paramount importance to geologists,
who study the composition and physical history of
the earth, but the geographer, too, needs a basic
knowledge of the most common rocks and their

_felationship with landforms. Rocks also form the
basis for soil, and determine to some extent the type
of natural vegetation and land use, SO we must have

a fair acquaintance with the rocks around us.

ly speaking, all rocks may be classified
three Major groups—igneous, sedimentary and
orphic, according to their origin and ap-

ee

are said to be Acid igneous rocks, such as

granite, are less dense and are lighter in colour
than basic rocks. These contain a greater proportion
of basic oxides, e.g. of iron, aluminium or magnesium.
and are thus denser and darker in colour. 3

In terms of origin there are two main classes of
igneous rocks.

1. Plutonic rocks. These are igneous rocks, formed
at some depth in the earth’s crust. They have cooled
and solidified slowly so that large, easily-recognized
crystals have been able to form. These intrusive
rocks, such as granite, diorite and gabbro, are
exposed at the surface by the processes of denudation
and erosion.

2. Volcanic rocks. These are molten rocks poured
out of volcanoes as lavas. They solidify rapidly on
the earth’s surface and the crystals are small.

Basalt is a common volcanic or extrusive rock
and forms lava flows, lava sheets and lava plateaux,
e.g. those of Antrim in Northern Ireland, the Deccan
Plateau in India and the Columbia-Snake Plateau in
U.S.A. Some kinds of basalt solidify in a very
peculiar manner to form long polygonal columns.
A well-known example is the columnar basalt of the
Giant’s Causeway in Antrim. Some of the molten
lava may push its way to the surface through clefts
and passages, solidifying as vertical dykes or hori-
zontal sills. Their origin and occurrence will be
discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3.

Most igneous rocks are extremely hard and
resistant. For this reason, they are quarried for
road-making and polished as monuments and grave-
stones.

Sedimentary Rocks

Sedimentary rocks are formed from sediment ac-
cumulated over long periods, usually under water.
They are distinguished from the other rock types
in their characteristic layer formation and are
termed stratified rocks. The strata may vary in
thickness from a few inches to many feet. The rocks
may be coarse or fine-grained, soft or hard. The
materials that form sedimentary rocks may be
brought by streams, glaciers, winds or even animals.
They are non-crystalline and often contain fossils
of animals, plants and other micro-organisms. Sedi-
mentary rocks are thus the most varied in their
formation of all rocks. Sedimentary rocks are
classified according to their 4g¢ and different kinds
of rocks formed during the same period are grouped
together. It is more useful to know the characteristics
f the various kinds of rocks.

Sedimentary rocks may be
major categories in accordance with theis
composition
1. Mechanically formed sedimentary
rocks have been formed from the accumulation of

These

rocks.

materials derived from other rocks which have
been cemented together. Sands are probably
the most familiar sedimentary rocks. They are

made from sand grains, often quartz fragments
derived from granites. Their texture, composition
and colour vary tremendously. Many types of
sandstones have been quarried for building purposes
or for making grindstones. A coarser type of sand-
stone is known as grit. When larger pebbles are
firmly cemented to form a rock it is called cong

rate when the pebbles are rounded, or ! : when
the fragments are angular. The finer sedimentary
materials form clay, widely used for brick-making.
shale or mudstone. Sand and gravel may occur in
uncemented form.

2. Organically formed sedimentary rocks. These
rocks are formed from the remains of living organisms
such as corals or shellfish, whose fleshy parts have
been decomposed, leaving behind the hard shells.
The most common rocks formed in this way are of
the calcareous type. They include limestones and
chalk.

The carbonaceous rocks are also organically

formed but from vegetative matter—swamps and
forests. The pressure of overlying sediments has
compressed the plant remains into compact masses
of carbon which eventually become peat. lignite or
coal, all of which bear great economic value.
3. Chemically formed sedimentary rocks. Such
rocks are precipitated chemically from solutions of
one kind or another. Rock salts are derived from
strata which once formed the beds of seas or lakes.
Gypsum or calcium sulphate is obtained from the
evaporation of salt lakes, such as the Dead Sea,
which have a very high salinity. In similar ways,
potash and nitrates may be formed.

Metamorphic Rocks

All rocks whether igneous or sedimentary may
become metamorphic or changed rocks under great
heat and pressure. Their original character and
appearance may be greatly altered by such forces,
particularly during intense earth movements. In this
manner, clay may be metamorphosed into slate,
limestone into marble, sandstone into quartzite.

granite into gneiss, shale into schist and coal into

--- PAGE 11 ---
pected limestone hill near Kuala Lumpur. Compare
this hill with the limestone features shown in Chapter7
Jabatan Penerangan

2 Influence of Rock Types
ndscape
“appearance and characteristic features of land-
are greatly influenced by the underlying rock
Softer rocks like clay and shale are worn down
‘than harder rocks like granite.
est Malaysia the resistant granites form
| of the Main Range and the Eastern
several peaks rise to over 2,000 feet.
ne of smooth slopes and rounded
st peak in West Malaysia,
186 feet) is composed of even more
hales, schists and sandstones,
the much lower, rounded
s form flat plains. The
of their permeability,
hills such as those near

er, rain,

frost, sun, wind, glaciers and waves, so that ou,
present landforms are very varied and diverse. But
these agents only modify the pattern of mountains
plateaux and plains which have been modelled i
movements of the earth’s crust. j

Since the dawn of geological time, no less than
nine orogenic or mountain building movements
have taken place, folding and fracturing the earth’y
crust. Some of them occurred in Pre-Cambrian
times between 600-3,500 million years ago. The
three more recent orogenies are the Caledonian,
Hercynian and Alpine. The < about 320
million years ago raised the mountains of Scandinavia
and Scotland, and is represented in North America,
These ancient mountains have been worn down and
no longer exhibit the striking forms that they must
once have had. In a later period, during the Her
cynian earth movements about 240 million years ago,
were formed such ranges as the Ural Mountains,
the Pennines and Welsh Highlands in Britain, the
Harz Mountains in Germany, the Appalachians in
America as well as the high plateaux of Siberia and
China. These mountains have also been reduced in
size by the various sculpturing forces.

We are now living in an era very close to the last
of the major orogenic movements of the earth,
the Alpine, about 30 million years ago. Young fold
mountain ranges were buckled up and overthrust on a
gigantic scale. Being the most recently formed,
these ranges, such as the Alps, Himalayas, Andes
and Rockies (shown in Fig. 17) are the loftiest and
the most imposing. Their peaks are sometimes
several miles high. But the time will come when
these lofty ranges will be lowered like those that
existed before them. From the eroded materials,
new rocks will be formed, later to be uplifted to form
the next generation of mountains.

Types of Mountains

Mountains make up a large proportion of the
earth’s surface. Based on their mode of formation,
four main types of mountains can be distinguished.
1. Fold mountains. These mountains are by far the
Most widespread and also the most important.
They are caused by large-scale earth movements.
when stresses are set up in the earth’s crust. Such
Stresses may be due to the increased load of the
overlying rocks, flow movements in the mantle,
magmatic intrusions into the crust, or the expansion
Or contraction of some part of the earth. When
Such stresses are initiated, the rocks are subjected
to compressive forces that produce wrinkling or

Caldonian Folds

Pre-Cambrian Ancient Shields

Fig. 17 Structural divisions of the earth

olding along the lines of weakness. As illustrated
in Fig. 18(a) and (b) folding effectively shortens the
earth’s crust, creating from the original level surface
a series of ‘waves’. The upfolded waves are called
anticlines and the troughs or downfolds are synclines.
The formation of up- and downfolds closely resembles
that of the wrinkles of a table-cloth when it is pushed
from either one or both sides of the table.

In the great fold mountains of the world such as

anticline

—— > _ compression «———

Fig. 18 (a) The horizontal strata of the earth's crust
before folding
(b) Compression shortens the crust forming
fold mountains

the Himalayas, Rockies, Andes and Alps, due
to the complexity of the compressional forces, the
folds developed much more complicated forms.
When the crest of a fold is pushed too far, an overfold

is formed (Fig. 19). If it is pushed still further, it
becomes a recumbent fold (Fig. 19). In extreme
cases, fractures may occur in the crust, so that the
upper part of the recumbent fold slides forward
over the lower part along a thrust plane, forming an
overthrust fold. The over-riding portion of the
thrust fold is termed a nappe (Fig. 19). Since the
rock strata have been elevated to great heights,
sometimes measurable in miles, fold mountains may

anticline recumbent fold
simple fold

syncline

asymmetric fold

nappe
overfold Ba

thrustplane (fault line)

Fig. 19 Types of folding

be called mountains of elevation. The fold moun-
tains are also closely associated with volcanic activity.
They contain many active volcanoes, especially in the
Cireum-Pacific fold mountain system. They also
contain rich mineral resources such as tin, copper,
gold and petroleum.

--- PAGE 12 ---
fa)

Fig. 20 Normal, reverse and transcurrent faults

Je Block mountains. When the earth’s crust bends
folding occurs, but when it cracks, faulting takes
place (Fig. 20). Faulting may be caused by tension
or compression, forces which lengthen or shorten
the earth's crust, causing a section of it to subside
: or as Tise above the surrounding level. Figs. 21(a)
and (b) explain how faulting causes horsts or block

moun a and their counterparts graben or rift

In Fig. 21(a) earth movements generate 1
forces that tend to pull the crust apart, and fau/ts fl
developed. If the block enclosed by the fant
remains as it is or rises, and the land on either sia
subsides, the upstanding block becomes the :

¢ hors
or block mountain. The faulted edges :

are very

steep, with scarp slopes and the summit jis almost
level, e.g. the Hunsruck Mountains, the Vosges and
Black Forest of the Rhineland. Tension may also

cy
f

TENSION

, BLOCK MT (HORST

Fig. 21 (a) Block mountain (horst) form i
ed by t
when faults develop ‘Sasa!

i

COMPRESSION

poses.
aon! <=

RIFT VALLEY

FAULT
FAULT

(b) Rift valley formed b i
lie de y compression when

(c) Later stage when
worn back ae

hanging sides are

cause the central portion to be let down between
two adjacent fault blocks forming a graben or rift
valley, which will have walls. The East
African Rift Valley system is 3,000 miles long,
stretching from East Africa through the Red Sea
to Syria.

steep

rces set up by earth movements
may produce a thrust or reverse fault and shorten
the crust. A block may be raised or lowered in
relation to surrounding areas. Fig. 21(b) illustrates
a rift valley formed in this way. In general large-
scale block mountains and rift valleys are due to
tension rather than compression. The faults may
occur in series and be further complicated by tilting
and other irregularities. Denudation through the
ages modifies faulted landforms,

3. Volcanic mountains. These are, in fact, volcanoes
which are built up from material ejected from
fissures in the earth’s crust. The materials include
molten lava, voleanic bombs, cinders, ashes, dust
and liquid mud. They fall around the vent in suc-
cessive layers, building up a characteristic volcanic
cone (Fig. 22). Volcanic mountains are often called
mountains of accumulation. They are common in
the Circum-Pacific belt and include such volcanic
peaks as Mt. Fuji (Japan) Mt. Mayon (Philippines),
Mt. Merapi (Sumatra), Mt. Agung (Bali) and Mt.
Catopaxi (Ecuador). Further details are given in
Chapter 3.

Fig 22 A volcano or ‘mountain of accumulation’ with
successive layers of lava

4. Residual mountains. These are mountains evolv-
ed by denudation. Where the general level of the
land has been lowered by the agents of denudation
some very resistant areas may remain and these
form residual mountains, eg. Mt. Manodnock in
U.S.A. Residual mountains may also evolve from
plateaux which have been dissected by rivers into
hills and valleys like the ones illustrated in Fig. 23.
Here the ridges and peaks are all very similar in
height. Examples of dissected plateaux, where the

Fig. 23 Residual mountains or mountains of
denudation.

down-cutting streams have eroded the uplands into
mountains of are the Highlands of
Scotland. Scandinavia and the Deccan Plateau.

denudation

Types of Plateaux

Plateaux are elevated uplands with extensive level
surfaces, and usually descend steeply to the surround-
ing lowland. They are sometimes referred to as
tablelands. Like all highlands, plateaux are subjected
to erosional processes. As a result, their original
characteristics may be greatly altered. According to
their mode of formation and their physical appear-
ance, plateaux may be grouped into the following
types.

1. Tectonic plateaux. These are formed by earth
movements which cause uplift, and are normally of
a considerable size, and fairly uniform altitude.
They include continental blocks like the Deccan
Plateau in India. Some of the tectonic plateaux may
be tilted like the Meseta of central Iberia, or faulted
like the Harz of Germany.

When plateaux are enclosed by fold mountains,

they are known as intermont plateaux, Examples
are the Tibetan Plateau between the Himalayas and
the Kunlun, and the Bolivian Plateau between two
ranges of the Andes. Intermont plateaux are some
of the highest and the most extensive plateaux in the
world.
2. Volcanic plateaux. Molten lava may issue from
the earth’s crust and spread over its surface to form
successive sheets of basaltic lava. These soldify to
form a lava plateau. Some of the better known
volcanic plateaux are the Antrim Plateau of Northern
Ireland and the north-western part of the Deccan
Plateau. The most remarkable plateau built by lava
is the Columbia-Snake Plateau which covers an area
almost twice as big as Malaysia. Each layer of the
lava flow is over 100 feet thick and the entire depth
of successive lava layers is estimated to be almost
a mile.

17

--- PAGE 13 ---
3. Dissected plateaux. Through the continual pro-
cess of weathering and erosion by running water, ice
winds, high and extensive plateaux are gradually
2 down, and their surfaces made irregular. In
id highlands, stream action and sometimes
cut deep, narrow valleys in the plateaux,
then described as dissected plateaux. An
the Scottish Highlands. In drier countries,
corrasion by rivers and abrasion by winds
st the plateau into steep-sided tabular masses
mesas and buttes. intersected by deep canyons.
a common feature of arid and semi-arid areas,
south-western U.S.A.
the world’s plateaux have rich mineral
s and have been actively mined. The African
yields gold, diamonds, copper, manganese
In the Brazilian Plateau, there are
of iron and manganese, particularly

x nese, coal and iron and the plateau
lia is rich in gold and iron.

land, either level or undulat-
ore than a few hundred feet
may be low hills which will
phy. The plains usually
‘y and are often inten-
and settlements are
and when plains are

1em are, their econo-
e.g. the Indo-

Some of the largest depositional plains are due
deposition by large rivers. Active erosion in a
upper course results in large quantities of alluviy ;
being brought down to the lower course and deposit :
to form extensive alluvial plains, flood plaij = a
deltaic plains. They form the most productive an
cultural plains of the world, intensively tilled and
very densely populated. The Nile delta of Egypt j
noted for rice and cotton cultivation, the Ganga
delta for rice and jute growing, while the plain ‘
North China, where the Hwang Ho has spread out a
thick mantle of alluvium, supports a wide range of
crops.

Glaciers and ice-sheets may deposit a widespread
mantle of unsorted fluvio-glacial sands and gravels
in the outwash plain or may drop boulder clay, a
mixture of various sizes of boulders and clay, fie
form a till plain or drift plain. Outwash plains are
usually barren lands, e.g. some parts of Holland and
northern Germany, but boulder clay may be very
valuable farming land e.g. the Mid-West of the U.S.A
and East Anglia in England. :

In coastal regions, waves and winds often drive
beach materials, mud, sand or shingle, landwards
and deposit them on the coastal plain to form marine
swamps, mud-flats, tidal and estuarine lowlands. An
appreciable portion of the coastal lowlands of
Belgium, the Netherlands and the Gulf Coast of
U.S.A. were formed in this way. Uplift may raise
the coastal lowlands slightly and they then form an
emergent coastal plain e.g. the coastal margins from
Florida to Texas.

Winds may blow aeolian deposits—very fine
particles known as loess—from interior deserts or
barren surfaces and deposit them upon hills, valleys
or plains forming a loess plateau, as in north-west
China, or a /oess plain, as in the Pampas of Argentina.
The loess helps to level an undulating plain by filling
up grooves and depressions. Many of the loess-
covered plains in the world are fertile agricultural
regions.

3. Erosional plains. These plains are carved by
the agents of erosion. Rain, rivers, ice and wind
help to smooth out the irregularities of the earth’s
surface, and in terms of millions of years, even high
mountains can be reduced to low undulating plains.
Such plains of denudation are described as px in
a word meaning ‘almost-plains’.

Rivers, in their course from source to sea, deepen
their valleys and widen their banks. The projecting
spurs are cut back so that the level ground bordering
the river is constantly widened. At the same time
the higher land between the rivers is gradually
lowered (Fig. 24).

In glaciated regions, glaciers and ice-sheets scoured
and levelled the land forming ice-scoured plains
Hollows scooped out by the ice are now filled by
lakes. There are extensive ice-scoured plains in
northern Europe and northern Canada. Finland is
estimated to have 35,000 lakes, occupying 10% of the
total land surface of the country.

In arid and semi-arid regions, wind deflation
sweeps away much of the eroded desert materials,
lowering the level of land and forming extensive
plains, e.g. the gravelly or stony desert plains called
reg in Africa. Mechanical weathering in arid and
semi-arid areas wears back the mountain slopes to
leave a gently sloping pediments or pediplains (Fig.
25).

Fig. 25 Pediplain

In the formation of a pediplain in arid or
semi-arid conditions the hills are worn back
to form a gently sloping plain but some steep
hills remain. These are called inselbergs

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

1. Either: Attempt a classification of mountains
according to their mode of formation.
Or: Explain why a knowledge of rocks and
their structures is essential in the inter-
pretation of landforms.

2. With the aid of diagrams, explain the difference
in appearance and formation of any three of the
following:

(a) folds and faults

(b) dissected plateau and intermont plateau

(c) alluvial plain and peneplain

(d) sima and sial

(e) lithosphere and mantle

3. What is a sedimentary rock? In what way is it
different from igneous rocks? Describe the
various sources from which sedimentary rocks
may be derived. (Quote actual examples of
sedimentary rocks to support your answer.)

4. For each of the following:

a young fold mountain
a rift valley
a loess plain

(a) Draw a simple diagram to show its charac-
teristic relief.

(b) Explain its origin.

(c) Name and locate a region where such a
feature may be found.

5. Either : Describe and explain the following select-
ed landforms
(a) Antrim Plateau
(b) Rus§fan Platform
(c) Scottish Highlands

Or: Explain the meaning of any four of the
following terms connected with the study
of landforms and the earth’s crust.

basalt, orogenesis, recumbent fold, fossiliferous rocks,

horst, syncline.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Chapter 3 Vulcanism and Earthquakes

Landforms Associated

with Vulcanic Activities

Vulcanie activities have a profound influence on the
_ earth’s landforms. Solid, liquid or gaseous materials
may find their way to the surface from some deep-

Seated reservoir beneath. Molten magma is mobile
tock that forces its way into the planes of weakness
of the crust to escape quietly or explosively to the
surface. The resultant landforms depend on the
‘Strength and fluidity of the magma, the types of cracks,
faults and joints that it penetrates, and the manner in
Which it escapes to the surface. Magma while
thrusting its way up to the surface may cool and
solidify within the crust as plutonic rocks resulting
intrusive landforms. Magmas that reach the sur-
ce and solidify, form extrusive landforms. Rocks
I by either plutonic or volcanic activity are

rocks,

rms of Igneous Intrusions
the commonest intrusive landforms are sills
When an intrusion of molten magma is
tally along the bedding planes of
<, the resultant intrusion is called a
of the overlying sedimentary strata
‘Intrusion which will resemble a lava
bold escarpment like the Great Whin
id. Similar intrusions when in-
narrow walls of igneous rocks
y layers are termed as dykes.

Because of their narrowness, dykes seldom dominate
the landscape. When exposed to denudation they
may appear as upstanding walls or shallow trenches
depending on whether they are more or less resistant
than the rocks in which they are emplaced. Examples
of dykes are the Cleveland Dyke of Yorkshire
England and hundreds of others in the Isles of Mull
and Arran in Scotland. A large, very resistant dyke
of quartzite forms a long ridge to the north of Kuala
Lumpur.

Igneous intrusions on a larger scale are the various
types of —liths’: /accoliths, lopoliths, phacoliths and
batholiths (Fig. 26). The names may sound difficult:
they are, in fact, all variations of igneous intrusions
placed differently in the earth’s crust, and soldifying
within the upper layers of the crust. A laccolith is a
large blister or igneous mound with a dome-shaped
upper surface and a level base fed by a pipe-like
conduit from below. It arches up the overlying
strata of sedimentary rocks, e.g. the laccoliths of the
Henry Mountains, in Utah U.S.A.

A lopolith is another variety of igneous intrusion
with a saucer shape. A shallow basin is formed
in the midst of the country rocks. The Bushveld
lopoliths of Transvaal, South Africa are good
examples,

A phacolith is a lens-shaped mass of igneous
rocks occupying the crest of an anticline or the

overlying
focks arched up

by laccolith
lava plateau built up

by successive flows

bottom of a syncline and being fed by a conduit from
beneath. An example of a phacolith is Corndon Hill
in Shropshire, England.

A batholith is a huge mass of igneous rocks,
usually granite, which after removal of the overlying
rocks forms a massive and resistant upland region
such as the Wicklow Mountains of Ireland, the
uplands of Britanny, France and the Main Range of
West Malaysia. Their precise mode of origin is
still a matter of controversy. It is generally believed
that large masses of magma rising upwards metamor-
phosed the country rocks with which they came into
contact. These metamorphosed rocks together with
the solidified magma give rise to extensive batholiths,
sometimes hundreds of miles in extent. They are
the most spectacular of the intrusive landforms.

The Origin of Volcanoes
The ancient Greeks believed that volcanic eruptions

occurred when Vulcan, the God of the Underworld,
stoked his subterranean furnace beneath Vulcano, a
small volcanic island off Sicily, from which the present
word volcano is derived. Of course, we no longer
believe this is true. Geologists and vulcanologists
have ascertained that volcanic activity is closely
connected with crustal disturbances, particularly
where there are zones of weakness due to deep fault-
ing or mountain folding. As temperature increases
with increasing depth below the earth’s crust, at an
average rate of about 1°F. for every 65 feet of descent,
the interior of the earth can be expected to be in a
semi-molten state, comprising solid, liquid and
gaseous materials, collectively termed magma.

The magma is heavily charged with gases such as

carbon dioxide, sulphurated hydrogen, and small
proportions of nitrogen, chlorine and other volatile
substances. The gases and vapour increase the
mobility and explosiveness of the /avas which are
emitted through the orifice or vent of a volcano
during a volcanic eruption. There are two main
types of lavas.
1. Basic lavas. These are the hottest lavas, about
1,000°C. (1,830°F.) and are highly fluid. They are
dark coloured like basalt, rich in iron and magnesium
but poor in silica. As they are poured out of the
volcano, they flow quietly and are not very explosive.
Due to their high fluidity, they flow readily with a
speed of 10 to 30 miles per hour. They affect extensive
areas, spreading out as thin sheets over great distances
before they solidify. The resultant volcano is gently
sloping with a wide diameter and forms a flattened
shield or dome (Fig. 27).

Fig. 27 Lava dome or shield volcano

crater

sticky viscous lava
which cannot
flow far

steeply sloping sides

Fig. 28 Acid lava cone

21

--- PAGE 15 ---
2. Acid lavas. These lavas are with
a high melting point. They are light-coloured, of
low density, and have a high percentage of silica.
They flow slowly and seldom travel far before
solidifying. The resultant cone is therefore

sided. The rapid congealing of lava in the vent
obstructs the flow of the out-pouring lava, resulting
in loud explosions, throwing out many volcanic
bombs or pyroclasts (Fig. 28). Sometimes the lavas
are so viscous that they form a spine or plug at the
crater like that of Mt. Pelee in Martinique (Fig. 29).
Some spines are very resistant and while most of the
material of very old volcanoes is removed by erosion
the spine may remain, e.g. Puy de Dome, France.

material removed by erosion

Fig. 29 A volcanic plug or spine after prolonged

exposure to erosion. The plug is more
resistant and remains after most of the
volcanic materials have been worn away.

Types of Volcanoes
= are three types of volcanoes: active, dormant
ae Volcanoes are said to be active when
: frequently erupt or at least when they have
Tupted oe recent time. Those that have been
Sei erupt and show signs of possible eruption
eee are described as dormant. Volcanoes
ae not erupted at all in historic times but retain
oo of volcanoes are termed extinct. All
‘Oes pass through active, dormant and extinct
— but We can never be thoroughly sure when they
© extinct. Mt. Vesuvius and Mt. Krakatau were

lava, flowing for long distances produces extensiy
such as the great lava
plains of the Snake Basin, U.S.A. The basal
plateaux are found in many continents, e.g. the north.
western part of the Deccan Plateau and in Iceland.

Volcanic cones are most typical of the CXtrusive
features. The highly fluid lavas build up Mes

with gently rising slopes and
broad, flattened tops. The volcanoes of Hawaij
have the best developed lava domes. The spectacular
Mauna Loa and Kilauea are so accessible that they
have been closely studied. Kilauea has a very
steep-walled « into which the active vent pours
red hot lava forming the /ava-pit of Halemaumay
Thousands of lava fountains rise and fall in the
dazzling pit.

The less fluid lavas that explode more violently
form ash and cinder cones with large central craters
and steep slopes. They are typical of small volcanoes,
occurring in groups and seldom exceeding 1,000
feet in height, such as Mt. Nuovo, near Naples and
Mt. Paricutin in Mexico. The lava flows are so
viscous that they solidify after a short distance.
When they are confined in valleys, they form lava
tonsues and lava-dammed lakes when they dam a
river valley. Other minor features that may be
associated with lava obstructions include lava bridges
and lava tunnel |

A voleanic region may be strewn with solid,
materials that were hurled from the vent of the
ee The very fine particles are the volcanic
ie a ae Pe shot so high into the sky that it

the world several times before it
ee comes to rest. The dust or ash falls as.
be Oa and can bury houses and people. The

Tagmental rocks are collectively called
Pyroclasts and include cinders or Japillj
Pumice and volcanic bombs, ae

The highest and most co:
composite cones.

IS,

scoria,

mmon volcanoes have
They are often called strato-
€s are built up by several erup-
5 ashes and other volcanic materials from

ated. Sipe leads down a reservoir of

9880S | steam

CRATER

ASHES:

subsidiary crater

parasitic cone

Seat

from reservoir dfmagma beneath
Fig. 30 A composite cone

glow have earned for it the name “Lighthouse of the
Mediterranean’. Other well known composite vol-
canoes include Mt. Vesuvius, Mt. Fuji, Mt. Popacata-
petl and Mt. Chimborazo.

During an eruption material from the top of the
cone is blown off or collapses into the vent widening
the orifice into a large crater. Some voleanoes may
have greatly enlarged depressions called calderas.
which may be several miles across. These are the
result of violent eruptions accompanied by the
subsidence of much of the volcano into the magma
beneath (Fig. 31). Water may collect in the crater
or the caldera forming crater or caldera lakes, eg.
Lake Toba in Sumatra.

ouline of

original crater
former ee
-~
volcano ee

-

Caldera

Fig. 31 A caldera. A violent eruption weakens the
structure of the volcano and after eruption
has ceased much of the volcano subsides into
the magma reservoir beneath. The depression
may later be filled with water to form a lake.

Some Volcanic Eruptions
In the history of mankind perhaps the most disastrous
eruptions were those of Mt. Vesuvius, Mt. Krakatau

and Mt. Pelee.

Mt. Vesuvius

Mt. Vesuvius, standing 4,000 feet above the Bay of
Naples, erupted violently on 24 August A.D. 79
taking the people who lived around it by complete
surprise. White-hot lava flowed from parasitic cones.
In the midst of a thundering explosion, the highly
gaseous magma escaped as gigantic luminous clouds
in cauliflower form and shot up to great heights
before it fell to earth as pyroclasts and ashes. The
city of Pompeii, located to the south-west, was
buried beneath twenty feet of volcanic ashes which
were later cemented by the torrential downpours of
heavy rain that accompanied the violent eruption.
In a similar way, the city of Herculaneum on the
west was completely overwhelmed by a mudflow of
ashes and cinders almost 50 feet thick, washed down
by torrential rain from the slopes of Vesuvius.
Almost the entire population of the two cities was
buried alive.

After this, minor eruptions occurred from time to
time but the fertility of the solidified Voleanic ashes
tempted many farmers to begin anew on the slopes
of Vesuvius. Then came the catastrophic eruption
of December 1631 when an avalanche comprising :
red hot volcanic debris, pasty lava and highly
energized gases ruined fifteen towns and killed
4,000 inhabitants. The ashes that descended on
Naples were estimated to be a foot thick.

Mt. Krakatau
The greatest volcanic explosion known to men is
perhaps that of Mt. Krakatau in August 1883.
Krakatau is a small volcanic island in the Sunda
Straits, midway between Java and Sumatra. Dense
black clouds of ashes shot 20 to 50 miles high, and
were brought down as mud by the torrential rain
which fell over the adjacent islands. So much magma
was ejected from the underlying reservoir that two-
thirds of the island collapsed and disappeared forming
a huge submarine caldera. The explosion could be
heard in Australia, almost 3,000 miles away. 1
fine dust that was thrown into the upper part of
atmosphere travelled several times around the world,
causing brilliant sunsets and glowing sky in many |
parts of the globe. Though Krakatau itself was not
inhabited and nobody was killed by the lava fi
the vibration set up enormous waves over 100.

--- PAGE 16 ---
high which drowned 36,000 people in the coastal
districts of Indonesia.

After remaining dormant for almost half a
century, an eruption in 1927 pushed up a cinder
cone from the submarine floor, culminating in a
summit of 220 feet above sea level by 1952. This
new volcanic island was named Anak Krakatau,
meaning ‘the child of Mt. Krakatau’.

Mt. Pelee

The eruption of Mt. Pelee of the West Indies in
May 1902 was the most catastrophic of modern
times. The volcano erupted white-hot lava and
super-heated steam which swept down the slope
at an amazing speed as a nuee ardente (glowing
avalanche). St. Pierre, the capital of Martinique,
lying on the path of the lava, was completely destroyed
within minutes. Its entire population of 30,000,
except two of them. was killed almost instantly.
Even the sea was boiling and all the ships in the
harbour were wrecked.

The ejection of volcanic materials continued for
several months until a vertical spine rose from the
crater, almost a thousand feet high by the middle of
1903. The spine was formed by the pasty lava,
partially solidified in the neck of the volcano. Part
of the ‘Spine, however, crumbled under continual
weathering as well as internal forces.

Mt. i,
t. Mayon ot ise on town of Legaspi, southern Luzon. Philippine Tourist and Travel Association

The Distribution of Volcanoes
in the World
Volcanoes are located in a fairly clearly -defineg
pattern around the world, closely related to region,
that have been intensely folded or faulted. Therg
are well over 500 active volcanoes and thousands of
dormant and extinct ones. They occur along coasta
mountain ranges, as off-shore islands and in the
midst of oceans, but there are few in the interiors of
continents. The greatest concentration is probably
that in the Circum-Pacific region. popularly termeg
the ‘Pacific Ring of Fire’, which has been estimate
to include two-thirds of the world’s volcanoes
(Fig. 32). The chain of volcanoes extends for almost
2,000 miles from the Aleutian Islands into Kam.
chatka, Japan, the Philippines, and Indonesia (Java
and Sumatra in particular), southwards into the
Pacific islands of Solomon, New Hebrides, Tonga
and North Island, New Zealand. On the other side
of the Pacific, the chain continues from the Andes
to Central America (particularly Guatemala, Costa
Rica and Nicaragua), Mexico and right up to Alaska.
It is said that there are almost 100 active volcanoes
in the Philippines, 40 in the Andes, 35 in Japan, and
more than 70 in Indonesia.

In contrast, the Atlantic coasts have comparatively
few active volcanoes but many dormant or extinct
volcanoes, e.g. Madeira, Ascension, St. Helena, Cape

volcanoes (both active and extinct

4
major earthquake belts

lava plateaus

PATAGONIAN PL |

Fig. 32 World distribution of volcanoes, lava plateaux and earthquakes

Verde Islands and Canary Islands, but those of Iceland
and the Azores are active. Volcanoes of the Mediter-
ranean region are mainly associated with the Alpine
folds, e.g. Vesuvius, Etna, Stromboli, Vulcano and
those of the Aegean islands. A few continue into
Asia Minor (Mt. Ararat, Mt. Elbruz). The Hima-
layas have, surprisingly, no active volcano at all.

In Africa some volcanoes are found along the
East African Rift Valley, e.g. Mt. Kilimanjaro and
Mt. Kenya, both probably extinct. The only active
volcano of West Africa is Mt. Cameroon. There
are some volcanic cones in Madagascar, but active
eruption has not been known so far. The West
Indian islands have experienced some violent ex-
plosions in recent times, e.g. Mt. Pelee in Martinique,
and in St. Vincent further south. The Lesser Antilles
are made up mainly of volcanic islands and some of
them still bear signs of volcanic liveliness. Elsewhere
in the interiors of continents—Asia, North America,
Europe and Australia, active volcanoes are rare.

Geysers and Hot Springs

Geysers are fountains of hot water and superheated
steam that may spout up to a height of 150 feet
from the earth beneath. The phenomena are asso-
ciated with a thermal or volcanic region in which

the water below is being heated beyond boiling-point
(100°C. or 212°F.). The jet of water is usually
emitted with an explosion, and is often triggered off
by gases seeping out of the heated rocks (Fig. 33).
Almost all the world’s geysers are confined to three
major areas: Iceland, the Rotorua district of North
Island, New Zealand and Yellowstone Park of

HOT SPRINGS

Fig. 33 Hot springs and geysers

--- PAGE 17 ---
‘The world’s best known geyser is perhaps
Faithful’ in Yellowstone National Park, Wyo-
‘erupts at regular intervals—every 63
+s or thermal springs are more common,
found in any part of the earth where
3 enough beneath the surface to be
by the interior forces. The water rises to
ce without any explosion. Such springs
‘minerals which may be of some
ind has thousands of hot springs.
been harnessed to heat houses,
1d for other domestic purposes.
geysers have become tourist
in and Hawaii.

free from earthquakes for long
used by gentle waves of
’s crust occur every few

that 60,000 inhabitants died. The effects of the
earthquake were felt within a 400 miles radius of
Lisbon, in North Africa and Europe.

The earthquake on 1 September 1923 that shook
Tokvo and Yokohama was equally shocking. A
fracture that occurred in the earth’s crust off the
coast of Japan caused the earthquake. The fragile
buildings of the densely populated twin cities were
mostly ruined; more than half a million houses
collapsed. Widespread fires from factories, gas
mains, oil installations and kitchens killed a quarter
of a million people and many more were injured.

Other disastrous earthquakes include that of San
Francisco in 1906 which ruined the greater part of
the heart of San Francisco. In the loess region of
Kansu in China, the 1920 earthquake claimed
200,000 lives, and again in 1927 when 100,000 cave-
dwellers were buried alive. In 1960, the earthquake
at Agadir, Morocco sealed the fate of 10,000 in-
habitants, besides causing untold damage, and in
1968 there was a disastrous earthquake in eastern
Tran, with its epicentre at Kakh.

The Distribution of Earthquakes

The world’s distribution of earthquakes coincides
very closely with that of volcanoes. Regions of
greatest seismicity are Circum-Pacific areas, with
the epicentres and the most frequent occurrences
along the ‘Pacific Ring of Fire’. It is said that as

: many as 70 per cent of earthquakes occur in the

-Pacific belt. Another 20 per cent of earth-
take place in the Mediterranean-Himalayan
luding Asia Minor, the Himalayas and parts
th-west China. Elsewhere, the earth’s crust
table and is less prone to earthquakes,
ere can be said to be immune to earth

?

3. Describe, with appropriate sketches, the
major types of landforms originating from acid
and basic lavas.

4. On a map of the world, locate the chief
volcanic and earthquake areas. Write a des-
criptive account of any one major volcanic
eruption or earthquake that has occurred in
historical times. You should include the causes,
effects and consequences of such a named
occurrence.

5. The following terms are in one way oF
another connected with volcanoes and earth-
quakes. Choose one term from each of the
sections A, B and C and write what you know
about them:

Section A Section B Section C
magma basalt plateau Vulcano

lava lava plain Tsunami
pyroclasts parasitic cones ‘Old Faithful’

--- PAGE 18 ---
Uhapter 4 Weathering, Mass Movement

and Groundwater

The earth’s crust is constantly undergoing geological
changes caused by interna! forces, which create new
Telief features. Orogenesis build new mountain
anges, uplift or depression of particular areas is
caused by folding or faulting, and volcanic distur-
bances also modify the landscape. Meanwhile exter-
nal forces are working vigorously to wear away the
surface, and the interaction of these constructive and
destructive forces gives rise to the great diversity of
present-day landforms. The process of wearing away
the earth causes a general lowering and levelling out
of the surface. It is known as denudation and is car-
ried out in four phases.

i, Weathering: the gradual disintegration of

ES rocks by atmospheric or weather forces;

li. Erosion: the active wearing away of the earth’s
surface by moving agents like running water,

os wind, ice and waves;

ii. Transportation: the removal of the eroded

; debris to new positions:

iv. Deposition: the dumping of the debris in
certain parts of the earth, where it may
accumulate to form new rocks,

All four phases of the denudation process are tak-

ing place simultaneously in different parts of the

world at different rates, much depending on the

nature of the relief, the structure of the rocks, the
local climate and interference by man,

‘describes the work of weathering and

ey produces, while Chapters 5 to 10 deal

osion, transportation and deposition by water,

in breaking up the rocks is of
ucal, and physical or mecha-
processes involved in each

layers of exposed rocks. Such reactions may Weaken
or entirely dissolve certain constituents of the rock
thus loosening the other crystals and weakening the
whole surface. For example, in Malaysia, the surface
of granite which has been exposed to the weather is
found to be pitted and rough. This is because the ona
nite is made of three main minerals: quartz, felspar
and mica. The felspar is more quickly weathered than
the quartz and thus the felspar crystals are worn
away. The quartz crystals are eventually loosened jn
this way and form a coarse sandy residue.

When the surface of a rock is weathered some of
the material which is loosened is removed by erosive
agents such as wind or running water thus exposing a
fresh surface to weathering, but much of the Weath-
ered material or regolith (remains of the rock) may
Stay in position forming the basis of soil. Regolith is
simply the mineral remains of decomposed rocks, but
soil contains organic materials, such as the roots of
plants, fallen leaves, small animals such as worms,
bacteria and so on. It is the organic content of soil
which makes it fertile and allows crops to be grown,

When a soil cover exists, chemical weathering of
the underlying rocks does not cease; on the contrary it
is usually enhanced, This is because the soil absorbs
rain-water and keeps the underlying rocks in contact
with this moisture. The rain-water absorbs organic
acids from the soil and thus becomes a stronger
weathering agent than pure rain-water acting on bare
rock.

There are three major chemical weathering proces-
ses,

(a) Solution. Many minerals are dissolved by
water, especially when, as with rain-water, it contains
enough carbon dioxide to make it a weak acid. Solu-
tion is the most potent weathering process in limes-
tone regions because the rain-water attacks and dis-
solves the calcium carbonate of which the rock is
chiefly formed. The dissolved calcium carbonate is
carried away by the water, joints and cracks in the
rock are quickly widened and whole systems of caves
and passages are worn out (see Chapter 8). Limes-
tone, however, is by no means the only rock to suffer
from solution. All rocks are subject to solution to

: Some extent, though the process is much slower than

with lime The rate at which solution takes place

Rock easily
weathered
where joints are
closely spaced

Rock still
unweathered
where joints
are far apart

Possible original
pattern of joints

Fig. 4.1 Differential weathering in a rock such as granite where
unevenly spaced joints may give rise to corestones and certain
blocks remain unweathered. In jointed rocks, temperature
change cracks up rectangular blocks.

density of joints or cracks in the rock is also crucial to
the speed of weathering. This factor is very clearly
seen in Malaysia in the weathering of granite. In trop-
ical countries, where the heavy rainfall and warm cli-
mate both promote rapid chemical reactions, weath-
ering often proceeds very rapidly. This produces the
very deep regoliths or soils overlying the solid rocks.
Often these regoliths contain core-stones. These are
pieces of solid rock which have resisted weathering
while all the surrounding rock has been weathered.
They are more resistant because they have fewer
joints or cracks to harbour moisture and are thus
more slowly weathered by solution processes (Fig.
4.1 and Plate 4.A). 4

Rates of weathering are also affected by climate,
Warm wet climates promote rapid chemical weather-
ing, while dry climates inhibit chemical weathering.
Dry climates, however, provide good conditions for
physical or mechanical weathering.

(b) Oxidation. Oxidation is the reaction of oxygen
in air or water with minerals in the rock. For example,
most rocks contain a certain amount of iron, which
when it comes in contact with air is changed to iron
oxide, familiar brownish crust or rust. Iron oxide
crumbles easily and is fat more easily eroded than the
origi sn. It is thus removed, loosening the overall
weakening them.

GSS
4.4 Asolid corestone embedded in weathered material which

has been exposed in a road cutting near Tampin, Negri Sembi-
lan G.C. Morgan

(c) Decomposition by organic acids. Within the soil
which covers most rocks are bacteria whch thrive on
decaying plant or animal material. These bacteria
produce acids which, when dissolved in water, help to
speed up the weathering of the underlying rocks. In
some cases micro-organisms and plants like mosses or
lichens can live on bare rock, so long as the surface is
damp. These absorb chemical elements from the
rocks as food and also produce organic acids. They
are thus agents of both chemical and mechanical
weathering.

2. Physical or Mechanical weathering

Mechanical weathering is the physical disintegration
of a rock by the actual prising apart of separate parti-
cles. This can happen even with completely fresh rock
but the processes of physical weathering are able to
work much more easily when the surface of the rock
has already been weakened by the action of chemical
weathering, Mechanical weathering takes place in
several ways.

(a) Repeated temperature changes. In deserts,
rocks are exposed to the blazing sun during the day
and are intensely heated. The outer layers expand
much faster than the cooler interior of the rocks and
tend to pull away from the rest. At nightfall the temp-
erature drops rapidly and the outer layers contract
more rapidly than the interior, setting up internal
stresses, Such stresses, repeated every day for months

--- PAGE 19 ---
4.8 When corestones are exposed to tropical weather condi-
tions they are subject to repeated wetting and drying which
cause the outer layers to peel off. This sandstone boulder shows
‘several layers have split off in some areas. G.C. Morgan

and years, cause the rocks to crack and split. Well-
ointed tocks tend to split along the joints
breaking up into rectangular blocks. Shales
split up into platy fragments because

Pp structure. In crystalline rocks such as
of the various minerals (quartz,

expand and contract at different
e stresses and accelerating the dis-
rocks, Fragments broken from
‘gravity to the foot of the
‘Screes or may form a litter of
boulders on the flatter

lly be greatest

near the surface and where there are sharp angles jp
the rocks. Rectangular blocks are thus gradually
rounded by the splitting away of sharp corners. When
the surface layers of rounded boulders gradually split
off the process is called onion peeling, because the
various layers look like the layers of an onion, peeled
off one after another. The technical term for this pro-
cess is exfoliation (Plate 4.B).
(b) Repeated wetting and drying. Exfoliation is not
confined to desert areas. Similar stresses may be set
up in rocks by repeated wetting and drying of the sur-
face layers. This takes place especially in tropical reg-
ions, like Malaysia, where short downpours saturate
the rocks and then the hot sun quickly dries them
again. Repeated wetting and drying also occurs at the
coast, where rocks may be rapidly dried by sun and
wind between tides. When rocks are wetted the outer
layers absorb a certain amount of moisture and
expand. When they dry this moisture evaporates and
they quickly shrink. When this happens repeatedly
the outer layers split off. It should also be stressed
that the wetting and drying of the rocks in deserts is
probably just as important as temperature changes in
mechanical weathering. The rocks dry very quickly
indeed after being wetted by brief desert rain-storms.
(c) Frost action. In temperate latitudes frost is a
potent rock breaker. All rocks contain cracks and
joints, or pore spaces, and after a shower water or
snow collects in such places. When the temperature
drops at night or during the winter, this water freezes.
When water freezes it expands by one-tenth -its vol-
ume and exerts a bursting pressure of almost 140 kg
per square cm (2,000 Ib. to the square inch).
Repeated freezing of this kind will deepen and widen
the original cracks and crevices and break the rock
ae ea oe (Fig. 4.2). On mountain peaks
oo eates sharp pinnacles and angular out-
es. Such peaks are described as frost-shattered

ction as an agent of mechanical weathering

Water freezes and
expands in volume
prising rocks apart

errr ne

Large tree

Roots penetrate joints and
force rocks apart

peaks. Angular fragments of rock are prised from
mountain-sides or cliff faces and fall to the foot of the
slope where they accumulate to form screes.

(d) Biotic factors. Small fragments of rock
loosened by either chemical or mechanical weather-
ing lodge in cracks and crevices in the rock and plants
may sprout in such crevices. As they grow their roots
penetrate the rocks below, usually along joints and
other lines of weakness, prising them apart. You have
often come across large trees growing near roads or
the courtyards of houses that finally prise open the
concrete or paving stones above their roots. The pro-
cess is just the same on a smaller scale in a natural set-
ting (Fig. 4.3).

Men, in the course of mining, road construction
and farming, also contribute to mechanical weather-
ing by excavating the rocks and rendering them more
vulnerable to the agents of denudation.

Mass Movement

Mass movement is the movement of weathered mate-
rials down a slope due to gravitational forces. The
movement may be gradual or sudden, depending on
i e slope, the weight of the weathered

there is any lubricating moisture
eral kinds of mass move-

Bedding plane

Roots force their way into
joints and bedding planes

Soil
> a S&S eee
ON a
€
@s Ne] Animals burrow into rock
breaking up the surface

Fig. 4.3 Plant roots as agents of mechanical weathering

1. Soil Creep

This is a slow, gradual but more or less continuous
movement of soil down hillslopes. The movement is
not very noticeable, especially when the slope is fairly
gentle or when the soil is well-covered with grass or
other vegetation. Soil creep is most common in damp

Fig. 4.4 Evidences of soil creep

posts tilt
from vertical

soil accumulates
behind walls

--- PAGE 20 ---
oe Hep) abi flood has damaged the road Jabatan
soils where the water acts as a lubricant so that indi-
vidual soil particles move over each other and over
the underlying rock. It is also found where continuous
trampling by animals grazing on the slopes sets up
vibrations which loosen the soil and cause it to move.
Though the movement is slow and cannot readily be
seen in action, the gradual movement tilts trees.

fences, posts and so on which are rooted in the soil.
The soil is also seen to accumulate at the foot of slope
or behind obstacles such as walls, which may eventu-
ally be burst by the weight of soil above (Fig. 4.4).

2. Soil Flow (Solifluction)

When the soil is compl i

When i pletely saturated with water the
= particles are almost suspended in the water
o move easily Over one another and over the under-
lying rock, The soil acts like a liquid and a soil-flow or

mud-flow occurs. In arid regions a mantle of weat}
ered debris may become saturated with rain-water
after a storm and flow downslope as a semi-liquid
mass. In temperate and tundra regions soil flow
occur when the surface layers of frozen ground thas
in spring. Soil and rock debris, lubricated by the melt.
water, flow easily over the underlying frozen subsojj
In areas of peat soils, the peat absorbs much mois.
ture. However if saturation point is reached the peaty
soil may flow downslope. In Ireland such flows are
known as ‘hog-bursts’.

3. Landslides (Slumping or Sliding)

These are very rapid kinds of movement and occur
when a large mass of soil or rock falls suddenly. Land-
slides usually occur on steep slopes such as in moun-
tainous areas, on cliffs or where man has artificially
steepened slopes, for example, in road or rail cuttings
(Plate 4.C). Landslides may be caused because <
steep slope is undercut by a river or the sea so that it
falls by gravity. Earthquakes or volcanic disturbances
may loosen rocks and start off a landslide. Man-made
steepening both undercuts the slope and sets up vib-
rations which may loosen rocks or soil. But often
landslides are caused by the lubricating action of rain-
water. Water may collect in joints or bedding planes
in rocks so that one layer slides over another, espe-
cially in areas of tilted strata. Slumping is particularly
common where permeable debris or rock layers
overlie impermeable strata such as clay. Water sink-
ing through the permeable material is halted by the
clay. The damp clay provides a smooth slippery sur-
5 over which the upper layers easily slide (Fig.

Water may collect at the base of the regolith
because it sinks readily into the weathered material

Fig. 4.5 Landslide

4.D Aneffective way of preventing landslide by building acon-
crete wall—Taiwan Goh Cheng Leong

but more slowly into the solid rock beneath. The
water may allow the regolith to slide away from the
underlying rock.

Man often enhances the possibility of landslides by
clearing natural vegetation for agriculture or housing.
Removal of the plant cover allows more water to
penetrate the soil and rocks. In areas such as the
Cameron Highlands, where steep slopes have been
cleared, there is much evidence of minor slumps and
slides, the old scars showing up clearly in the tea gar-
dens. Extensive landslides, whether natural or man-
induced, can have disastrous consequences, burying
villages, railway lines or people. Spectacular land-
slides have taken place in many parts of the world,
including South Wales, British Columbia, Hong
Kong and the Cameron Highlands where the village
of Ringlet was partially buried in 1961 and several
houses were ruined.

Groundwater

The whole process of the circulation of water between
the land, sea and atmosphere is known as the hyd-

rological cycle. The movement of the water he
atmosphere and its effect on climate are dealt n
Chapters 13 and 14 The seas and oceans are GISCUS-
sed in Chapter 12. The effect of water on the | iS

ansport and depos-

an agent of weathering, erosion, tt
ition is dealt with in this and the following chapters.
especially Chapter 5.

When rain falls on the earth it ts distributed in vari-
ous ways. Some 1s immediately and thus
returns to the atmosphere as water vapour. Some is
absorbed by plants and only gradually returned to the
atmosphere by transpiration from the leaves of
plants. Much of it flows directly off slopes to join
streams and rivers, eventually reaching the seas and
occeans. This is known as run-ol A considerable
proportion of the water received from rain or snow,
however, percolates dow nwards into the soil and
rocks, filling up joints and pore-spaces and forming
what is known as goundwate! Groundwater plays an
important part in weathering and mass movement
and is also important as a means of natural water stor
age. It re-enters the hydrological cycle by way of
springs.

The amount of water available to form groundwa-
ter depends to some extent on climate In dry climates
much precipitation may be quickly evaporated into
the dry atmosphere and little moisture may percolate
into the ground. In very humid conditions, where the
surface of the ground may already be moist, much
water may be moved as run-off, In moderately humid
areas water both runs off and sinks into the ground.
The proportion of the rainfall absorbed as groundwa-
ter may depend on the season of the year.

More important, however, is the nature of the

4.E A severe flood in Kuala Kangsar (Malaysia) in 1967-the
main street of the town was under 4-6 m (15-20 feet) of water

Jabatan Penerangan Malaysia

--- PAGE 21 ---
- POROUS ROCK Water PERMEABLE OR
(e.g. limestone) PERVIOUS ROCK
(e.g. granite)

Fig. 4.6 Porosity and permeability of rocks

rocks and how easily they absorb and retain water.
Various rocks and soils differ greatly in their porosity
and permeability; the amount of groundwater pre-
sent and the depth at which it lies are governed by
these characteristics. Porous rocks are those, like
sandstone, which have many pore-spaces between
the grains. Water is easily absorbed by such rocks and
may be stored in the pore-spaces. Permeable or pervi-
Sus rocks are those which allow water to pass through
them easily (Fig. 4.6). Thus most porous rocks are
also permeable. However some rocks are porous but
impermeable. Clay, for example, is highly porous
ord it is made up of innumerable very fine particles
wi Pore-spaces between them. It thus absorbs a
Stall that the water eS Not move easily through the

; impermeable. On the other hand,

numerous joints or cracks through which the Wat
can pass, rendering it pervious or permeable. Sone
granites are, however, far more pervious than others 3

The Water-Table

Water which seeps through the ground moves dow

ward under the force of gravity until it reaches te ;
impermeable layer of rock through which it caren
pass. If there is no ready outlet for the groundwater a
the form of a spring, the water accumulates above t a
impermeable layer and saturates the rock. The
permeable rock in which the water is stored is ee
as the aquifer (Fig. 4.7). The surface of the saturateq
area is called the water-table. The depth of the water.
table varies greatly according to relief and to the typ

of rocks. The water-table is far below the surface of
hill-tops but is close to the surface in valleys and flat
low-lying areas where it may cause waterlogging and
swampy conditions. The depth of the water-table also
varies greatly with the seasons. When plenty of rain is
available to augment groundwater supplies the water-
table may rise, but in dry periods, no new supplies are
available, and the water-table is lowered as ground-
water is lost through seepages and springs (Fig. 4.7).

ae ae ae ee edge of pervious rocklying above

Rainwater

| Rainwater
¥ .

Rock with joints or fissures

Permeable &
saturated
rocks

Fig. 4.8(b) Spring emerges from rocks with joints

impermeable
rock

Fig. 4.8(d) Scarp-foot spring and dip-slope spring

Springs and Wells
1. Springs

The groundwater stored in the rock is released onto
the surface at points where the water-table reaches
the surface. A spring is simply an outlet for such
water. The water may seep gradually out of the rock
or may gush out as a fountain. Springs are of several
kinds due to the nature of the rocks and the position
of the water-table. The main types are described
below.
(a) In areas of tilted strata, where permeable and
impermeable rocks alternate, water emerges at the
base of the permeable layers (Fig. 4.8a).

(b) In well-jointed rocks water may percolate
downwards until it reaches a joint which emerges at
the surface. The water may come to the surface

A dyke spring

Fig. 4.8(c)

Fig. 4.8(e) Vauclusian spring in karst regions

through the joint (Fig. 4.8b).

(c) Where a dyke or sill of impermeable rock is
intruded through permeable rocks, it causes the
water-table to reach the surface and the water issues
as a spring (Fig. 4.8c).

(d) In limestone or chalk escarpments, where the
permeable rock lies between impermeable strata,
water issues at the foot of the scarp as a scarp-foot
spring, or near the foot of the dip-slope as a dip-slope
spring, as illustrated in Fig. 4.84.

(e) In karst regions rivers often disappear under-
ground. They then flow through passages worn in the
rock by solution, and may re-emerge when limestone
gives place to some impermeable rock. This kind of
spring is sometimes called a vauclusian spring but is
better referred to as a resurgence (Fig. 4.8e; see also
Chapter 8).

Some other types of springs, e.g. hot springs, min-
eral springs and geysers are described in Chapter 3.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Well water
available
during wet
season
Water-table

Well water
available
all the time

i
Permanent water-table »

ON i

Saturated rocks

Fig. 4.9 Depth of wells and water-table mark

2. Wells

Springs are the natural emergence points of ground
Water, but Man can make use of stored water below
ground by sinking wells. A hole is bored through the
earth until the water-table is reached. The well must
be sunk to the depth of the permanent water-table
(Fig. 4.9) if a constant supply of water is to be
obtained. If the well is only sunk to the wet-season
depth of the water-table, water will be unobtainable
when the level drops in the dry season. When a well is
bored, the water usually has to be raised by hand or
by mechanical pumping. Wells are particularly
important in arid areas where there is little surface
— but where the underlying rocks contain ground-
<

A particularly important type of well is the artesian

;
! ©

Pervious rocks (Aquifer)

Artesian wells

Fig. 4.11

The distribution of artesian basins in Australia

well, which owing to the nature of its formation js
quite distinctive. Where rock layers have been down-
folded into a basin shape, permeable strata such as
chalk or limestone may be sandwiched between
impermeable layers, such as clay. The permeable
rocks may only come to the surface at the edges of the
basin, but water falling on them will gradually seep
downwards by the force of gravity until it reaches the
lowest part of the basin (Fig. 4.10). The impermeable
layer below prevents the water from passing down-
wards while the impermeable layer on top prevents
any possibility of the water escaping upwards. The
aquifer is thus saturated to the brim of the basin.

The water is thus trapped in the aquifer under great
pressure and when a well is bored, the pressure of
water downwards from all around the basin is suffi-
cient to force the water up the bore-hole so that it
gushes onto the surface like a fountain. After a time

ic
Rdinidil sdaks

in a |

the pressure decreases and it is necessary to pump up
the water. ,

The depth of artesian wells varies from place to
place, from a few feet to thousands of feet. The water
may be used to supply the needs of an entire village as
in the Great Plains of U.S.A. or for sheep farming as
in Queensland and other parts of Australia. Fig. 4.11
shows the distribution of artesian wells in Australia.
But the water is sometimes unsuitable for agricultural
or irrigation purposes as it may be hot or contain an
excessive amount of mineral salts.

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

1. (a) What do you understand by the term ‘weather-
ing’?

(b) Name 4 natural forces that play a role in weath-
ering.

(c) Differentiate mechanical weathering from
chemical weathering and give examples of
each.

(a) Describe how gravitational forces and rain-
water assist in the mass movement of weathe-
red materials on hill slopes.

(b) Distinguish soil creep from landslides, and
locate places where such occurrences have
taken place.

3. (a) What is meant by the following:

i. hydrological cycle
ii. water-table
iii. acquifer.
(b) Forany two of the above, discuss their relation-
ship with groundwater.

4. ‘While the earth’s crust is undergoing constructive
changes to create new relief, external forces of
nature are working vigorously to level this down.’
Discuss.

5. Elaborate on any three of the following:

(a) Exfoliation is the result of temperature changes
in deserts.

(b) Screes accumulate at the foot of steep moun-
tains in temperate lands.

(c) There are many ways in which springs can be
formed.

(d) Artesian wells have a distinct formation.

6. (a) In what ways are chemical weathering diffe-

N

Artesian wells are most valuable to Man when they
can be used in desert areas, e.g. in parts of the Sahara
and in Australia. The aquifers receive water in areas
of higher rainfall, but the water accumulates in basins
underlying arid regions.

All wells bored by Man tend to deplete groundwe-
ter resources because the water is extracted faster
than under natural conditions and also much faster
than it can be replenished by rainfall. In many areas
groundwater supplies have been greatly reduced or
even exhausted by Man as a result of carelessness and
overexploitation.

rent from mechanical weathering?
(b) Describe any three major processes of chemical
weathering.
(c) In what type of physical landform is chemical
weathering by solution most dominant?
(d) Name a few well-known physical features
caused by solution in chemical weathering.
7. (a) Why is mechanical weathering also known as
physical weathering?
(b) State four ways by which mechanical weather-
ing takes place.
(c) Inwhatclimatic regions is mechanical weather-
ing by frost action most potent?
8. With reference to examples, carefully distinguish
betweeen:
(a) ‘weather’ and ‘erosion’
(b) ‘porous rocks’ and “pervious rocks”
(c) ‘a spring’ and ‘a well’
(d) ‘screes’ and ‘pebbles’.
9. Describe and explain the manner in which a land
surface may be changed by
i. rain;
ii. frost;
ili. wind.
Illustrate your answer with annotated diagrams
and specific examples.
10. (a) Explain what happens to precipitation when
it falls on the land surface.
(b) What factors determine the amount of water
entering the ground in a particular place?
(c) Why is the ‘underground scenery’ better devel-
open in karst regions?

--- PAGE 23 ---
Chapter 5 Landforms Made by Running Water

The Development of a River System

When rain falls. part of it sinks into the ground,
some is evaporated back into the atmosphere and
the rest runs off as rivulets, brooks, streams and
tributaries of rivers that flow down to the sea.
This running water forms a potent agent for denuding
the earth’s surface. Denudation is the general lowering
of the earth’s surface. This takes place because such
agents of erosion as rivers, ice, wind and waves wear
away the rocks and transport the eroded debris to
lower land or right down to the sea. But erosion
cannot take place unless the rocks are first weakened
or shattered by exposure to the elements. Rain,
frost and wind weather the rocks so that they can be
eroded more easily. Unlike glaciers and snow, which

are confined to the cold and temperate latitudes;

waves which act only on coastlines; winds, which are

only ‘efficient’ in deserts: the effect of running water

is felt all over the globe wherever water is present.

Running water is thus the most important single agent
of denudation.

The source of a river may be a spring, a lake or
a marsh, but it is generally in an upland region,
where precipitation is heaviest and where there is a
slope down which the run-off can flow. The up-
lands therefore form the catchment areas of rivers.
The crest of the mountains is the divide or watershed
from which streams flow down the slopes on both
sides to begin their journey to the oceans, The
initial stream that exists as a consequence of the
slope is called the consequent stream. As the con-
sequent stream wears down the surface by deepening
its channel downwards, it is joined by several tri-
butaries either obliquely or at right angles depending
on the alignment and the degree of resistance of the
rocks.

If the tocks are composed of homogeneous beds
of uniform resistance to erosion, the tributaries will
join the main valley obliquely as insequent streams,
The drainage pattern so evolved will be tree-like in
appearance, and is therefore described as dendritic
drainage, after a Greek word dendron meaning
x 34). On the other hand, if the rocks
| alternate layers of hard and soft
tend to follow the pattern of
If the outcrops of the rocks
to the main valley, the tributaries
es as subsequent streams,

Fig. 34 Dendritic or

tree-like
developed on homogeneous rock or beds of
equal resistance

drainage _ pattern

Fig. 35 Trellised or

developed on alternating outcrops of harder
and softer rocks

rectangular drainage pattern

The drainage pattern so developed will be rectangular
in shape and is called trellised drainage (Fig. 35).

The Mechanism of Humid Erosion

Humid erosion covers the entire scope of sculpturing
effects of running water from the action of rainwater
to that of the rivers. Mass movements of earth and
weathered materials on hill-slopes down to valleys
are mainly due to the lubricating action of water
which allows a mass of materials to move under
gravity. This is particularly acute where the slopes
are steep. The s/ow movement of soil down a hill-
slope is call soil-creep. A more sudden movement
due to the lubricating effect or rain-water may cause

widespread es. In mountainous districts
where the roads and railway tracks are cut through
steep-sided valleys landslides may obstruct railway
lines, cut off road communications and even bury

villages and people.

The Processes of River Action

When a river flows it carries with it eroded materials.
These comprise the river’s load, and may be divided
into three distinct types.

1. Materials in solution. These are minerals which
are dissolved in the water.

2. Materials in suspension. Sand, silt and mud are
carried along suspended in the water as the stream
flows.

3, The traction load. This includes coarser materials
such as pebbles, stones, rocks and boulders, which
are rolled along the river bed.

It has been estimated that for every square mile
of the earth’s surface, more than 200 tons of solid
materials in suspension and more than 50 tons of
materials in solution are being carried off by running
water every year. The Mississippi River which
drains an area almost half the size of the United States
itself, removes more than two million tons of eroded
material into the Gulf of Mexico daily. Consequent-
ly the river basins are being lowered, and in the case
of swift-flowing rivers like the Irrawaddy, its drainage
basin is being lowered by about a foot in every 400
years! During floods the amount of rock debris
swept off by rivers is very much greater. We can
see this from the mud that colours the river-water
2. Middle course
interlocking spurs

1. Upper course
gorge

rapids and waterfalls | meanders
river capture | tiver cliffs

|

|

|

|

|

transportation

valley widening

vertical corrasion ae
(some deposition)

steep gorge-like or V-shaped valley open,

Fig. 36 The graded long profile and ty,

widening gentle-sloping valley very gently-sloping, smooth, wide valley

during a heavy rain. The ability of a river to move
the various srades of materials depends greatly
upon the volume of the water, the s elocity of the flow
and lastly the size, shape and weight of the

It is said that by doubling the velocity of a river, its
transporting power is increased by more than 10
times! It is therefore not surprising to find huge
boulders that are ‘stranded’ in normal times, but
may be moved during seasonal floods. The move-
ment of rivers is thus intermittent, acting vigorously
in certain parts of the year and remaining less active

at other times.

River Erosion and Transportation
In rivers, erosion and transportation go on simul-
taneously, comprising the following inter-acting
processes.
1. Corrasion or abrasion. This is the mechanical
grinding of the river’s traction load against the
banks and bed of the river. The rock fragments are
hurled against the sides of the river and also roll
along the bottom of the river. Corrasion takes place,
in two distinct ways. ‘

(a) Lateral corrasion. This is the sideways erosion
which widens the V-shaped valley.

(b) Vertical corrasion. This is the downward
action which deepens the river channel.
2. Corrosion or solution. This is the chemical or
solvent action of water on soluble or partly-soluble
rocks with which the river comes into contact. For
example calcium carbonate in limestones is easily
dissolved and removed in solution.

3. Lower course

flood plains
ox-bow lakes
deltas

deposition

|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

Aalluvium deposition

pical cross section of a river from source to mouth

--- PAGE 24 ---
3. Hydraulic action. This is the mechanical loosen-
ing and sweeping away of materials by the river water
itseli Some of the water splashes against the river
banks and surges into cracks and crevices. This
helps to disintegrate the rocks. The water also
undermines the softer rocks with which it comes
into contact. It picks up the loose fragments from
its banks and bed and transports them away.

4. Attrition. This is the wear and tear of the
transported materials themselves when they roll and
collide into one another. The coarser boulders are
broken down into smaller stones; the angular edges
are smoothed and rounded to form pebbles. The
finer materials are carried further down-stream to
be deposited.

The Course of a River

The course of a river may be divided into three distinct
parts (Fig. 36). 1. The upper or mountain course
(in the stage of youth), 2. The middle or valley course
(in the stage of maturity), 3. The lower or plain course
(in the stage of old age).

1. The Upper or Mountain Course

This begins at the source of the river near the water-
shed, which is probably the crest of a mountain
range. The river is very swift as it descends the
steep slopes, and the predominant action of the river
is vertical corrasion. The valley developed is thus
deep, narrow and distinctively V-shaped. Down-
cutting takes place so rapidly that Jateral corrasion
cannot keep pace. In some cases where the rocks
are very resistant, the valley is so narrow and the
sides are so steep that gorges are formed e.g. the
Indus Gorge in Kashmir. In arid regions, where
there is little rainfall to widen the valley sides, and
the river cuts deep into the valley-fioor, precipitous
valleys called canyons are formed, eg. the Bryce
Canyon, Utah, U.S.A.

Saha more outstanding features that are
tten best developed in the upper course of a ri
Pees 26 ppe! a river

r capture. This is also known as river

(oF river beheading. Its development is depen-

it rate of back-cutting (headward
For instance, if one side of
; ore

A deep gorge in the Cuzco Department of Peru Pau/ Popper

the piracy occured is termed as the elbow of capture.
The beheaded stream (Z) is called the misfit. The
valley below the elbow is the wind gap, and may
be valuable as a road and rail route. Examples of
river capture abound. In Burma, the Upper Sittang
has beencaptured by theIrrawaddy;in Northumberland,
England, the Blyth and the Wansbeck are beheaded
by the North Tyne.

(b) Rapids, cataracts and waterfalls. These are
liable to occur at any part of the river course, but they
are most numerous in the mountain course where
changes of gradient are more abrupt and also more
frequent. Due to the unequal resistance of hard and
soft rocks traversed by a river, the outcrop of a band
of hard rock may cause a river to ‘jump’ or ‘fall’ down-
pids are formed (Fig. 38). Similar falls of

stream. Ka

bands of hard rocks

Fig. 38 Rapids, cataracts

greater dimensions are also referred to as cataracts, of
which there are five along the Nile that interrupt
smooth navigation. When rivers plunge down in a
sudden fall of some height, they are called waterfalls
(Fig. 39). Their great force usually wears out a
plunge-pool beneath. Waterfalls are formed in
several ways.

= waterial

Fig. 39 A waterfall with plunge pool

i. When a bar of fesistant rock fies transversely
across a river valley, e.g. the Niagara Falls, U.S.A.,
which is 167 feet high and the Kaieteur Falls in
Guyana, 825 feet high.

ii. When a fault-line scarp caused by faulting
lies across river, e.g. Victoria Falls on the River Zam-
bezi, plunging 360 feet.

iii, When water plunges down the edge of a

like the River Congo which leaps for 900
feet through a series of more than 30 rapids as
Livingstone Falls.

iv. Glaciation produces hanging where
tributary streams reach the main U-shaped valley
below as waterfalls, eg. the Yosemite Falls of
California with a total descent of 2,560 feet.

2. The Middle or Valley Course

In the middle course, tends to
replace vertical corrasion. Active erosion of the
banks widens the V-shaped valley. The volume of
water increases with the confluence of many tributaries

lateral corrasion

Fig. 40 Interlocking spurs

and this increases the river's load. The work of
the river is predominantly transportation with some
deposition. Downstream, the interlocking spurs
(Fig. 40) that project from both sides of the valley
are cut back into a line of bluffs. Rain-wash, soil
creep, landslides and gullying gradually widen the
valley, cutting back the sides. The river’s treble task
of valley-cutting, bed-smoothing and debris-removal
are being carried out in a more tranquil manner
than in the mountain course though the velocity
does not decrease. Some of the load is dropped or
deposited. Again this depends on the volume of
flow, for in the event of flood, the river’s erosive
power and its capability for load-carrying is greatly
increased. The more outstanding features associated
with the valley course are these.

(a) Meanders. As water flowing under gravity
seldom flows straight for any long distance, a winding
course soon develops. The irregularities of the
ground force the river to swing in loops, forming
meanders, a term derived from the winding River

--- PAGE 25 ---
Meanderez in Asia Minor. The mechanism of

meander formation is illustrated in Fig. 41.

(b) River cliffs and slip-off slopes. When the
flow of water PQ (in Fig. 41) enters the bend of the
river, it dashes straight into Q, eroding the outer
bank into a steep river-cliff at Q. The water piles
up on the outside of the bend because of the centri-
fugal force. A bottom current RS is set up in a cork-
screw motion and is hurled back into mid-stream
and the inner bank. Shingle is thus deposited here

{a) The development of meanders

erosion
ot - S A a

4
4
iS 450"
PQ=fiow of water “——> Se
RS=bottom current ===>

{b) Cross-section of a meander

Fig. 41 Meanders
(a) The development of meanders
(b) Cross-section of a meander

at S. where the slip-off sloy
bank is therefore the bank of continuous erosion
and the inner bank is the bank of continual deposition

(c) Interlocking spurs. As the stream flows on
the meanders migrate progressively outwards With
the interlocking spurs alternating with the undercut
slopes as shown in Fig. 40. It must be pointed
at this stage that meanders in the middle course
only the beginning of the downstream swing, for
bends are restricted by the interlocking spurs, In
the lower course, the loops are enlarged across the
level plain and meanders are fully developed.

e is very gentle. The Outer

out
are

3. The Lower or Plain Course

The river moving downstream across a broad, leye|
plain is heavy with debris brought down from the
upper course. Vertical corrasion has almost ceased
though lateral corrasion still goes on to erode its
banks further. The work of the river is mainly
deposition. building up its bed and forming extensive
flood plains. The volume of water is greatly swelled
by the additional tributaries that join the main stream,
Coarse materials are dropped and the finer silt is
carried down towards the mouth of the river. Large
sheets of materials are deposited on the level plain
and may split the river into several complicated
channels, so that it can be described as a braided

stream. Some of the major plain course features are
the following.

The Sg. Muara in Negri Sembilan
The river swings from side to sid!
in tight meanders. Note the sand
deposited on the slip-off slope
G.C. Morgan

their jower course

(a) Flood plain. Rivers
ts. During annual

arge quantities of sedime

carry
or sporadic floods, these

materials are spread over

1

layer of

the low-lying adjacent areas. A sediment
is thus deposited during each flood, gradually building
up a (Fig. 42)

flows normally its bed is raised through the accumu-

ertile When the river
lation of deposits and material is also dropped on
It will

not be long before the water level flows dangerously

the sides forming raised banks called

close to the top of the levees. In an attempt to

iy fe bedrock

Fig. 42 Section of a flood plain (with levee and
artificial embankment)

minimise the risk of floods, artificial embankments
are erected on the natural levees, but this allows the
river to rise further. When they can no longer with-
stand the pressure of the flood water, the banks
burst, damaging property and drowning thousands.
Disastrous floods of this nature frequently occur in
the Yang-tze Kiang, Mississippi, Po and Ganges
plains. But the best known river for floods is the
Hwang-Ho, ‘China’s Sorrow’, where millions have
perished. For example, in 1852 the Hwang-Ho
breached its bank, killing a million people and did
untold damage to farms and properties. The river's
course was diverted over 300 miles away, draining
into the Gulf of Pohai instead of the Yellow Sea.
Nowadays, huge dredgers help to deepen the channels
to avoid excessive sedimentation.

(b) Ox-bow lakes. These are also known as
cut-offs or bayous in the Mississippi basin. In the
lower course of a river, a meander becomes very much
more pronounced. The outside bend or concave
bank is so rapidly eroded that the river becomes
almost a complete circle. There will come a time
when the river cuts through the narrow neck of the
loop, abandoning an ox-bow lake or ‘mortlake
(meaning dead lake). The river then flows straight.
The ox-bow lake will later degenerate into a swamp
through subsequent floods that may silt up the lake.
It becomes marshy, and eventually dries up (Fig. 43).

(c) Delta. When a river reaches the sea, the fine
materials it has not yet dropped are deposited at its
mouth, forming a fan-shaped alluvial area called a

EROSION

Fig. 43 The formation of an ox-bow lake

delta, a word which originated from the Greek letter
A which closely resembled the triangular delta of the
Nile (Fig. 44). This alluvial tract is, in fact, a seaward
extension of the flood-plain. Due to the obstruction
caused by the deposited alluvium, the river may
discharge its water through several channels called
distributaries. Some deltas are extremely large. For
instance, the Ganges delta is almost as big as the whole
of West Malaysia. Deltas extend sideways and sea-
wards at an amazing rate. The River Po extends its
delta by over forty feet a year. The town of Adria,
located nearly fifteen miles inland was a seaport in
the time of Christ!

Deltas differ much in their size, shape, growth
and importance. A number of factors such as the
rate of sedimentation, the depth of the river and the
sea-bed, and the character of the tides, currents and
waves greatly influence the eventual formation of

li delta takes a characteristic tan
shape extending sideways and
sean arts

ii. river is obstructed by sedi
ments and branches into dis-
tributaries to discharge more
sediments brought down

Lriver reaches coast and
deposits sediments

{

alluvium

lower course of
fiver

Fig. 44 The formation of deltas
(a) Stages in the formation of a delta

a

(b) Section through the lower course of a
tiver, showing flood plain and delta

--- PAGE 26 ---
For this reason, several types of delta are
The Mississippi has a bird’s-foot delta,
several main branches like the foot of a bird
into the Gulf of Mexico. The Nile, Ganges
ong have the fan-shaped arcuate deltas
s distributaries. Some other rivers

on, Ob and Vistula have their deltas
Submerged in coastal waters to form estuarine
A tetos like the Ebro of Spain have

Sea leva}

former sea level knickpoint

New Sea leve|

River a and knickpoint due to
Pe eamea tiver cuts d

lown into
deposited sediments to form a new

ng terraces at either side. At the
rejuvenation the river falls to its new

to a fantastic depth.
Canyon, the depth is
wide at the top and

shifted upwards to the middle course. The upper
course is little affected when there is a rise in sea level.
In many areas where the sea has risen this was
probably caused by the release of water locked up

in the ice masses during the Quaternary Ice Ages.
The Human Aspects of Rivers
In many countries, rivers form the chief highway of

commerce and transport. The Yang-tze Kiang is
navigable up to a thousand miles from its mouth.
The Amazon, the world’s greatest river is navigable
2,300 miles up-stream to the foot of the Andes,
though it is less extensively used. Even the Nile
with its cataracts is navigable for its first 960 miles
up to the First Cataract at Aswan. Other major
rivers such as the Mississippi, St. Lawrence, Rhine,
Danube, Congo, Murray, Darling, Mekong and Irra-
waddy all serve as important waterways for their
respective countries. Some of them are useful for
transporting logs to the saw mills, others are used to
export bulky goods and import foodstuffs and raw
materials.

But all rivers undertake three closely interrelated
activities erosion, transportation and deposition. Their
work has therefore both advantages and disadvant-
ages from a human point of view. Rapids and water-
falls, interrupt the navigability of a river. By deposit-
ing large quantities of sediments in the lower course,
the river silts up ports preventing large steamers
from anchoring close to the shores. Deltas are thus
less satisfactory sites than estuaries for the siting of
large ports. Though this can be overcome by the
construction of artificial harbours or by dredging
this is expensive and, in some instances, impracti-
cable. Some rivers change their courses from time
to time, others are made difficult for navigation by
their seasonal variations in the amount of water
discharged, and others may suffer from ill-drained
marshes and stagnant waters, leading to ill health
and water-borne disease. Many rivers flood, bursting
levees and causing untold damage to crops. The
floods may add a layer of fertile silt to the flood plain,
but excessive flooding as in the Orinoco may dis-
courage people from cultivating crops at all.

On the other hand, the advantages of rivers
often outweigh the destruction that they cause.
In the upper course, rivers with steep gorges and
waterfalls, provide natural sites for the generation

engineering and agin

cesses at work along the

hydro-electric power, leading to the establishment —
urgical industries, 5 _ Heapuree to iis ment,

downstream unchecked may cause widespread dis-
astrous floods in the lower course, eg. in the
Indus and Ganges plains. In regions of insufficient
rainfall such as Egypt and the Chao Phraya basin
in Thailand irrigation canals fed by the main stream
enable many crops to be successfully cultivated.
The upper streams develop river captures and the
resultant wind gaps may facilitate construction of
upland roads and railways. The river valleys provide
a convenient means of land communication.

The flood plains of large rivers with their thick
mantles of fine silt are some of the richest agriculture!
areas of the world. They may support very dense
populations and a chain of large cities may be strung
along their banks. Many deltas are equally fertile,
eg. the Ganges delta accounts for almost all the
jute grown for world consumption; the Nile delta
produces superior quality cotton and several crops
of rice a year. The productive hinterlands are able
to support ports such as New Orleans for the Missis-
sippi basin, Rotterdam for the Rhineland and
Calcutta for the Indo-Gangetic Plain.

Fresh-water fishing is important along many rivers
and lakes. The organic matter brought down by
the river waters provides valuable food for fish and
for spawning purposes. Rivers supply water for
domestic consumption, sewerage and other industrial
purposes. In Lancashire, the soft-water from the
Millstone Grit is used for washing, dyeing and
bleaching textiles. Rivers form the political boun-
daries between many countries. The Mekong se-
parates Laos from Thailand; and the Yalu forms a
well defined border between North Korea and the
eastern U.S.S.R.

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

1. What are the characteristic features you
would expect to find in a river valley at the
stage of youth, maturity and old age? Illustrate
some of the more outstanding features with
diagrams and examples.

ve By sefersnce i speriie Bkalupies, Mesaeibe
the major constructive |

--- PAGE 27 ---
following pairs of features of a river:
{a) dendritic and trellised drainage pattern
_ (bd) rapids and waterfalls
~ (ce) estuary and delta
_(d) tributaries and distributaries
 {e) river capture and river cliff

__ 4. Explain any three of the following statements
(a) Mass movement of earth is mainly due
to the lubricating action of rain-water
___ and gravitional forces.
:  (b) Vertical corrasion is dominant in the

upper course of a river.

(c) The work of the river in the lower course
is mainly depositional.

(d) Ports are better sited on estuaries than
on deltas.

(e) Incised meanders are features of river
rejuvenation.

5. Either; Describe and explain with relevant
sketches the various types of river
deltas
Or: Explain the ways in which river erosion
occurs.

Chapter 6 Landforms of glaciation

The Ice Age and Types of Ice Masses
During the Pleistocene period or the Ice Ages, about
30,000 years ago, great continental ice sheets covered
much of the temperate latitudes. It is estimated
that more than 12 million square miles of the northern
hemisphere were buried by ice, half of which was in
North America and the rest in Europe, Greenland
and the high mountains of Eurasia (Fig. 46). The
warmer climate that followed caused the ice sheets
to retreat. Today only two major ice caps are still
present, in Greenland and Antarctica. The former
covers an area of 720,000 square miles while the
latter is more than 5 million square miles. They are
made up of compact sheets of ice, hardened and
crystallised to a depth of over a mile, In Marie Byrd
Land, Antarctica, the ice cap was measured and found
to be more than 14,000 feet thick! Under such a
collosal weight, the land sinks gradually.

From the central dome of the ice cap the ice creeps
out in all directions to escape as glaciers. The peaks
of the loftier mountains project above the surface
as nunataks. When the ice sheets reach right down
to the sea they often extend outwards into the polar
waters and float as ice shelves. They terminate in
precipitous cliffs, When they break into individual
blocks, these are called icebergs. While afloat in
the sea, icebergs assume a tabular or irregular shape
and only one-ninth of the mass is visible above the

Fig. 46 The extent of continental ice sheets in the Ice Ages

surface. They diminish in size when approaching
warmer waters and are eventually melted, dropping
the rock debris that was frozen inside them on the
sea bed.

Apart from Greenland and Antarctica, glaciation
is still evident on the highlands of many parts of the
world, which lie above the snowline. This varies from
sea level in the polar regions to 9,000 feet in the Alps
and 17,000 feet at the equator, as on Mt. Kilimanjaro.
Permanent snowfields are sustained by heavy winter
snowfall and ineffective summer melting and evapora-
tion. Where the slopes are gentle and the hollows
are sheltered from both direct sunlight and strong
winds, any snow that falls is rapidly accumulated,
Part of the surface snow may melt during the day, but
by nightfall it is refrozen. This process is repeated
until it forms a hard, granular substance Known as
névé (in French) or firn (in German). Owing to
gravitational forces, the neve of the upland snowfield
is drawn towards the valley below. This is the be-
ginning of the flow of the glacier—river of ice’.
It normally assumes a tongue-shape, broadest at the
source but becoming narrower downhill. Though
the glacier is not a liquid, under the continual pressure
from the accumulated snow above, it moves. The
rate of movement is greatest in the middle where there
is little obstruction. The sides and the bottom are