--- PAGE 1 ---
Social Science
Contemporary
India
II
Textbook in Geography
for Class X
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 2 ---
1068 – CONTEMPORARY INDIA-II
ISBN 81-7450-644-6
Textbook for Class X
First Edition
January 2006 Agrahayana 1928 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Reprtined q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise
December 2007, February 2009, without the prior permission of the publisher.
January 2010, January 2011, q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent, re-sold,
January 2012, December 2012, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding
or cover other than that in which it is published.
November 2013, November 2014,
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price
December 2015, December 2016, indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should
January 2018, February 2019, be unacceptable.
December 2019, January 2021
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
November 2021
DIVISION, NCERT
Revised Edition NCERT Campus
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944 Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
PD 410T BS Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
` 90.00
Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production : Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business : Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor (In charge) : Bijnan Sutar
Assistant Editor : R. N. Bhardwaj
Production Assistant : Rajesh Pippal
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Published at the Publication Division by the
Nidhi Wadhwa
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
Cartography
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Prabhat
Cartographic Design Agency
Printing Press, D-23, Industrial Area,
Site-A, Mathura- 281 001 (U.P.)
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 3 ---
FFFFFooooorrrrreeeeewwwwwooooorrrrrddddd
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on
the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They
also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures
will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system
of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must
recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults.
Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one
of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode
of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour
in implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of
teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for
teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather
than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to
address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and
reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration for
child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space
to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the
advisory committee for textbooks in Social Sciences, at the higher
secondary level, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for this
book, Professor M.H. Qureshi for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are
grateful to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 4 ---
the institutions and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw
upon their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the
members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department
of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development
under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P.
Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its
products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to
undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training
iv
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 5 ---
RRRRRaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnnaaaaallllliiiiisssssaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn ooooofffff CCCCCooooonnnnnttttteeeeennnnnttttt iiiiinnnnn ttttthhhhheeeee TTTTTeeeeexxxxxtttttbbbbbooooooooookkkkk
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce
content load on students. The National Education Policy 2020,
also emphasises reducing the content load and providing
opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In
this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to
rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken
into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of
the following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject
areas in the same class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in
the same subject
• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without
much interventions from teachers and can be learned by
children through self-learning or peer-learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying
out the changes given above.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 7 ---
TTTTTeeeeexxxxxtttttbbbbbooooooooookkkkk dddddeeeeevvvvveeeeelllllooooopppppmmmmmeeeeennnnnttttt cccccooooommmmmmmmmmiiiiitttttttttteeeeeeeeee
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES AT
THE SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of
Calcutta, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
M. H. Qureshi, Professor, Centre for the Study of Regional Development,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
ADVISOR
B. S. Butola, Professor, Centre for the Study of Regional Development,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Aparajita De, Lecturer, Department of Geography,
Delhi School of Economics, University of Delhi, Delhi
Geeta Duggal, Former Principal, Delhi Public School, Rewari
Indu Sharma, PGT, Demonstration School RIE, Ajmer
K. Jaya, PGT, Convent of Jesus and Mary, Bangla Sahib Road, New Delhi
Punam Behari, Reader, Miranda House, University of Delhi, Delhi
Saroj Sharma, TGT (Retd.), Mother’s International School,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Aparna Pandey, Lecturer, Department of Education in Social Sciences
and Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 9 ---
AAAAAccccckkkkknnnnnooooowwwwwllllleeeeedddddgggggeeeeemmmmmeeeeennnnntttttsssss
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
acknowledges the support of individuals and organisations as listed
below for providing various photographs and other materials such as
articles used in this textbook — Shveta Uppal, NCERT, New Delhi for
Fig. 1.11, 2.2, 4.3, 4.10, 4.11, 7.3, 7.4, 7.5; Kalyan Banerjee, NCERT,
New Delhi for Fig. 7.9; Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi
for Fig. 2.2 (Endangered : the Nicobar megapode), 3.3, 3.5, 3.6, 3.7,
4.1, 5.14; CCSHAU, Hisar for Fig. 4.4(a), 4.13; Directorate of Extension,
Ministry of Agriculture, I.A.R.I. Campus, New Pusa, New Delhi for Fig.
4.2, 4.4(b), 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 4.8, 4.9 (Groundnut and Mustard), 4.12 (Apple
and Pomegranate), 4.15, 4.18; Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Govt. of India for Fig. 2.1, 5.10, 6.8; Ministry of Coal, Govt. of India for
Fig. 5.11(a) and (b); Ministry of Mines, Govt. of India for Fig. 5.3, 5.5,
5.8; Department of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry of Shipping,
Road Transport and Highways, Govt. of India for Fig. 7.2, 7.10; Ministry
of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Govt. of India for Fig. 5.12,
6.3, 6.6, 6.7; Department of Shipping, Ministry of Shipping, Road
Transport and Highways, Govt. of India for Fig. 7.6, 7.7, 7.8;
Kurukshetra magazine for collage on page 24; The Times of India for
collage on page 20, 24, 29, 26, 57, 91; The Hindu for collage on page
20; Hindustan for collage on page 91; NCERT, Social Science, Part-II,
Textbook for Class-VIII for Fig. 1.12, 3.2.
The Council is thankful to the Survey of India for certification of maps
given in the textbook.
Acknowledgements are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head,
Department of Education in Social Sciences and Humanities for her
valuable support at every stage of preparation of this textbook.
Special thanks are due to Vandana R. Singh, Consultant Editor for
going through the textbook and for giving useful suggestions.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of
Ishwar Singh, DTP Operator; Ajay Singh, Copy Editor; Dinesh Kumar,
Computer Incharge, who have helped in giving a final shape to this book.
The contribution of the Publication Department, NCERT are also duly
acknowledged.
The following are applicable to all the maps of India used in this textbook
1. © Government of India, Copyright 2006
2. The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the
publisher.
3. The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve
nautical miles measured from the appropriate base line.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 10 ---
4. The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are
at Chandigarh.
5. The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and
Meghalaya shown on this map are as interpreted from the “North-Eastern
Areas (Reorganisation) Act.1971,” but have yet to be verified.
6. The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master
Copy certified by Survey of India.
7. The state boundaries between Uttarakhand & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar &
Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh & Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by
the Governments concerned.
8. The spellings of names in these maps have been taken from various sources.
School Bhuvan–NCERT an Online web portal
Web based online e-learning Geo spatial portal School Bhuvan–NCERT has
been launched by NCERT and ISRO in collaboration to enhance geo spatial
skills among students. This online e-learning portal includes thematic maps
given in Geography textbooks. This portal enables students to use Geo-spatial
technology for better understanding of concepts in Geography. Online activities
available on the portal as Level 1, Level 2 and Level 3 encourage learners
from Classes VI to XII to develop neighbourhood maps and their attributes on
satellite imageries available on School Bhuvan–NCERT.
x
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 11 ---
CCCCCooooonnnnnttttteeeeennnnntttttsssss
Foreword iii
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks v
1. Resources and Development 1
2. Forest and Wildlife Resources 13
3. Water Resources 19
4. Agriculture 30
5. Minerals and Energy Resources 42
6. Manufacturing Industries 58
7. Lifelines of National Economy 71
Appendix–I 84
Appendix–II 85
Glossary 86
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 12 ---
Constitution of India
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 13 ---
The process of transformation of things
Can you identify and name the various items
available in our environment involves an
used in making life comfortable in our villages
interactive relationship between nature,
and towns. List the items and name the
technology and institutions. Human beings
material used in their making.
interact with nature through technology and
create institutions to accelerate their
Everything available in our environment
economic development.
which can be used to satisfy our needs,
Do you think that resources are free
provided, it is technologically accessible,
gifts of nature as is assumed by many?
economically feasible and culturally
They are not. Resources are a function of
acceptable can be termed as ‘Resource’.
human activities. Human beings themselves
are essential components of resources. They
transform material available in our
environment into resources and use them.
These resources can be classified in the
following ways–
(a) On the basis of origin – biotic and abiotic
(b) On the basis of exhaustibility – renewable
and non-renewable
(c) On the basis of ownership – individual,
community, national and international
Fig. 1.1: Interdependent relationship between (d) On the basis of status of development –
nature, technology and institutions potential, developed stock and reserves.
Fig. 1.2: Classification of resources
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 14 ---
Prepare a list of stock and reserve, resources Sustainable development
that you are familiar with from your local area. Sustainable economic development means
‘development should take place without
damaging the environment, and development
DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES in the present should not compromise with the
needs of the future generations.’
Resources are vital for human survival as well
as for maintaining the quality of life. It was
believed that resources are free gifts of nature.
As a result, human beings used them
indiscriminately and this has led to the
Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, 1992
following major problems.
In June 1992, more than 100 heads of states
• Depletion of resources for satisfying the
met in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, for the first
greed of a few individuals.
International Earth Summit. The Summit was
• Accumulation of resources in few hands, which, convened for addressing urgent problems of
in turn, divided the society into two segments environmental protection and socio-
i.e. haves and have nots or rich and poor. economic development at the global level.
• Indiscriminate exploitation of resources has The assembled leaders signed the
led to global ecological crises such as, global Declaration on Global Climatic Change and
warming, ozone layer depletion, environmental Biological Diversity. The Rio Convention
pollution and land degradation. endorsed the global Forest Principles and
adopted Agenda 21 for achieving
Sustainable Development in the 21st century.
Agenda 21
1. Imagine, if the oil supply gets exhausted It is the declaration signed by world leaders
one day, how would this affect our life style? in 1992 at the United Nations Conference
2. Plan a survey in your colony/village to on Environment and Development (UNCED),
investigate people’s attitude towards which took place at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It
recycling of the domestic/agricultural aims at achieving global sustainable
wastes. Ask questions about : development. It is an agenda to combat
(a) What do they think about resources environmental damage, poverty, disease
they use? through global co-operation on common
(b) What is their opinion about the interests, mutual needs and shared
wastes, and its utilisation? responsibilities. One major objective of the
(c) Collage your results. Agenda 21 is that every local government
should draw its own local Agenda 21.
An equitable distribution of resources has
become essential for a sustained quality of life
RESOURCE PLANNING
and global peace. If the present trend of resource
depletion by a few individuals and countries Planning is the widely accepted strategy for
continues, the future of our planet is in danger. judicious use of resources. It has importance
Therefore, resource planning is essential for in a country like India, which has enormous
sustainable existence of all forms of life. diversity in the availability of resources. There
Sustainable existence is a component of are regions which are rich in certain types of
sustainable development. resources but are deficient in some other
2 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 15 ---
resources. There are some regions which can
be considered self sufficient in terms of the
What resources are being developed in your
availability of resources and there are some
surroundings by the community/village
regions which have acute shortage of some vital
panchayats/ward level communities with the
resources. For example, the states of
help of community participation?
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Madhya
Pradesh are rich in minerals and coal deposits.
Arunachal Pradesh has abundance of water
technology and institutions may hinder
resources but lacks in infrastructural
development. There are many regions in our
development. The state of Rajasthan is very well
country that are rich in resources but these
endowed with solar and wind energy but lacks
are included in economically backward
in water resources. The cold desert of Ladakh
regions. On the contrary there are some regions
is relatively isolated from the rest of the
which have a poor resource base but they are
country. It has very rich cultural heritage but
economically developed.
it is deficient in water, infrastructure and some
vital minerals. This calls for balanced resource Can you name some resource rich but
planning at the national, state, regional and economically backward regions and some
local levels. resource poor but economically developed
regions? Give reasons for such a situation.
The history of colonisation reveals that
rich resources in colonies were the main
Prepare a list of resources found in your state attractions for the foreign invaders. It was
and also identify the resources that are primarily the higher level of technological
important but deficit in your state. development of the colonising countries that
helped them to exploit resources of other
regions and establish their supremacy over
the colonies. Therefore, resources can
Resource Planning in India
contribute to development only when they are
Resource planning is a complex process accompanied by appropriate technological
which involves : (i) identification and development and institutional changes. India
inventory of resources across the regions of has experienced all this in different phases of
the country. This involves surveying, colonisation. Therefore, in India, development,
mapping and qualitative and quantitative in general, and resource development in
estimation and measurement of the particular does not only involve the
resources. (ii) Evolving a planning structure availability of resources, but also the
endowed with appropriate technology, skill technology, quality of human resources and
the historical experiences of the people.
and institutional set up for implementing
resource development plans. (iii) Matching Conservation of Resources: Resources are
the resource development plans with overall vital for any developmental activity. But
national development plans. irrational consumption and over-utilisation
India has made concerted efforts for of resources may lead to socio-economic and
achieving the goals of resource planning right environmental problems. To overcome these
from the First Five Year Plan launched after problems, resource conservation at various
Independence. levels is important. This had been the main
The availability of resources is a necessary concern of the leaders and thinkers in the
condition for the development of any region, past. For example, Gandhiji was very apt in
but mere availability of resources in the voicing his concern about resource
absence of corresponding changes in conservation in these words: “There is enough
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT 3
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 16 ---
for everybody’s need and not for any body’s available land for various purposes with careful
greed.” He placed the greedy and selfish planning.
individuals and exploitative nature of modern India has land under a variety of relief
technology as the root cause for resource features, namely; mountains, plateaus, plains
depletion at the global level. He was against and islands. About 43 per cent of the land area
mass production and wanted to replace it with is plain, which provides facilities for agriculture
the production by the masses. and industry. Mountains account for 30 per
cent of the total surface area of the country and
ensure perennial flow of some rivers, provide
At the international level, the Club of Rome
facilities for tourism and ecological aspects.
advocated resource conservation for the first
About 27 per cent of the area of the country is
time in a more systematic way in 1968.
the plateau region. It possesses rich reserves
Subsequently, in 1974, Gandhian philosophy
of minerals, fossil fuels and forests.
was once again presented by Schumacher
in his book Small is Beautiful. The seminal L AND U TILISATION
contribution with respect to resource
Land resources are used for the following
conservation at the global level was made
purposes:
by the Brundtland Commission Report, 1987.
This report introduced the concept of 1. Forests
‘Sustainable Development’ and advocated 2. Land not available for cultivation
it as a means for resource conservation,
(a) Barren and waste land
which was subsequently published in a book
(b) Land put to non-agricultural uses, e.g.
entitled Our Common Future. Another
buildings, roads, factories, etc.
significant contribution was made at the Earth
3. Other uncultivated land (excluding
Summit at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992.
fallow land)
(a) Permanent pastures and grazing land,
L R (b) Land under miscellaneous tree crops
AND ESOURCES
groves (not included in net sown area),
We live on land, we perform our economic
(c) Cultruable waste land (left uncultivated
activities on land and we use it in different
for more than 5 agricultural years).
ways. Thus, land is a natural resource of
utmost importance. It supports natural 4. Fallow lands
vegetation, wild life, human life, economic (a) Current fallow-(left without cultivation
activities, transport and communication for one or less than one agricultural year),
systems. However, land is an asset of a finite (b) Other than current fallow-(left
magnitude, therefore, it is important to use the uncultivated for the past 1 to 5
agricultural years).
5. Net sown area the physical extent of land
on which crops are sown harvested is
known as net sown area.
Area sown more than once in an
agricultural year plus net sown area is
known as gross cropped area.
L U P I
AND SE ATTERN IN NDIA
The use of land is determined both by physical
factors such as topography, climate, soil types
as well as human factors such as population
Fig 1.3: India : Land under important Relief density, technological capability and culture
Features and traditions etc.
4 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 17 ---
Reporting Area: 100 Per cent
Source : Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture, 2017
Fig. 1.4
Total geographical area of India is 3.28 of such land is very high. Hence, these lands
million sq km. Land use data, however, is are cultivated once or twice in about two to
available only for 93 per cent of the total three years and if these are included in the
geographical area because the land use net sown area then the percentage of NSA in
reporting for most of the north-east states India comes to about 54 per cent of the total
except Assam has not been done fully. reporting area.
Moreover, some areas of Jammu and Kashmir The pattern of net sown area varies greatly
occupied by Pakistan and China have also not from one state to another. It is over 80 per
been surveyed. cent of the total area in Punjab and Haryana
and less than 10 per cent in Arunachal
Pradesh, Mizoram, Manipur and Andaman
Try to do a comparison between the two pie
Nicobar Islands.
charts (Fig. 1.4 ) given for land use and find
out why the net sown area and the land
Find out reasons for the low proportion of
under forests have changed from 1960-61
net sown area in these states.
to 2014-15 very marginally.
The land under permanent pasture has Forest area in the country is far lower than
also decreased. How are we able to feed our the desired 33 per cent of geographical area,
huge cattle population on this pasture land as it was outlined in the National Forest Policy
and what are the consequences of it? Most of (1952). It was considered essential for
the other than the current fallow lands are maintenance of the ecological balance. The
either of poor quality or the cost of cultivation livelihood of millions of people who live on the
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT 5
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 18 ---
fringes of these forests depends upon it. A part There are many ways to solve the problems
of the land is termed as waste land and land of land degradation. Afforestation and proper
put to other non-agricultural uses. Waste land management of grazing can help to some extent.
includes rocky, arid and desert areas and land Planting of shelter belts of plants, control on
put to other non-agricultural uses includes over grazing, stabilisation of sand dunes by
settlements, roads, railways, industry etc. growing thorny bushes are some of the
Continuous use of land over a long period of methods to check land degradation in arid
time without taking appropriate measures to areas. Proper management of waste lands,
conserve and manage it, has resulted in land control of mining activities, proper discharge
degradation. This, in turn, has serious and disposal of industrial effluents and wastes
repercussions on society and the after treatment can reduce land and water
environment. degradation in industrial and suburban areas.
LAND DEGRADATION AND CONSERVATION SOIL AS A RESOURCE
MEASURES
Soil is the most important renewable natural
We have shared our land with the past resource. It is the medium of plant growth
generations and will have to do so with the future and supports different types of living organisms
generations too. Ninety-five per cent of our basic on the earth. The soil is a living system. It
needs for food, shelter and clothing are obtained takes millions of years to form soil upto a few
from land. Human activities have not only cm in depth. Relief, parent rock or bed rock,
brought about degradation of land but have climate, vegetation and other forms of life and
also aggravated the pace of natural forces to time are important factors in the formation of
cause damage to land. soil. Various forces of nature such as change
Some human activities such as in temperature, actions of running water, wind
deforestation, over grazing, mining and and glaciers, activities of decomposers etc.
quarrying too have contributed significantly in contribute to the formation of soil. Chemical
land degradation. and organic changes which take place in the
Mining sites are abandoned after
excavation work is complete leaving deep Top soil
the upper soil layer
scars and traces of over-burdening. In states
like Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Subsoil weathered
Pradesh and Odisha deforestation due to
rocks sand and
mining have caused severe land degradation. silt clay
In states like Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya
Pradesh and Maharashtra overgrazing is one
of the main reasons for land degradation. In
the states of Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar Substratum
Pradesh, over irrigation is responsible for land weathered parent
degradation due to water logging leading to rock material
increase in salinity and alkalinity in the soil.
The mineral processing like grinding of
limestone for cement industry and calcite and
soapstone for ceramic industry generate huge
quantity of dust in the atmosphere. It retards
the process of infiltration of water into the soil
Unweathered
after it settles down on the land. In recent
parent bed rock
years, industrial effluents as waste have
become a major source of land and water
pollution in many parts of the country.
Fig. 1.5: Soil Profile
6 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 19 ---
soil are equally important. Soil also consists nodules than the Khadar. It has more fine
of organic (humus) and inorganic materials particles and is more fertile than the bangar.
(Fig. 1.5). Alluvial soils as a whole are very fertile.
On the basis of the factors responsible for Mostly these soils contain adequate proportion
soil formation, colour, thickness, texture, age, of potash, phosphoric acid and lime which
chemical and physical properties, the soils of are ideal for the growth of sugarcane, paddy,
India are classified in different types. wheat and other cereal and pulse crops. Due
to its high fertility, regions of alluvial soils are
Classification of Soils
intensively cultivated and densely populated.
India has varied relief features, landforms, Soils in the drier areas are more alkaline and
climatic realms and vegetation types. These can be productive after proper treatment and
have contributed in the development of various irrigation.
types of soils.
Black Soil
Alluvial Soils These soils are black in colour and are also
This is the most widely spread and important known as regur soils. Black soil is ideal for
soil. In fact, the entire northern plains are growing cotton and is also known as black
made of alluvial soil. These have been cotton soil. It is believed that climatic condition
deposited by three important Himalayan river along with the parent rock material are the
systems– the Indus, the Ganga and the important factors for the formation of black
Brahmaputra. These soils also extend in soil. This type of soil is typical of the Deccan
Rajasthan and Gujarat through a narrow trap (Basalt) region spread over northwest
corridor. Alluvial soil is also found in the Deccan plateau and is made up of lava flows.
eastern coastal plains particularly in the deltas They cover the plateaus of Maharashtra,
of the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna Saurashtra, Malwa, Madhya Pradesh and
and the Kaveri rivers. Chhattisgarh and extend in the south east
direction along the Godavari and the Krishna
valleys.
Fig. 1.6: Alluvial Soil
The alluvial soil consists of various
proportions of sand, silt and clay. As we move
inlands towards the river valleys, soil particles
appear some what bigger in size. In the upper
reaches of the river valley i.e. near the place
of the break of slope, the soils are coarse. Such
soils are more common in piedmont plains
such as Duars, Chos and Terai.
Fig. 1.7: Black Soil
Apart from the size of their grains or
components, soils are also described on the The black soils are made up of extremely
basis of their age. According to their age fine i.e. clayey material. They are well-known
alluvial soils can be classified as old alluvial for their capacity to hold moisture. In addition,
(Bangar) and new alluvial (Khadar). The they are rich in soil nutrients, such as calcium
bangar soil has higher concentration of kanker carbonate, magnesium, potash and lime. These
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT 7
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 20 ---
India: Major Soil Types
8 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 21 ---
soils are generally poor in phosphoric contents. vegetation and in semi-arid environment, it is
They develop deep cracks during hot weather, generally humus poor. They are prone to
which helps in the proper aeration of the soil. erosion and degradation due to their position
These soils are sticky when wet and difficult to on the landscape. After adopting appropriate
work on unless tilled immediately after the first soil conservation techniques particularly in
shower or during the pre-monsoon period. the hilly areas of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil
Nadu, this soil is very useful for growing tea
Red and Yellow Soils
and coffee. Red laterite soils in Tamil Nadu,
Red soil develops on crystalline igneous rocks
Andhra Pradesh and Kerala are more suitable
in areas of low rainfall in the eastern and
for crops like cashew nut.
southern parts of the Deccan plateau. Yelllow
and red soils are also found in parts of Arid Soils
Odisha, Chhattisgarh, southern parts of the
Arid soils range from red to brown in colour.
middle Ganga plain and along the piedmont
They are generally sandy in texture and saline
zone of the Western Ghats. These soils develop
in nature. In some areas the salt content is
a reddish colour due to diffusion of iron in
very high and common salt is obtained by
crystalline and metamorphic rocks. It looks
evaporating the water. Due to the dry climate,
yellow when it occurs in a hydrated form.
high temperature, evaporation is faster and
Laterite Soil the soil lacks humus and moisture. The lower
horizons of the soil are occupied by Kankar
Laterite has been derived from the Latin word
because of the increasing calcium content
‘later’ which means brick. The laterite soil
downwards. The Kankar layer formations in
develops under tropical and subtropical
the bottom horizons restrict the infiltration of
climate with alternate wet and dry season.
water. After proper irrigation these soils
This soil is the result of intense leaching due
to heavy rain. Lateritic soils are mostly deep become cultivable as has been in the case of
to very deep, acidic (pH<6.0), generally western Rajasthan.
deficient in plant nutrients and occur mostly
in southern states, Western Ghats region of
Maharashtra, Odisha, some parts of West
Bengal and North-east regions. Where these
soils support deciduous and evergreen
forests, it is humus rich, but under sparse
Fig. 1.9: Arid Soil
Forest Soils
These soils are found in the hilly and
mountainous areas where sufficient rain
forests are available. The soils texture varies
according to the mountain environment
where they are formed. They are loamy and
silty in valley sides and coarse grained in
Fig. 1.8: Laterite Soil the upper slopes. In the snow covered areas
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT 9
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 22 ---
of Himalayas, these soils experience
denudation and are acidic with low humus
content. The soils found in the lower parts of
the valleys particularly on the river terraces
and alluvial fans are fertile.
Soil Erosion and Soil Conservation
The denudation of the soil cover and
subsequent washing down is described as soil
erosion. The processes of soil formation and
erosion, go on simultaneously and generally
there is a balance between the two. Sometimes,
this balance is disturbed due to human
activities like deforestation, over-grazing,
construction and mining etc., while natural Fig. 1.11: Gully Erosion
forces like wind, glacier and water lead to
soil is washed away. This is known as sheet
soil erosion. The running water cuts through
erosion. Wind blows loose soil off flat or
the clayey soils and makes deep channels as
sloping land known as wind erosion. Soil
gullies. The land becomes unfit for cultivation
erosion is also caused due to defective methods
and is known as bad land. In the Chambal
of farming. Ploughing in a wrong way i.e. up
basin such lands are called ravines.
and down the slope form channels for the
Sometimes water flows as a sheet over large
quick flow of water leading to soil erosion.
areas down a slope. In such cases the top
Ploughing along the contour lines can
decelerate the flow of water down the slopes.
This is called contour ploughing. Steps can
be cut out on the slopes making terraces.
Terrace cultivation restricts erosion. Western
and central Himalayas have well developed
terrace farming. Large fields can be divided into
strips. Strips of grass are left to grow between
the crops. This breaks up the force of the wind.
This method is known as strip cropping.
Planting lines of trees to create shelter also
works in a similar way. Rows of such trees are
called shelter belts. These shelter belts have
contributed significantly to the stabilisation of
sand dunes and in stabilising the desert in
western India.
Fig. 1.10: Soil Erosion
10 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 23 ---
EXERCISES EXERCISES E XERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following is the main cause of land degradation in Punjab?
(a) Intensive cultivation (c) Over irrigation
(b) Deforestation (d) Overgrazing
(ii) In which one of the following states is terrace cultivation practised?
(a) Punjab (c) Haryana
(b) Plains of Uttar Pradesh (d) Uttarakhand
(iii) In which of the following states black soil is predominantly found?
(a) Uttar Pradesh (c) Rajasthan
(b) Maharashtra (d) Jharkhand
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Name three states having black soil and the crop which is mainly grown in it.
(ii) What type of soil is found in the river deltas of the eastern coast? Give three
main features of this type of soil.
(iii) What steps can be taken to control soil erosion in the hilly areas?
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Explain land use pattern in India and why has the land under forest not
increased much since 1960-61?
(ii) How have technical and economic development led to more consumption of
resources?
P /A
ROJECT CTIVITY
1. Make a project showing consumption and conservation of resources in your locality.
2. Have a discussion in the class– how to conserve various resources used in
your school.
3. Imagine if oil supplies get exhausted, how will this affect our life style?
4. Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the
hidden answers.
(i) Natural endowments in the form of land, water, vegetation and minerals.
(ii) A type of non-renewable resource.
(iii) Soil with high water retaining capacity.
(iv) Intensively leached soils of the monsoon climate.
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT 11
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 24 ---
S F G S F O B R O M S U A P J
Q G A F F O R E S T A T I O N
P N R E C P R S L D M I L N F
S N A T Q X U O V A I O L A L
O D E I D R J U J L D B N B D
T G H M I N E R A L S A X M W
B V J K M E D C R U P F M H R
L A T E R I T E M V A Z T V L
A B Z O E N M F T I S D L R C
C G N N S Z I O P A X T Y J H
K J G K D T D C S L S E G E W
(i) Natural endowments in the form of land, water, vegetation and minerals.
(ii) A type of non-renewable resource.
(iii) Soil with high water retaining capacity.
(iv) Intensively leached soils of the monsoon climate.
(v) Plantation of trees on a large scale to check soil erosion.
(vi) The Great Plains of India are made up of these soils.
12 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 25 ---
Flora and Fauna in India
Narak! My Lord, you are the creator of music
If you look around, you will be able to find
in the world of Lepchas
that there are some animals and plants which
Oh Narak! My Lord, let me dedicate
are unique in your area. In fact, India is
myself to you
one of the world’s richest countries in terms
Let me gather your music from the
of its vast array of biological diversity. This
springs, the rivers, the mountains, the forests,
is possibly twice or thrice the number yet
the insects and the animals
to be discovered. You have already studied
Let me gather your music from the sweet
in detail about the extent and variety of
breeze and offer it to you
forest and wildlife resources in India. You
may have realised the importance of
these resources in our daily life. These
Source: Lepcha folk song from northern part of
diverse flora and fauna are so well
West Bengal
integrated in our daily life that we take
these for granted. But, lately, they are
We share this planet with millions of other
under great stress mainy due to insensitivity
living beings, starting from micro-organisms
to our environment.
and bacteria, lichens to banyan trees,
elephants and blue whales. This entire
habitat that we live in has immense Find out stories prevalent in your region
biodiversity. We humans along with all living which are about the harmonious relationship
organisms form a complex web of ecological between human beings and nature.
system in which we are only a part and
very much dependent on this system for
Conservation of Forest and Wildlife in India
our own existence. For example, the plants,
animals and micro-organisms re-create the Conservation in the background of rapid
quality of the air we breathe, the water we decline in wildlife population and forestry has
drink and the soil that produces our food become essential. But why do we need to
without which we cannot survive. Forests conserve our forests and wildlife?
play a key role in the ecological system as Conservation preserves the ecological diversity
these are also the primary producers on and our life support systems – water, air and
which all other living beings depend. soil. It also preserves the genetic diversity of
plants and animals for better growth of species
and breeding. For example, in agriculture,
we are still dependent on traditional crop
Biodiversity or Biological Diversity is
varieties. Fisheries too are heavily dependent
immensely rich in wildlife and cultivated
on the maintenance of aquatic biodiversity.
species, diverse in form and function but
In the 1960s and 1970s, conservationists
closely integrated in a system through
demanded a national wildlife protection
multiple network of interdependencies.
programme. The Indian Wildlife (Protection)
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 26 ---
Tribal girls using bamboo saplings in a
nursery at Mukhali near Silent Valley
Tribal women selling minor forest produce Leaf litter collection by women folk
Fig. 2.1
Act was implemented in 1972, with various Project Tiger
provisions for protecting habitats. An all-
Tiger is one of the key wildlife species in
India list of protected species was also
the faunal web. In 1973, the authorities
published. The thrust of the programme was
realised that the tiger population had
towards protecting the remaining population
dwindled to 1,827 from an estimated
of certain endangered species by banning
55,000 at the turn of the century. The major
hunting, giving legal protection to their
threats to tiger population are numerous,
habitats, and restricting trade in wildlife.
such as poaching for trade, shrinking
Subsequently, central and many state
habitat, depletion of prey base species,
governments established national parks and
growing human population, etc. The trade
wildlife sanctuaries about which you have
of tiger skins and the use of their bones in
already studied. The central government also
traditional medicines, especially in the
announced several projects for protecting
Asian countries left the tiger population on
specific animals, which were gravely
the verge of extinction. Since India and
threatened, including the tiger, the one-
Nepal provide habitat to about two-thirds
horned rhinoceros, the Kashmir stag or
of the surviving tiger population in the
hangul, three types of crocodiles – fresh
world, these two nations became prime
water crocodile, saltwater crocodile and the
targets for poaching and illegal trading.
Gharial, the Asiatic lion, and others. Most
“Project Tiger”, one of the well-
recently, the Indian elephant, black buck
publicised wildlife campaigns in the world,
(chinkara), the great Indian bustard
was launched in 1973. Tiger conservation
(godawan) and the snow leopard, etc. have
has been viewed not only as an effort to
been given full or partial legal protection
save an endangered species, but with
against hunting and trade throughout India.
14 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 27 ---
Fig. 2.2: Rhino and deer in Kaziranga National Park
equal importance as a means of much of its forest and wildlife resources are
preserving biotypes of sizeable magnitude. either owned or managed by the government
Corbett National Park in Uttarakhand, through the Forest Department or other
Sunderbans National Park in West Bengal, government departments. These are classified
Bandhavgarh National Park in Madhya under the following categories.
Pradesh, Sariska Wildlife Sanctuary in
(i)Reserved Forests: More than half of the
Rajasthan, Manas Tiger Reserve in Assam
total forest land has been declared
and Periyar Tiger Reserve in Kerala are
reserved forests. Reserved forests are
some of the tiger reserves of India.
regarded as the most valuable as far as the
conservation of forest and wildlife resources
are concerned.
The conservation projects are now focusing
on biodiversity rather than on a few of its (ii)Protected Forests: Almost one-third of the
components. There is now a more intensive total forest area is protected forest, as
search for different conservation measures. declared by the Forest Department. This
Increasingly, even insects are beginning to find forest land are protected from any further
a place in conservation planning. In the depletion.
notification under Wildlife Act of 1980 and
(iii) Unclassed Forests: These are other
1986, several hundred butterflies, moths,
forests and wastelands belonging to
beetles, and one dragonfly have been added to
both government and private individuals
the list of protected species. In 1991, for the
and communities.
first time plants were also added to the list,
Reserved and protected forests are also
starting with six species.
referred to as permanent forest estates
maintained for the purpose of producing
timber and other forest produce, and for
Collect more information on the wildlife protective reasons. Madhya Pradesh has the
sanctuaries and national parks of India and largest area under permanent forests,
cite their locations on the map of India. constituting 75 per cent of its total forest area.
Jammu and Kashmir, Andhra Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West
Types and Distribution of Forest and
Bengal, and Maharashtra have large
Wildlife Resources
percentages of reserved forests of its total forest
Even if we want to conserve our vast forest and area whereas Bihar, Haryana, Punjab,
wildlife resources, it is rather difficult to Himachal Pradesh, Odisha and Rajasthan have
manage, control and regulate them. In India, a bulk of it under protected forests. All North-
FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES 15
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 28 ---
Can you find out the reasons for the above mentioned problems?
eastern states and parts of Gujarat have a very own set of rules and regulations which do not
high percentage of their forests as unclassed allow hunting, and are protecting the wildlife
forests managed by local communities. against any outside encroachments.
The famous Chipko movement in the
Community and Conservation
Himalayas has not only successfully resisted
Conservation strategies are not new in our deforestation in several areas but has also
country. We often ignore that in India, forests shown that community afforestation with
are also home to some of the traditional indigenous species can be enormously
communities. In some areas of India, local successful. Attempts to revive the traditional
communities are struggling to conserve these conservation methods or developing new
habitats along with government officials, methods of ecological farming are now
recognising that only this will secure their widespread. Farmers and citizen’s groups like
own long-term livelihood. In Sariska Tiger the Beej Bachao Andolan in Tehri and
Reserve, Rajasthan, villagers have fought Navdanya have shown that adequate levels of
against mining by citing the Wildlife Protection diversified crop production without the use of
Act. In many areas, villagers themselves are synthetic chemicals are possible and
protecting habitats and explicitly rejecting economically viable.
government involvement. The inhabitants of In India joint forest management (JFM)
five villages in the Alwar district of Rajasthan programme furnishes a good example for
have declared 1,200 hectares of forest as the involving local communities in the
management and restoration of degraded
Bhairodev Dakav ‘Sonchuri’, declaring their
16 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 29 ---
Sacred groves - a wealth of diverse and rare forests. The programme has been in formal
species existence since 1988 when the state of
Nature worship is an age old tribal belief based on Odisha passed the first resolution for joint
the premise that all creations of nature have to be forest management. JFM depends on the
protected. Such beliefs have preserved several virgin formation of local (village) institutions that
forests in pristine form called Sacred Groves (the undertake protection activities mostly on
forests of God and Goddesses). These patches of degraded forest land managed by the forest
forest or parts of large forests have been left department. In return, the members of
untouched by the local people and any interference these communities are entitled to
with them is banned. intermediary benefits like non-timber
Certain societies revere a particular tree which forest produces and share in the timber
they have preserved from time immemorial. The harvested by ‘successful protection’.
Mundas and the Santhal of Chota Nagpur region The clear lesson from the dynamics of
worship mahua (Bassia latifolia) and kadamba both environmental destruction and
(Anthocaphalus cadamba) trees, and the tribals of reconstruction in India is that local
Odisha and Bihar worship the tamarind (Tamarindus communities everywhere have to be
indica) and mango (Mangifera indica) trees during involved in some kind of natural resource
weddings. To many of us, peepal and banyan trees management. But there is still a long way
are considered sacred. to go before local communities are at the
Indian society comprises several cultures, each centre-stage in decision-making. Accept
with its own set of traditional methods of conserving only those economic or developmental
nature and its creations. Sacred qualities are often
activities, that are people centric,
ascribed to springs, mountain peaks, plants and
environment-friendly and economically
animals which are closely protected. You will find
rewarding.
troops of macaques and langurs around many
temples. They are fed daily and treated as a part of
Write a short essay on any practices
temple devotees. In and around Bishnoi villages in
which you may have observed and
Rajasthan, herds of blackbuck, (chinkara), nilgai and
practised in your everyday lives that
peacocks can be seen as an integral part of the
community and nobody harms them. conserve and protect the environment
around you.
“The tree is a peculiar organism of unlimited kindness and benevolence and
makes no demand for its sustenance, and extends generously the products of its
life activity. It affords protection to all beings, offering shade even to the axemen
who destroy it”.
Gautama Buddha (487 B.C.)
FOREST AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES 17
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 30 ---
EXERCISES EXERCISES E XERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions
(i) Which of the following conservation strategies do not directly involve
community participation?
(a) Joint forest management (c) Chipko Movement
(b) Beej Bachao Andolan (d) Demarcation of Wildlife sanctuaries
2. Match the following.
Reserved forests other forests and wastelands belonging to both
government and private individuals and
communities
Protected forests forests are regarded as most valuable as far as the
conservation of forest and wildlife resources
Unclassed forests forest lands are protected from any further
depletion
3. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What is biodiversity? Why is biodiversity important for human lives?
(ii) How have human activities affected the depletion of flora and fauna? Explain.
4. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe how communities have conserved and protected forests and wildlife
in India?
(ii) Write a note on good practices towards conserving forest and wildlife.
18 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 31 ---
You already know that three-fourth of the WATER SCARCITY AND THE NEED FOR WATER
earth’s surface is covered with water, but only
CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT
a small proportion of it accounts for
freshwater that can be put to use. This Given the abundance and renewability of
freshwater is mainly obtained from surface water, it is difficult to imagine that we may
run off and ground water that is continually suffer from water scarcity. The moment we
being renewed and recharged through the speak of water shortages, we immediately
hydrological cycle. All water moves within the associate it with regions having low rainfall
hydrological cycle ensuring that water is a or those that are drought prone. We
renewable resource. instantaneously visualise the deserts of
You might wonder that if three-fourth of Rajasthan and women balancing many
the world is covered with water and water is ‘matkas’ (earthen pots) used for collecting
a renewable resource, then how is it that and storing water and travelling long
countries and regions around the globe suffer distances to get water. True, the availability
from water scarcity? Why is it predicted that of water resources varies over space and time,
by 2025, nearly two billion people will live in mainly due to the variations in seasonal and
absolute water scarcity? annual precipitation, but water scarcity in
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 32 ---
most cases is caused by over-exploitation, consequent greater demands for water, and
excessive use and unequal access to water unequal access to it. A large population
among different social groups. requires more water not only for domestic
Where is then water scarcity likely to use but also to produce more food. Hence, to
occur? As you have read in the hydrological facilitate higher food-grain production, water
cycle, freshwater can be obtained directly resources are being over-exploited to expand
from precipitation, surface run off and irrigated areas for dry-season agriculture.
groundwater. Irrigated agriculture is the largest consumer
Is it possible that an area or region may of water. Now it is needed to revolutionise the
have ample water resources but is still facing agriculture through developing drought
water scarcity? Many of our cities are such resistant crops and dry farming techniques.
examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an You may have seen in many television
outcome of large and growing population and advertisements that most farmers have their
Water, Water Everywhere, Not a Drop to Drink:
After a heavy downpour, a boy collects drinking
water in Kolkata. Life in the city and its adjacent
districts was paralysed as incessant overnight rain,
meaning a record 180 mm, flooded vast area and
disruted traffic.
A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in
the snow in a devastated village.
Fig. 3.1: Water Scarcity
20 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 33 ---
own wells and tube-wells in their farms for long-term basis by ensuring functionality of
irrigation to increase their produce. But have the tap water connections. (Source: Economic
you ever wondered what this could result in? Survey 2020–21, p.357)
That it may lead to falling groundwater levels,
India’s rivers, especially the smaller ones,
adversely affecting water availability and food
have all turned into toxic streams. And even
security of the people. the big ones like the Ganga and Yamuna
Post-independent India witnessed are far from being pure. The assault on
intensive industrialisation and urbanisation, India’s rivers – from population growth,
creating vast opportunities for us. Today, large agricultural modernisation, urbanisation and
industrial houses are as commonplace as the industrialisation – is enormous and growing
industrial units of many MNCs (Multinational by the day….. This entire life stands
Corporations). The ever-increasing number of threatened.
industries has made matters worse by exerting
Source: The Citizens’ Fifth Report, CSE, 1999.
pressure on existing freshwater resources.
Industries, apart from being heavy users of
You may have already realised that the need
water, also require power to run them. Much
of the hour is to conserve and manage our
of this energy comes from hydroelectric power.
water resources, to safeguard ourselves from
Today, in India hydroeclectric power
health hazards, to ensure food security,
contributes approximately 22 per cent of the
continuation of our livelihoods and productive
total electricity produced. Moreover,
activities and also to prevent degradation of our
multiplying urban centres with large and
natural ecosystems. Over exploitation and
dense populations and urban lifestyles have
mismanagement of water resources will
not only added to water and energy
impoverish this resource and cause ecological
requirements but have further aggravated the
crisis that may have profound impact on
problem. If you look into the housing societies
our lives.
or colonies in the cities, you would find that
most of these have their own groundwater
From your everyday experiences, write a short
pumping devices to meet their water needs.
proposal on how you can conserve water.
Not surprisingly, we find that fragile water
resources are being over-exploited and have
caused their depletion in several of these cities. MULTI-PURPOSE RIVER PROJECTS AND
So far we have focused on the quantitative INTEGRATED WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
aspects of water scarcity. Now, let us consider
But, how do we conserve and manage water?
another situation where water is sufficiently
Archaeological and historical records show
available to meet the needs of the people, but,
that from ancient times we have been
the area still suffers from water scarcity. This
constructing sophisticated hydraulic
scarcity may be due to bad quality of water.
structures like dams built of stone rubble,
Lately, there has been a growing concern that
reservoirs or lakes, embankments and canals
even if there is ample water to meet the needs
for irrigation. Not surprisingly, we have
of the people, much of it may be polluted by
continued this tradition in modern India by
domestic and industrial wastes, chemicals,
building dams in most of our river basins.
pesticides and fertilisers used in agriculture,
thus, making it hazardous for human use.
Hydraulic Structures in Ancient India
Government of India has accorded highest
• In the first century B.C., Sringaverapura
priority to improve the quality of life and
enhance ease of living of people especially those near Allahabad had sophisticated water
living in rual areas by announcing the Jal harvesting system channelling the flood
Jeevan Mission (JJM). The Goal of JJM is to water of the river Ganga.
enable every rural household get assured • During the time of Chandragupta Maurya,
supply of potable piped water at a service level dams, lakes and irrigation systems were
of 55 litres per capita per day regularly on extensively built.
WATER RESOURCES 21
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 34 ---
• Evidences of sophisticated irrigation works
A dam is a barrier across flowing water that
have also been found in Kalinga,
obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often
(Odisha), Nagarjunakonda (Andhra
creating a reservoir, lake or impoundment.
Pradesh), Bennur (Karnataka), Kolhapur
“Dam” refers to the reservoir rather than the
(Maharashtra), etc.
structure. Most dams have a section called a
• In the 11th Century, Bhopal Lake, one of the
spillway or weir over which or through which
largest artificial lakes of its time was built.
it is intended that water will flow either
• In the 14th Century, the tank in Hauz Khas, intermittently or continuously. Dams are
Delhi was constructed by Iltutmish for classified according to structure, intended
supplying water to Siri Fort area. purpose or height. Based on structure and
Source: Dying Wisdom, CSE, 1997. the materials used, dams are classified as
timber dams, embankment dams or masonry
dams, with several subtypes. According to
the height, dams can be categorised as large
dams and major dams or alternatively as low
dams, medium height dams and high dams.
handicap of its colonial past. Jawaharlal Nehru
proudly proclaimed the dams as the ‘temples of
modern India’; the reason being that it would
integrate development of agriculture and the
village economy with rapid industrialisation and
growth of the urban economy.
Find out more about any one traditional
Fig. 3.2: Hirakud Dam
method of building dams and irrigation works.
What are dams and how do they help us
in conserving and managing water? Dams
We have sown the crops in Asar
were traditionally built to impound rivers and
rainwater that could be used later to irrigate We will bring Bhadu in Bhadra
agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not Floods have swollen the Damodar
just for irrigation but for electricity generation,
The sailing boats cannot sail
water supply for domestic and industrial
Oh! Damodar, we fall at your feet
uses, flood control, recreation, inland
navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are Reduce the floods a little
now referred to as multi-purpose projects Bhadu will come a year later
where the many uses of the impounded water
Let the boats sail on your surface
are integrated with one another. For example,
(This popular Bhadu song in the Damodar
in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra –
valley region narrates the troubles faced by
Nangal project water is being used both for
people owing to the flooding of Damodar river
hydel power production and irrigation. known as the river of sorrow.)
Similarly, the Hirakud project in the
Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of In recent years, multi-purpose projects
water with flood control. and large dams have come under great
Multi-purpose projects, launched after scrutiny and opposition for a variety of
Independence with their integrated water reasons. Regulating and damming of rivers
resources management approach, were thought affect their natural flow causing poor sediment
of as the vehicle that would lead the nation to flow and excessive sedimentation at the bottom
development and progress, overcoming the of the reservoir, resulting in rockier stream
22 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 35 ---
beds and poorer habitats for the rivers’ aquatic Source: S. Sharma, quoted in In the Belly of
life. Dams also fragment rivers making it the River. Tribal conflicts over development in
Narmada valley, A. Baviskar, 1995.
difficult for aquatic fauna to migrate, especially
for spawning. The reservoirs that are created
on the floodplains also submerge the existing
vegetation and soil leading to its Sardar Sarovar Dam has been built over
decomposition over a period of time. the Narmada River in Gujarat. This is one
Multi-purpose projects and large dams of the largest water resource projects of
have also been the cause of many new India covering four states—Maharashtra,
environmental movements like the ‘Narmada Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan.
Bachao Andolan’ and the ‘Tehri Dam Andolan’ The Sardar Sarovar project would meet the
etc. Resistance to these projects has primarily requirement of water in drought-prone and
been due to the large-scale displacement of desert areas of Gujarat (9,490 villages and
local communities. Local people often had to 173 towns) and Rajasthan (124 villages).
give up their land, livelihood and their meagre
Source: http://www.sardarsarovardam.org/
access and control over resources for the
project.aspx
greater good of the nation. So, if the local
people are not benefiting from such projects
Irrigation has also changed the cropping
then who is benefited? Perhaps, the
pattern of many regions with farmers shifting
landowners and large farmers, industrialists
to water intensive and commercial crops. This
and few urban centres. Take the case of the
has great ecological consequences like
landless in a village – does he really gain from salinisation of the soil. At the same time, it
such a project? has transformed the social landscape i.e.
increasing the social gap between the richer
landowners and the landless poor. As we can
Narmada Bachao Andolan or Save see, the dams did create conflicts between
Narmada Movement is a Non Governmental people wanting different uses and benefits
Organisation (NGO) that mobilised tribal from the same water resources. In Gujarat,
people, farmers, environmentalists and
the Sabarmati-basin farmers were agitated
human rights activists against the Sardar
and almost caused a riot over the higher
Sarovar Dam being built across the
priority given to water supply in urban areas,
Narmada river in Gujarat. It originally
particularly during droughts. Inter-state water
focused on the environmental issues related
disputes are also becoming common with
to trees that would be submerged under the
regard to sharing the costs and benefits of the
dam water. Recently it has re-focused the
multi-purpose project.
aim to enable poor citizens, especially
the oustees (displaced people) to get
full rehabilitation facilities from
the government. Do you know that the Krishna-Godavari
People felt that their suffering would not dispute is due to the objections raised by
be in vain… accepted the trauma of Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh
displacement believing in the promise of governments? It is regarding the diversion
irrigated fields and plentiful harvests. So, of more water at Koyna by the Maharashtra
often the survivors of Rihand told us that they government for a multipurpose project. This
accepted their sufferings as sacrifice for the would reduce downstream flow in their
sake of their nation. But now, after thirty bitter states with adverse consequences for
years of being adrift, their livelihood having agriculture and industry.
even being more precarious, they keep
asking: “Are we the only ones chosen to
make sacrifices for the nation?” Make a list of inter-state water disputes.
WATER RESOURCES 23
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 36 ---
India: Major Rivers and Dams
24 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 37 ---
Most of the objections to the projects arose RAINWATER HARVESTING
due to their failure to achieve the purposes
Many thought that given the disadvantages
for which they were built. Ironically, the dams
and rising resistance against the multi-
that were constructed to control floods have
purpose projects, water harvesting system was
triggered floods due to sedimentation in the
a viable alternative, both socio-economically
reservoir. Moreover, the big dams have mostly
and environmentally. In ancient India, along
been unsuccessful in controlling floods at the
with the sophisticated hydraulic structures,
time of excessive rainfall. You may have seen
there existed an extraordinary tradition of
or read how the release of water from dams
water-harvesting system. People had in-depth
during heavy rains aggravated the flood
knowledge of rainfall regimes and soil types
situation in Maharashtra and Gujarat in 2006.
and developed wide ranging techniques to
The floods have not only devastated life and
harvest rainwater, groundwater, river water
property but also caused extensive soil
and flood water in keeping with the local
erosion. Sedimentation also meant that the
ecological conditions and their water needs.
flood plains were deprived of silt, a natural
In hill and mountainous regions, people built
fertiliser, further adding on to the problem of
diversion channels like the ‘guls’ or ‘kuls’ of
land degradation. It was also observed that
the Western Himalayas for agriculture.
the multi-purpose projects induced
‘Rooftop rainwater harvesting’ was commonly
earthquakes, caused water-borne diseases and
practised to store drinking water, particularly
pests and pollution resulting from excessive
in Rajasthan. In the flood plains of Bengal,
use of water.
people developed inundation channels to
Collect information about flood prone areas of the country
WATER RESOURCES 25
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 38 ---
irrigate their fields. In arid and semi-arid
regions, agricultural fields were converted into
rain fed storage structures that allowed the
water to stand and moisten the soil like the
‘khadins’ in Jaisalmer and ‘Johads’ in other
parts of Rajasthan.
Fig. 3.4
(a) Recharge through Hand Pump
In the semi-arid and arid regions of
Rajasthan, particularly in Bikaner, Phalodi
and Barmer, almost all the houses
traditionally had underground tanks or
tankas for storing drinking water. The tanks
could be as large as a big room; one
household in Phalodi had a tank that was
6.1 metres deep, 4.27 metres long and 2.44
metres wide. The tankas were part of the
well-developed rooftop rainwater harvesting
system and were built inside the main house
or the courtyard. They were connected to
the sloping roofs of the houses through a
pipe. Rain falling on the rooftops would
travel down the pipe and was stored in these
underground ‘tankas’. The first spell of rain
(b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell was usually not collected as this would
• Rooftop rainwater is collected using a PVC pipe clean the roofs and the pipes. The rainwater
• Filtered using sand and bricks from the subsequent showers was then
• Underground pipe takes water to sump for
collected.
immediate usage
The rainwater can be stored in the
• Excess water from the sump is taken to the well
• Water from the well recharges the underground tankas till the next rainfall making it an
• Take water from the well (later) extremely reliable source of drinking water
when all other sources are dried up,
Fig 3.3: Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting
26 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 39 ---
Fortunately, in many parts of rural and urban
India, rooftop rainwater harvesting is being
successfully adapted to store and conserve
water. In Gendathur, a remote backward village
in Mysuru, Karnataka, villagers have installed,
in their household’s rooftop, rainwater harvesting
system to meet their water needs. Nearly 200
households have installed this system and the
village has earned the rare distinction of being
rich in rainwater. See Fig. 3.6 for a better
A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above understanding of the rooftop rainwater
in the Kaza village, from which water is released
harvesting system which is adapted here.
as and when required.
Gendathur receives an annual precipitation of
Fig 3.5: Traditional method of rainwater 1,000 mm, and with 80 per cent of collection
harvesting efficiency and of about 10 fillings, every house
can collect and use about 50,000 litres of water
particularly in the summers. Rainwater, or
annually. From the 200 houses, the net amount
palar pani, as commonly referred to in
of rainwater harvested annually amounts to
these parts, is considered the purest form
1,00,000 litres.
of natural water. Many houses constructed
underground rooms adjoining the ‘tanka’
to beat the summer heat as it would keep
the room cool.
Rooftop rainwater harvesting is the most
common practice in Shillong, Meghalaya.
It is interesting because Cherapunjee and
Mawsynram situated at a distance of
55 km. from Shillong receive the highest
rainfall in the world, yet the state capital
Shillong faces acute shortage of water.
Nearly every household in the city has a Rooftop harvesting was common across the towns
rooftop rainwater harvesting structure. and villages of the Thar. Rainwater that falls on the
sloping roofs of houses is taken through a pipe into
Nearly 15-25 per cent of the total water
an underground tanka (circular holes in the ground).
requirement of the household comes from
built in the main house or in the courtyard. The
rooftop water harvesting. picture above shows water being taken from a
neighbour’s roof through a long pipe. Here the
neighbour’s rooftop has been used for collection of
rainwater. The picture shows a hole through which
rainwater flows down into an underground tanka.
Find out other rainwater harvesting systems
existing in and around your locality. Fig. 3.6
Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the Tamil Nadu is the first state in India
practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on which has made rooftop rainwater
the decline as plenty of water is available due harvesting structure compulsory to all
to the perennial Indira Gandhi Canal, though the houses across the state. There are
some houses still maintain the tankas since legal provisions to punish the defaulters.
they do not like the taste of tap water.
WATER RESOURCES 27
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 40 ---
BAMBOO DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM
In Meghalaya, a 200-year-old system of tapping stream
and spring water by using bamboo pipes, is prevalent.
About 18-20 litres of water enters the bamboo pipe system,
gets transported over hundreds of metres, and finally
reduces to 20-80 drops per minute at the site of the plant.
Picture 1: Bamboo pipes are used to divert perennial springs
on the hilltops to the lower reaches by gravity.
Picture 2 and 3: The channel sections, made of bamboo, divert Picture 4: If the pipes pass a road,
water to the plant site where it is distributed into branches, again they are taken high above the land.
made and laid out with different forms of bamboo pipes. The flow of
water into the pipes is controlled by manipulating the pipe positions.
Picture 5 and 6
Reduced channel sections
and diversion units are
used at the last stage of
water application. The last
channel section enables
water to be dropped near
the roots of the plant.
Fig 3.7
1. Collect information on how industries are polluting our water resources.
2. Enact with your classmates a scene of water dispute in your locality.
28 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 41 ---
EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Based on the information given below classify each of the situations as
‘suffering from water scarcity’ or ‘not suffering from water scarcity’.
(a) Region with high annual rainfall.
(b) Region having high annual rainfall and large population.
(c) Region having high annual rainfall but water is highly polluted.
(d) Region having low rainfall and low population.
(ii) Which one of the following statements is not an argument in favour of multi-
purpose river projects?
(a) Multi-purpose projects bring water to those areas which suffer from
water scarcity.
(b) Multi-purpose projects by regulating water flow helps to control floods.
(c) Multi-purpose projects lead to large scale displacements and loss of
livelihood.
(d) Multi-purpose projects generate electricity for our industries and our
homes.
(iii) Here are some false statements. Identify the mistakes and rewrite them
correctly.
(a) Multiplying urban centres with large and dense populations and urban
lifestyles have helped in proper utilisation of water resources.
(b) Regulating and damming of rivers does not affect the river’s natural
flow and its sediment flow.
(c) In Gujarat, the Sabarmati basin farmers were not agitated when higher
priority was given to water supply in urban areas, particularly during
droughts.
(d) Today in Rajasthan, the practice of rooftop rainwater water harvesting
has gained popularity despite high water availability due to the Indira
Gandhi Canal.
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Explain how water becomes a renewable resource.
(ii) What is water scarcity and what are its main causes?
(iii) Compare the advantages and disadvantages of multi-purpose river projects.
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Discuss how rainwater harvesting in semi-arid regions of Rajasthan is
carried out.
(ii) Describe how modern adaptations of traditional rainwater harvesting
methods are being carried out to conserve and store water.
WATER RESOURCES 29
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 42 ---
India is an agriculturally important country. through natural processes; land productivity
Two-thirds of its population is engaged in in this type of agriculture is low as the farmer
agricultural activities. Agriculture is a primary does not use fertilisers or other modern
activity, which produces most of the food that inputs. It is known by different names in
we consume. Besides food grains, it also different parts of the country.
produces raw material for various industries.
Can you name some such types of farmings?
Can you name some industries based on
It is jhumming in north-eastern states like
agricultural raw material?
Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland;
Moreover, some agricultural products like Pamlou in Manipur, Dipa in Bastar district
tea, coffee, spices, etc. are also exported. of Chhattishgarh, and in Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.
TYPES OF FARMING
Jhumming: The ‘slash and burn’ agriculture
Agriculture is an age-old economic activity in
is known as ‘Milpa’ in Mexico and Central
our country. Over these years, cultivation
America, ‘Conuco’ in Venzuela, ‘Roca’ in
methods have changed significantly depending
Brazil, ‘Masole’ in Central Africa, ‘Ladang’
upon the characteristics of physical
in Indonesia, ‘Ray’ in Vietnam.
environment, technological know-how and In India, this primitive form of cultivation
socio-cultural practices. Farming varies from is called ‘Bewar’ or ‘Dahiya’ in Madhya
subsistence to commercial type. At present, Pradesh, ‘Podu’ or ‘Penda’ in Andhra Pradesh,
in different parts of India, the following ‘Pama Dabi’ or ‘Koman’ or Bringa’ in Odisha,
farming systems are practised. ‘Kumari’ in Western Ghats, ‘Valre’ or ‘Waltre’
in South-eastern Rajasthan, ‘Khil’ in the
Primitive Subsistence Farming
Himalayan belt, ‘Kuruwa’ in Jharkhand, and
This type of farming is still practised in few ‘Jhumming’ in the North-eastern region.
pockets of India. Primitive subsistence
agriculture is practised on small patches of
land with the help of primitive tools like hoe,
dao and digging sticks, and family/
community labour. This type of farming
depends upon monsoon, natural fertility of
the soil and suitability of other environmental
conditions to the crops grown.
It is a ‘slash and burn’ agriculture.
Farmers clear a patch of land and produce
cereals and other food crops to sustain their
family. When the soil fertility decreases, the
farmers shift and clear a fresh patch of land
for cultivation. This type of shifting allows
Nature to replenish the fertility of the soil Fig. 4.1
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 43 ---
Rinjha lived with her family in a small village Plantation is also a type of commercial
at the outskirts of Diphu in Assam. She enjoys farming. In this type of farming, a single crop
watching her family members clearing, is grown on a large area. The plantation has
slashing and burning a patch of land for an interface of agriculture and industry.
cultivation. She often helps them in irrigating
Plantations cover large tracts of land, using
the fields with water running through a
capital intensive inputs, with the help of
bamboo canal from the nearby spring. She
migrant labourers. All the produce is used
loves the surroundings and wants to stay
as raw material in respective industries.
here as long as she can, but this little girl
In India, tea, coffee, rubber, sugarcane,
has no idea about the declining fertility of
banana, etc., are important plantation crops.
the soil and her family’s search for fresh a
Tea in Assam and North Bengal coffee in
patch of land in the next season.
Karnataka are some of the important
plantation crops grown in these states. Since
the production is mainly for market, a well-
Can you name the type of farming Rinjha’s
family is engaged in? developed network of transport and
Can you enlist some crops which are grown communication connecting the plantation
in such farming? areas, processing industries and markets
plays an important role in the development
Intensive Subsistence Farming
of plantations.
This type of farming is practised in areas of
high population pressure on land. It is labour-
intensive farming, where high doses of
biochemical inputs and irrigation are used
for obtaining higher production.
Can you name some of the states of India
where such farming is practised?
Though the ‘right of inheritance’ leading
to the division of land among successive
generations has rendered land-holding size
uneconomical, the farmers continue to take
maximum output from the limited land in
Fig. 4.2: Banana plantation in Southern
the absence of alternative source of livelihood. part of India
Thus, there is enormous pressure on
agricultural land.
Commercial Farming
The main characteristic of this type of farming
is the use of higher doses of modern inputs,
e.g. high yielding variety (HYV) seeds, chemical
fertilisers, insecticides and pesticides in order
to obtain higher productivity. The degree of
commercialisation of agriculture varies from
one region to another. For example, rice is a
commercial crop in Haryana and Punjab, but
in Odisha, it is a subsistence crop.
Can you give some more examples of crops
which may be commercial in one region and
may provide subsistence in another region? Fig. 4.3: Bamboo plantation in North-east
AGRICULTURE 31
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 44 ---
CROPPING PATTERN watermelon, muskmelon, cucumber,
vegetables and fodder crops. Sugarcane takes
You have studied the physical diversities and
almost a year to grow.
plurality of cultures in India. These are also
reflected in agricultural practices and Major Crops
cropping patterns in the country. Various
A variety of food and non food crops are
types of food and fibre crops, vegetables and
grown in different parts of the country
fruits, spices and condiments, etc. constitute
depending upon the variations in soil, climate
some of the important crops grown in the
and cultivation practices. Major crops grown
country. India has three cropping seasons
in India are rice, wheat, millets, pulses, tea,
— rabi, kharif and zaid.
coffee, sugarcane, oil seeds, cotton and jute,
Rabi crops are sown in winter from October
etc.
to December and harvested in summer from
April to June. Some of the important rabi Rice: It is the staple food crop of a majority of
crops are wheat, barley, peas, gram and the people in India. Our country is the second
largest producer of rice in the world after
mustard. Though, these crops are grown in
China. It is a kharif crop which requires high
large parts of India, states from the north
temperature, (above 25°C) and high humidity
and north-western parts such as Punjab,
with annual rainfall above 100 cm. In the areas
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and
of less rainfall, it grows with the help of
Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh are
irrigation.
important for the production of wheat and
other rabi crops. Availability of precipitation
during winter months due to the western
temperate cyclones helps in the success of
these crops. However, the success of the green
revolution in Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar
Pradesh and parts of Rajasthan has also been
an important factor in the growth of the above-
mentioned rabi crops.
Kharif crops are grown with the onset of
monsoon in different parts of the country and
these are harvested in September-October.
Important crops grown during this season
are paddy, maize, jowar, bajra, tur (arhar),
moong, urad, cotton, jute, groundnut and
soyabean. Some of the most important rice- Fig. 4.4 (a): Rice Cultivation
growing regions are Assam, West Bengal,
coastal regions of Odisha, Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and
Maharashtra, particularly the (Konkan coast)
along with Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Recently,
paddy has also become an important crop of
Punjab and Haryana. In states like Assam,
West Bengal and Odisha, three crops of paddy
are grown in a year. These are Aus, Aman
and Boro.
In between the rabi and the kharif seasons,
there is a short season during the summer
months known as the Zaid season. Some of
Fig. 4.4 (b): Rice is ready to be harvested in the
the crops produced during ‘zaid’ are
field
32 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 45 ---
India: Distribution of Rice
AGRICULTURE 33
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 46 ---
Rice is grown in the plains of north and
north-eastern India, coastal areas and the
deltaic regions. Development of dense network
of canal irrigation and tubewells have made
it possible to grow rice in areas of less rainfall
such as Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar
Pradesh and parts of Rajasthan.
Wheat: This is the second most important
cereal crop. It is the main food crop, in north
and north-western part of the country. This
rabi crop requires a cool growing season and
a bright sunshine at the time of ripening. It
Fig. 4.6: Bajra Cultivation
requires 50 to 75 cm of annual rainfall evenly-
distributed over the growing season. There
Bajra grows well on sandy soils and
are two important wheat-growing zones in the
shallow black soil. Major Bajra producing
country – the Ganga-Satluj plains in the
States are Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
north-west and black soil region of the Deccan.
Maharashtra, Gujarat and Haryana. Ragi is
The major wheat-producing states are
a crop of dry regions and grows well on red,
Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
black, sandy, loamy and shallow black soils.
Pradesh, Bihar and Rajasthan.
Major ragi producing states are: Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Sikkim, Jharkhand and Arunachal Pradesh.
Maize: It is a crop which is used both as
food and fodder. It is a kharif crop which
requires temperature between 21°C to 27°C
and grows well in old alluvial soil. In some
states like Bihar maize is grown in rabi season
also. Use of modern inputs such as HYV
seeds, fertilisers and irrigation have
contributed to the increasing production of
maize. Major maize-producing states are
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
Fig. 4.5: Wheat Cultivation
Millets: Jowar, bajra and ragi are the
important millets grown in India. Though,
these are known as coarse grains, they have
very high nutritional value. For example, ragi
is very rich in iron, calcium, other micro
nutrients and roughage. Jowar is the third
most important food crop with respect to area
and production. It is a rain-fed crop mostly
grown in the moist areas which hardly needs
irrigation. Major Jowar producing States are
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh
Fig. 4.7: Maize Cultivation
and Madhya Pradesh.
34 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 47 ---
India: Distribution of Wheat
AGRICULTURE 35
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 48 ---
Pulses: India is the largest producer as well sowing to harvesting. India is the second
as the consumer of pulses in the world. These largest producer of sugarcane only after
are the major source of protein in a vegetarian Brazil. It is the main source of sugar, gur
diet. Major pulses that are grown in India are (jaggary), khandsari and molasses. The major
tur (arhar), urad, moong, masur, peas and sugarcane-producing states are Uttar
gram. Can you distinguish which of these Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil
pulses are grown in the kharif season and Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar,
which are grown in the rabi season? Pulses Punjab and Haryana.
need less moisture and survive even in dry
Oil Seeds: In 2018 India was the second
conditions. Being leguminous crops, all these
largest producer of groundnut in the world
crops except arhar help in restoring soil
after China. In rapeseed production India was
fertility by fixing nitrogen from the air.
third largest producer in the world after
Therefore, these are mostly grown in rotation
Canada and China in 2018. Different oil seeds
with other crops. Major pulse producing states
are grown covering approximately 12 per cent
in India are Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan,
of the total cropped area of the country. Main
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka.
oil-seeds produced in India are groundnut,
Food Crops other than Grains mustard, coconut, sesamum (til), soyabean,
Sugarcane: It is a tropical as well as a castor seeds, cotton seeds, linseed and
sunflower. Most of these are edible and used
subtropical crop. It grows well in hot and
humid climate with a temperature of 21°C to as cooking mediums. However, some of these
27°C and an annual rainfall between 75cm. are also used as raw material in the
and 100cm. Irrigation is required in the production of soap, cosmetics and ointments.
regions of low rainfall. It can be grown on a Groundnut is a kharif crop and accounts
variety of soils and needs manual labour from for about half of the major oilseeds produced in
the country. Gujarat was the largest producer
of groundnut followed by Rajasthan and Tamil
Nadu in 2019–20. Linseed and mustard are rabi
crops. Sesamum is a kharif crop in north and
rabi crop in south India. Castor seed is grown
both as rabi and kharif crop.
Tea: Tea cultivation is an example of
plantation agriculture. It is also an important
beverage crop introduced in India initially by
the British. Today, most of the tea plantations
are owned by Indians. The tea plant grows
well in tropical and sub-tropical climates
endowed with deep and fertile well-drained
soil, rich in humus and organic matter. Tea
Fig. 4.8: Sugarcane Cultivation bushes require warm and moist frost-free
Fig. 4.9: Groundnut, sunflower and mustard are ready to be harvested in the field
36 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 49 ---
climate all through the
year. Frequent showers
evenly distributed over the
year ensure continuous
growth of tender leaves.
Tea is a labour-intensive
industry. It requires
abundant, cheap and
skilled labour. Tea is
processed within
the tea garden to restore Fig. 4.10: Tea Cultivation Fig. 4.11: Tea-leaves Harvesting
its freshness. Major tea-
producing states are Assam, hills of Darjeeling Horticulture Crops: In 2018, India was the
and Jalpaiguri districts, West Bengal, Tamil second largest producer of fruits and
Nadu and Kerala. Apart from these, Himachal vegetables in the world after China. India is a
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Meghalaya, Andhra producer of tropical as well as temperate fruits.
Pradesh and Tripura are also tea-producing Mangoes of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh,
states in the country. In 2018 India was the Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal,
second largest producer of tea after China. oranges of Nagpur and Cherrapunjee
(Meghalaya), bananas of Kerala, Mizoram,
Coffee: Indian coffee is known in the world for
Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, lichi and guava
its good quality. The Arabica variety initially
of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, pineapples of
brought from Yemen is produced in the
country. This variety is in great demand all over Meghalaya, grapes of Andhra Pradesh,
the world. Initially its cultivation was Telangana and Maharashtra, apples, pears,
introduced on the Baba Budan Hills and even apricots and walnuts of Jammu and Kashmir
today its cultivation is confined to the Nilgiri in and Himachal Pradesh are in great demand
Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. the world over.
Fig. 4.12: Apricots, apple and pomegranate
Fig. 4.13: Cultivation of vegetables– peas, cauliflower, tomato and brinjal
Source: Pocket book of agricultural statistics, 2020, Govt. of India. Directorate of Economics and Statistics.
AGRICULTURE 37
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 50 ---
India is an important producer of pea, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil
cauliflower, onion, cabbage, tomato, brinjal Nadu, Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.
and potato.
Jute: It is known as the golden fibre. Jute grows
Non-Food Crops well on well-drained fertile soils in the flood
plains where soils are renewed every year. High
Rubber: It is an equatorial crop, but under
temperature is required during the time of
special conditions, it is also grown in tropical
growth. West Bengal, Bihar, Assam, Odisha and
and sub-tropical areas. It requires moist and
Meghalaya are the major jute producing states.
humid climate with rainfall of more than 200
It is used in making gunny bags, mats, ropes,
cm. and temperature above 25°C.
yarn, carpets and other artefacts. Due to its
Rubber is an important industrial raw
high cost, it is losing market to synthetic fibres
material. It is mainly grown in Kerala, Tamil
and packing materials, particularly the nylon.
Nadu, Karnataka and Andaman and Nicobar
islands and Garo hills of Meghalaya.
Technological and Institutional Reforms
It was mentioned in the previous pages that
List the items which are made of rubber and agriculture has been practised in India for
are used by us. thousands of years. Sustained uses of land
without compatible techno-institutional
Fibre Crops: Cotton, jute, hemp and natural changes have hindered the pace of agricultural
silk are the four major fibre crops grown in India. development. Inspite of development of sources
The first three are derived from the crops grown of irrigation most of the farmers in large parts
in the soil, the latter is obtained from cocoons of of the country still depend upon monsoon and
the silkworms fed on green leaves specially natural fertility in order to carry on their
mulberry. Rearing of silk worms for the agriculture. For a growing population, this
production of silk fibre is known as sericulture. poses a serious challenge. Agriculture which
provides livelihood for more than 60 per cent
Cotton: India is believed to be the original home
of its population, needs some serious technical
of the cotton plant. Cotton is one of the main
and institutional reforms. Thus, collectivisation,
raw materials for cotton textile industry. In
consolidation of holdings, cooperation and
2017, India was second largest producer of
abolition of zamindari, etc. were given priority
cotton after China. Cotton grows well in drier
to bring about institutional reforms in the
parts of the black cotton soil of the Deccan
country after Independence. ‘Land reform’ was
plateau. It requires high temperature, light
the main focus of our First Five Year Plan. The
rainfall or irrigation, 210 frost-free days and
right of inheritance had already lead to
bright sun-shine for its growth. It is a kharif
fragmentation of land holdings necessitating
crop and requires 6 to 8 months to mature.
consolidation of holdings.
Major cotton-producing states are–
The laws of land reforms were enacted but
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
the implementation was lacking or lukewarm.
The Government of India embarked upon
introducing agricultural reforms to improve
Indian agriculture in the 1960s and 1970s.
The Green Revolution based on the use of
package technology and the White Revolution
(Operation Flood) were some of the strategies
initiated to improve the lot of Indian agriculture.
But, this too led to the concentration of
development in few selected areas. Therefore,
in the 1980s and 1990s, a comprehensive land
development programme was initiated, which
Fig. 4.14: Cotton Cultivation
included both institutional and technical
38 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 51 ---
Fig. 4.15: Modern technological equipments used in agriculture
reforms. Provision for crop insurance against Satyagraha as one of the foremost
drought, flood, cyclone, fire and disease, satyagrahis. He was one of the votaries of
establishment of Grameen banks, cooperative Gandhi’s concept of gram swarajya. After
societies and banks for providing loan facilities Gandhiji’s martyrdom, Vinoba Bhave
to the farmers at lower rates of interest were undertook padyatra to spread Gandhiji’s
some important steps in this direction. message covered almost the entire country.
Kissan Credit Card (KCC), Personal Accident Once, when he was delivering a lecture at
Insurance Scheme (PAIS) are some other Pochampalli in Andhra Pradesh, some poor
schemes introduced by the Government of India landless villagers demanded some land for
for the benefit of the farmers. Moreover, special their economic well-being. Vinoba Bhave
weather bulletins and agricultural programmes could not promise it to them immediately but
for farmers were introduced on the radio and assured them to talk to the Government of
television. The government also announces India regarding provision of land for them if
minimum support price, remunerative and they undertook cooperative farming.
procurement prices for important crops to check Suddenly, Shri Ram Chandra Reddy stood
the exploitation of farmers by speculators and up and offered 80 acres of land to be
middlemen. distributed among 80 land-less villagers.
This act was known as ‘Bhoodan’. Later he
travelled and introduced his ideas widely all
Collect information about agriculture,
over India. Some zamindars, owners of
horticulture, agricultural schemes, etc. from
many villages offered to distribute some
Farmers’ Portal website https://farmer.
villages among the landless. It was known
gov.in/FarmerHome.aspx. Discuss about the
as Gramdan. However, many land-owners
benefits of the information available on
chose to provide some part of their land to
the portal.
the poor farmers due to the fear of land
ceiling act. This Bhoodan-Gramdan
Bhoodan – Gramdan movement initiated by Vinoba Bhave is also
Mahatma Gandhi declared Vinoba Bhave as known as the Blood-less Revolution.
his spiritual heir. He also participated in
AGRICULTURE 39
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 52 ---
EXERCISES EXERCISES E XERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following describes a system of agriculture where a single
crop is grown on a large area?
(a) Shifting Agriculture
(b) Plantation Agriculture
(c) Horticulture
(d) Intensive Agriculture
(ii) Which one of the following is a rabi crop?
(a) Rice
(b) Gram
(c) Millets
(d) Cotton
(iii) Which one of the following is a leguminous crop?
(a) Pulses
(b) Jawar
(c) Millets
(d) Sesamum
2. Answer the following questions in 30 words.
(i) Name one important beverage crop and specify the geographical conditions
required for its growth.
(ii) Name one staple crop of India and the regions where it is produced.
(iii) Enlist the various institutional reform programmes introduced by the
government in the interest of farmers.
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Suggest the initiative taken by the government to ensure the increase in
agricultural production.
(ii) Describe the geographical conditions required for the growth of rice.
P
ROJECTWORK
1. Group discussion on the necessity of literacy among farmers.
2. On an outline map of India show wheat producing areas.
40 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 53 ---
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the
hidden answers.
A Z M X N C B V N X A H D Q
S D E W S R J D Q J Z V R E
D K H A R I F G W F M R F W
F N L R G C H H R S B S V T
G B C W H E A T Y A C H B R
H R T K A S S E P H X A N W
J I E S J O W A R J Z H D T
K C L A E G A C O F F E E Y
L T E F Y M T A T S S R G I
P D E J O U Y V E J G F A U
O U M H Q S U D I T S W S P
U O A C O T T O N E A H F O
Y O L F L U S R Q Q D T W I
T M U A H R G Y K T R A B F
E A K D G D Q H S U O I W H
W Q Z C X V B N M K J A S L
1. The two staple food crops of India.
2. This is the summer cropping season of India.
3. Pulses like arhar, moong, gram, urad contain…
4. It is a coarse grain.
5. The two important beverages in India are…
6. One of the four major fibers grown on black soils.
AGRICULTURE 41
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 54 ---
Haban comes to Guwahati with his father A bright smile from toothpaste
from a remote village. and minerals
He sees people getting into strange
Toothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasive
house like objects which move along the minerals like silica, limestone, aluminium
road. He also sees a “kitchen” dragging a
oxide and various phosphate minerals do the
number of house along with it. He is amazed cleaning. Fluoride which is used to reduce
and asked his father “Why don’t our houses
cavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most
move like the one we saw in Guwahati, Ba?” toothpaste are made white with titanium
Ba replies, “These are not houses, they
oxide, which comes from minerals called
are buses and trains. Unlike our houses these rutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle in
are not made of bricks and stones, metal like
some toothpastes comes from mica. The
iron and alluminium are used in making toothbrush and tube containing the paste are
these. They do not move on their own. They
made of plastics from petroleum. Find out
are driven by an engine which needs energy where these minerals are found?
to work.”
Dig a little deeper and find out how many
We use different things in our daily life made minerals are used to make a light bulb?
from metal. Can you list a number of items
used in your house made of metals. Where do
All living things need minerals
these metals come from?
Life processes cannot occur without minerals.
You have studied that the earth’s crust is
Although our mineral intake represents only
made up of different minerals embedded in the
about 0.3 per cent of our total intake of
rocks. Various metals are extracted from these
nutrients, they are so potent and so important
minerals after proper refinement.
that without them we would not be able to
Minerals are an indispensable part of our
utilise the other 99.7 per cent of foodstuffs.
lives. Almost everything we use, from a tiny pin
to a towering building or a big ship, all are
made from minerals. The railway lines and the
Dig a little deeper and collect “Nutritional
tarmac (paving) of the roads, our implements
Facts” printed on food labels.
and machinery too are made from minerals.
Cars, buses, trains, aeroplanes are What is a mineral?
manufactured from minerals and run on Geologists define mineral as a
power resources derived from the earth. Even “homogenous, natura lly occurring substance
the food that we eat contains minerals. In all with a definable internal structure.” Minerals
stages of development, human beings have are found in varied forms in nature, ranging
used minerals for their livelihood, decoration, from the hardest diamond to the softest talc.
festivities, religious and ceremonial rites. Why are they so varied?
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 55 ---
You have already learnt about rocks. sufficient concentration to make its extraction
Rocks are combinations of homogenous commercially viable. The type of formation or
substances called minerals. Some rocks, for structure in which they are found determines
instance limestone, consist of a single mineral the relative ease with which mineral ores may
only, but majority of the rock consist of several be mined. This also determines the cost of
minerals in varying proportions. Although, extraction. It is, therefore, important for us
over 2000 minerals have been identified, only to understand the main types of formations
a few are abundantly found in most of the in which minerals occur.
rocks. Minerals generally occur in these forms:
A particular mineral that will be formed (i)In igneous and metamorphic rocks
from a certain combination of elements
minerals may occur in the cracks,
depends upon the physical and chemical crevices, faults or joints. The smaller
conditions under which the material forms.
occurrences are called veins and the
This, in turn, results in a wide range of colours, larger are called lodes. In most cases,
hardness, crystal forms, lustre and density that
they are formed when minerals in liquid/
a particular mineral possesses. Geologists use molten and gaseous forms are forced
these properties to classify the minerals.
upward through cavities towards the
earth’s surface. They cool and solidify as
Study of Minerals by Geographers they rise. Major metallic minerals like tin,
and Geologists copper, zinc and lead etc. are obtained
Geographers study minerals as part of the from veins and lodes.
earth’s crust for a better understanding of (ii)In sedimentary rocks a number of minerals
landforms. The distribution of mineral occur in beds or layers. They have been
resources and associated economic activities formed as a result of deposition,
are of interest to geographers. A geologist, accumulation and concentration in
however, is interested in the formation of horizontal strata. Coal and some forms of
minerals, their age and physical and iron ore have been concentrated as a result
chemical composition. of long periods under great heat and
pressure. Another group of sedimentary
However, for general and commercial minerals include gypsum, potash salt and
purposes minerals can be classified as under. sodium salt. These are formed as a result
of evaporation especially in arid regions.
MODE OF OCCURRENCE OF MINERALS
(iii) Another mode of formation involves the
Where are these minerals found?
decomposition of surface rocks, and the
Minerals are usually found in “ores”. The
removal of soluble constituents, leaving
term ore is used to describe an accumulation
a residual mass of weathered
of any mineral mixed with other elements.
material containing ores. Bauxite is
The mineral content of the ore must be in
formed this way.
Fig. 5.1
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 43
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 56 ---
(iv)Certain minerals may occur as alluvial non-ferrous minerals. The vast alluvial plains
deposits in sands of valley floors and the of north India are almost devoid of economic
base of hills. These deposits are called minerals. These variations exist largely because
‘placer deposits’ and generally contain of the differences in the geological structure,
minerals, which are not corroded by water. processes and time involved in the formation
Gold, silver, tin and platinum are most of minerals.
important among such minerals. Let us now study the distribution of a few
(v)The ocean waters contain vast quantities major minerals in India. Always remember that
the concentration of mineral in the ore, the ease
of minerals, but most of these are too widely
diffused to be of economic significance. of extraction and closeness to the market play
an important role in affecting the economic
However, common salt, magnesium and
bromine are largely derived from ocean viability of a reserve. Thus, to meet the demand,
a choice has to be made between a number of
waters. The ocean beds, too, are rich in
manganese nodules. possible options. When this is done a mineral
‘deposit’ or ‘reserve’ turns into a mine.
Ferrous Minerals
Rat-Hole Mining. Do you know that most
Ferrous minerals account for about three-
of the minerals in India are nationalised
fourths of the total value of the production of
and their extraction is possible only after
metallic minerals. They provide a strong base
obtaining due permission from the
for the development of metallurgical industries.
government? But in most of the tribal
India exports substantial quantities of ferrous
areas of the north-east India, minerals are
minerals after meeting her internal demands.
owned by individuals or communities. In
Meghalaya, there are large deposits of coal, Iron Ore
iron ore, limestone and dolomite etc. Coal
Iron ore is the basic mineral and the backbone
mining in Jowai and Cherapunjee is done
of industrial development. India is endowed
by family member in the form of a long
with fairly abundant resources of iron ore. India
narrow tunnel, known as ‘Rat hole’
is rich in good quality iron ores. Magnetite is
mining. The National Green Tribunal has
the finest iron ore with a very high content of
declared such activities illegal and
iron up to 70 per cent. It has excellent magnetic
recommended that these should be
qualities, especially valuable in the electrical
stopped forthwith.
industry. Hematite ore is the most important
industrial iron ore in terms of the quantity
Dig a little deeper: What is the difference used, but has a slightly lower iron content than
between an open pit mine, a quarry and an magnetite. (50-60 per cent). In 2018–19 almost
underground mine with shafts? entire production of iron ore (97%) accrued
from Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and
India is fortunate to have fairly rich and
Jharkhand. The remaining production (3%)
varied mineral resources. However, these are
was from other states.
unevenly distributed. Broadly speaking,
peninsular rocks contain most of the reserves
of coal, metallic minerals, mica and many other
Kudre in Kannada means horse. The
non-metallic minerals. Sedimentary rocks on
highest peak in the western ghats of
the western and eastern flanks of the peninsula,
Karnataka resembles the face of a horse.
in Gujarat and Assam have most of the
The Bailadila hills look like the hump of
petroleum deposits. Rajasthan with the rock
an ox, and hence its name.
systems of the peninsula, has reserves of many
44 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 57 ---
Maharashtra. Though, the ores are not of
very high quality, yet they are efficiently
exploited. Iron ore is exported through
Marmagao port.
Manganese
Manganese is mainly used in the
manufacturing of steel and ferro-manganese
alloy. Nearly 10 kg of manganese is required
to manufacture one tonne of steel. It is also
used in manufacturing bleaching powder,
insecticides and paints.
Andhra Others
Pradesh 2%
10%
Fig. 5.2: Iron ore mine
Karnataka
The major iron ore belts in India are: 12%
• Odisha-Jharkhand belt: In Odisha high Madhya
Pradesh
grade hematite ore is found in Badampahar
33%
mines in the Mayurbhanj and Kendujhar
districts. In the adjoining Singbhum
Odisha
district of Jharkhand haematite iron ore is
16%
mined in Gua and Noamundi.
• Durg-Bastar-Chandrapur belt lies in
Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra. Very high
grade hematites are found in the famous Maharashtra
Bailadila range of hills in the Bastar district 27%
of Chhattisgarh. The range of hills
Fig. 5.3: Production of Manganese showing
comprise of 14 deposits of super high state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19
grade hematite iron ore. It has the best
physical properties needed for steel
Dig a little deeper: Superimpose the maps
making. Iron ore from these mines is
showing distribution of iron ore, manganese,
exported to Japan and South Korea via
coal and iron and steel industry. Do you see
Vishakhapatnam port.
any correlation. Why?
• Ballari-Chitradurga-Chikkamagaluru-
Tumakuru belt in Karnataka has large
reserves of iron ore. The Kudremukh mines Non-Ferrous Minerals
located in the Western Ghats of Karnataka India’s reserves and production of non-
are a 100 per cent export unit. Kudremukh ferrous minerals is not very satisfactory.
deposits are known to be one of the largest However, these minerals, which include
in the world. The ore is transported as copper, bauxite, lead, zinc and gold play a
slurry through a pipeline to a port near vital role in a number of metallurgical,
Mangaluru.
engineering and electrical industries. Let us
• Maharashtra-Goa belt includes the state study the distribution of copper and
of Goa and Ratnagiri district of bauxite.
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 45
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 58 ---
India: Distribution of Iron Ore, Manganese, Bauxite and Mica
46 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 59 ---
Copper
Madhya
India is critically deficient in the reserve and Maharashtra Pradesh Others
3%
production of copper. Being malleable, ductile 6% 1%
and a good conductor, copper is mainly used Chhattisgarh
6%
in electrical cables, electronics and chemical
Gujarat
9%
Odisha
65%
Jharkhand
10%
Fig. 5.5: Production of Bauxite showing state-wise
Fig. 5.4: Copper mines at Malanjkhand share in per cent, 2018–19
industries. The Balaghat mines in Madhya Odisha was the largest bauxite producing
Pradesh, Khetri mines in Rajasthan and state in India in 2016-17. Panchpatmali
Singhbhum district of Jharkhand are leading deposits in Koraput district are the most
producers of copper. important bauxite deposits in the state.
Bauxite
Though, several ores
contain aluminium, it
is from bauxite, a
clay-like substance
that alumina and
later aluminium is
obtained. Bauxite
deposits are formed
by the decomposition
of a wide variety of
rocks rich in
aluminium silicates.
Aluminium is an
important metal
because it combines
the strength of metals
such as iron, with
extreme lightness
and also with good
conductivity and
great malleability.
India’s bauxite
deposits are mainly
Fig.5.6: Bauxite Mine
found in the
Amarkantak plateau, Maikal hills and the Dig a little deeper: Locate the mines of
plateau region of Bilaspur-Katni. Bauxite on the physical map of India.
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 47
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 60 ---
Rock Minerals
Limestone is found in association with rocks
After the discovery of aluminium composed of calcium carbonates or calcium
Emperor Napoleon III wore buttons and and magnesium carbonates. It is found in
hooks on his clothes made of aluminium sedimentary rocks of most geological
and served food to his more illustrious formations. Limestone is the basic raw
guests in aluminium utensils and the material for the cement industry and
less honourable ones were served in gold essential for smelting iron ore in the blast
and silver utensils. Thirty years after this furnace.
incident aluminium bowls were most
common with the beggars in Paris. Dig a little deeper: Study the maps to explain
why Chota Nagpur is a storehouse of minerals.
Non-Metallic Minerals Others
8%
Mica is a mineral made up of a series of plates Maharashtra Rajasthan
4% 20%
or leaves. It splits easily into thin sheets. These
Tamil Nadu
sheets can be so thin that a thousand can be 6%
layered into a mica sheet of a few centimeters
Gujarat
high. Mica can be clear, black, green, red yellow
7%
or brown. Due to its excellent di-electric
Madhya
strength, low power loss factor, insulating Pradesh
properties and resistance to high voltage, mica Telangana 13%
8%
is one of the most indispensable minerals used
in electric and electronic industries.
Mica deposits are found in the northern Karnataka
Andhra
edge of the Chota Nagpur plateau. Koderma 9%
Pradesh
Chhattisgarh
Gaya – Hazaribagh belt of Jharkhand is the 13%
11%
leading producer.
In Rajasthan, the major mica producing
Fig. 5.7: Production of Limestone showing
area is around Ajmer. Nellore mica belt of state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19
Andhra Pradesh is also an important producer
in the country.
Hazards of Mining
Have you ever wondered about the efforts the miners make in making life comfortable
for you? What are the impacts of mining on
the health of the miners and the environment?
The dust and noxious fumes inhaled by
miners make them vulnerable to pulmonary
diseases. The risk of collapsing mine roofs,
inundation and fires in coalmines are a
constant threat to miners.
The water sources in the region get
contaminated due to mining. Dumping of waste
and slurry leads to degradation of land, soil, Fig. 5.8: Air pollution due to
and increase in stream and river pollution. generation of dust in mining areas
48 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 61 ---
Stricter safety regulations and required millions of years to be created and
implementation of environmental laws are concentrated. The geological processes of
essential to prevent mining from becoming a mineral formation are so slow that the rates
“killer industry”. of replenishment are infinitely small in
comparison to the present rates of
CONSERVATION OF MINERALS consumption. Mineral resources are,
We all appreciate the strong dependence of therefore, finite and non-renewable. Rich
industry and agriculture upon mineral mineral deposits are our country’s extremely
deposits and the substances manufactured valuable but short-lived possessions.
from them. The total volume of workable Continued extraction of ores leads to
mineral deposits is an insignificant fraction increasing costs as mineral extraction comes
i.e. one per cent of the earth’s crust. We are from greater depths along with decrease
rapidly consuming mineral resources that in quality.
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 49
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 62 ---
A concerted effort has to be made in order
to use our mineral resources in a planned
and sustainable manner. Improved
technologies need to be constantly evolved to
allow use of low grade ores at low costs.
Recycling of metals, using scrap metals and
other substitutes are steps in conserving our
mineral resources for the future.
Dig a little deeper: Make a list of items where
substitutes are being used instead of minerals.
Where are these substitutes obtained from?
Energy Resources Fig. 5.9 (a): A view from inside of a coal mine
Energy is required for all activities. It is needed
to cook, to provide light and heat, to propel
vehicles and to drive machinery in industries.
Energy can be generated from fuel
minerals like coal, petroleum, natural gas,
uranium and from electricity. Energy
resources can be classified as conventional
and non-conventional sources. Conventional
sources include: firewood, cattle dung cake,
coal, petroleum, natural gas and electricity
(both hydel and thermal). Non-conventional
sources include solar, wind, tidal, geothermal,
biogas and atomic energy. Firewood and cattle
dung cake are most common in rural India. Fig. 5.9 (b): A view from outside of a coal mine
According to one estimate more than 70 per
cent energy requirement in rural households time of burial. Decaying plants in swamps
is met by these two ; continuation of these is produce peat. Which has a low carbon and
increasingly becoming difficult due to high moisture contents and low heating
decreasing forest area. Moreover, using dung capacity. Lignite is a low grade brown coal,
cake too is being discouraged because it which is soft with high moisture content. The
consumes most valuable manure which could principal lignite reserves are in Neyveli in Tamil
be used in agriculture. Nadu and are used for generation of
electricity. Coal that has been buried deep
Conventional Sources of Energy and subjected to increased temperatures is
Coal: In India, coal is the most abundantly bituminous coal. It is the most popular coal
available fossil fuel. It provides a substantial in commercial use. Metallurgical coal is high
part of the nation’s energy needs. It is used grade bituminous coal which has a special
for power generation, to supply energy to value for smelting iron in blast furnaces.
industry as well as for domestic needs. India Anthracite is the highest quality hard coal.
is highly dependent on coal for meeting its In India coal occurs in rock series of two
commercial energy requirements. main geological ages, namely Gondwana, a
As you are already aware that coal is little over 200 million years in age and in
formed due the compression of plant material tertiary deposits which are only about 55
over millions of years. Coal, therefore, is million years old. The major resources of
found in a variety of forms depending on the Gondwana coal, which are metallurgical coal,
degrees of compression and the depth and are located in Damodar valley (West Bengal-
50 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 63 ---
India: Distribution of Coal, Oil and Natural Gas
Collect information about cross country natural gas pipelines laid by GAIL
(India) under “One Nation One Grid”.
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 51
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 64 ---
Jharkhand). Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are gas distribution (COD) networks, natural gas
important coalfields. The Godavari, is also emerging as a preferred transport fuel
Mahanadi, Son and Wardha valleys also (CNG) and cooking fuel (PNG) at homes. India’s
contain coal deposits. major gas reserves are found in the Mumbai
Tertiary coals occur in the north eastern High and allied fields along the west coast
states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal which are supplemented by finds in the
Pradesh and Nagaland. Cambay basin. Along the East Coast, new
Remember coal is a bulky material, which reserves of natural gas have been discovered
loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash. in the Krishna-Godavari basin.
Hence, heavy industries and thermal power The first 1,700 km long Hazira-Vijaipur-
stations are located on or near the coalfields. Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline,
constructed by GAIL (India), linked Mumbai
Petroleum
High and Bassein gas fields with various
Petroleum or mineral oil is the next major
fertilizer, power and industrial complexes in
energy source in India after coal. It provides western and northen India. This artery
fuel for heat and lighting, lubricants for
provided impetus to Indian gas market
machinery and raw materials for a number of development. Overall, India’s gas infrastructure
manufacturing industries. Petroleum refineries
has expanded over ten times from 1,700 km
act as a “nodal industry” for synthetic textile, to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines and
fertiliser and numerous chemical industries.
is expected to soon reach over 34, 000 km as
Most of the petroleum occurrences in India
Gas Grid by linking all gas sources and
are associated with anticlines and fault traps
consuming markets across the country
in the rock formations of the tertiary age. In
including North Eastern states.
regions of folding, anticlines or domes, it
occurs where oil is trapped in the crest of the Electricity
upfold. The oil bearing layer is a porous
Electricity has such a wide range of
limestone or sandstone through which oil may
applications in today’s world that, its percapita
flow. The oil is prevented from rising or
consumption is considered as an index of
sinking by intervening non-porous layers.
development. Electricity is generated mainly in
Petroleum is also found in fault traps
two ways: by running water which drives hydro
between porous and non-porous rocks. Gas,
turbines to generate hydro electricity; and by
being lighter usually occurs above the oil.
burning other fuels such as coal, petroleum
Mumbai High, Gujarat and Assam are
and natural gas to drive turbines to produce
major petroleum production areas in India.
thermal power. Once generated the electricity
From the map locate the 3 major off shore
is exactly the same.
fields of western India. Ankeleshwar is the
most important field of Gujarat. Assam is the
oldest oil producing state of India. Digboi,
Name some river valley projects and write
Naharkatiya and Moran-Hugrijan are the
the names of the dams built on these rivers.
important oil fields in the state.
Natural Gas Hydro electricity is generated by fast
flowing water, which is a renewable resource.
Natural Gas is found with petroleum deposits
India has a number of multi-purpose projects
and is released when crude oil is brought to
the surface. It can be used as a domestic and like the Bhakra Nangal, Damodar Valley
industrial fuel. It is used as fuel in power sector corporation, the Kopili Hydel Project etc.
to generate electricity, for heating purpose in producing hydroelectric power.
industries, as raw material in chemical, Thermal electricity is generated by using
petrochemical and fertilizer industries, as coal, petroleum and natural gas. The thermal
transport fuel and as cooking fuel. With the power stations use non-renewable fossil fuels
expansion of gas infrastructure and local city for generating electricity.
52 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 65 ---
Rawat Bhata
India: Distribution of Nuclear and Thermal Power Plants
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 53
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 66 ---
Collect information about thermal/hydel
power plants located in your state. Show
them on the map of India.
Non-Conventional Sources of Energy
The growing consumption of energy has
resulted in the country becoming increasingly
dependent on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and
gas. Rising prices of oil and gas and their
potential shortages have raised uncertainties
about the security of energy supply in future,
which in turn has serious repercussions on the Fig. 5.10: Solar operated electronic milk
testing equipment
growth of the national economy. Moreover,
increasing use of fossil fuels also causes
serious environmental problems. Hence, there Collect information about newly established
is a pressing need to use renewable energy solar power plants in India.
sources like solar energy, wind, tide, biomass
Wind power
and energy from waste material. These are
called non-conventional energy sources. India has great potential of wind power. The
India is blessed with an abundance of largest wind farm cluster is located in Tamil
sunlight, water, wind and biomass. It has the Nadu from Nagarcoil to Madurai. Apart from
largest programmes for the development of these, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat,
these renewable energy resources. Kerala, Maharashtra and Lakshadweep have
important wind farms. Nagarcoil and
Nuclear or Atomic Energy
Jaisalmer are well known for effective use of
It is obtained by altering the structure of
wind energy in the country.
atoms. When such an alteration is made, much
energy is released in the form of heat and this
is used to generate electric power. Uranium and
Thorium, which are available in Jharkhand and
the Aravalli ranges of Rajasthan are used for
generating atomic or nuclear power. The
Monazite sands of Kerala is also rich in
Thorium.
Locate the 6 nuclear power stations and find
out the state in which they are located.
Solar Energy
Fig. 5.11: Wind mills – Nagarcoil
India is a tropical country. It has enormous
Biogas
possibilities of tapping solar energy.
Photovoltaic technology converts sunlight Shrubs, farm waste, animal and human waste
directly into electricity. Solar energy is fast are used to produce biogas for domestic
becoming popular in rural and remote areas. consumption in rural areas. Decomposition
Some big solar power plants are being of organic matter yields gas, which has higher
established in different parts of India which thermal efficiency in comparison to kerosene,
will minimise the dependence of rural dung cake and charcoal. Biogas plants are
households on firewood and dung cakes, set up at municipal, cooperative and
which in turn will contribute to environmental individual levels. The plants using cattle dung
conservation and adequate supply of manure are known as ‘Gobar gas plants’ in rural India.
in agriculture. These provide twin benefits to the farmer in
the form of energy and improved quality of
54 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 67 ---
manure. Biogas is by far the most efficient geothermal gradient is high, high temperatures
use of cattle dung. It improves the quality of are found at shallow depths. Groundwater in
manure and also prevents the loss of trees such areas absorbs heat from the rocks and
and manure due to burning of fuel wood becomes hot. It is so hot that when it rises to
and cow dung cakes. the earth’s surface, it turns into steam. This
steam is used to drive turbines and generate
electricity.
There are several hundred hot springs in
India, which could be used to generate
electricity. Two experimental projects have been
set up in India to harness geothermal energy.
One is located in the Parvati valley near
Manikarn in Himachal Pradesh and the other
is located in the Puga Valley, Ladakh.
Conservation of Energy Resources
Energy is a basic requirement for economic
development. Every sector of the national
Fig. 5.12: Biogas Plant economy – agriculture, industry, transport,
commercial and domestic – needs inputs of
Tidal Energy energy. The economic development plans
Oceanic tides can be used to generate implemented since Independence necessarily
electricity. Floodgate dams are built across required increasing amounts of energy to
inlets. During high tide water flows into the remain operational. As a result, consumption
inlet and gets trapped when the gate is closed. of energy in all forms has been steadily rising
After the tide falls outside the flood gate, the all over the country.
water retained by the floodgate flows back to In this background, there is an urgent need
the sea via a pipe that carries it through a to develop a sustainable path of energy
power-generating turbine. development. Promotion of energy conservation
In India the Gulf of Khambhat, the Gulf and increased use of renewable energy sources
of Kuchchh in Gujarat on the western coast are the twin planks of sustainable energy.
and Gangetic delta in Sunderban regions of India is presently one of the least energy
West Bengal provide ideal conditions for efficient countries in the world. We have to
utilising tidal energy. adopt a cautious approach for the judicious
use of our limited energy resources. For
Geo Thermal Energy
example, as concerned citizens we can do our
Geo thermal energy refers to the heat and bit by using public transport systems instead
electricity produced by using the heat from of individual vehicles; switching off electricity
the interior of the Earth. Geothermal energy when not in use, using power-saving devices
exists because, the Earth grows progressively and using non-conventional sources of energy.
hotter with increasing depth. Where the After all, “energy saved is energy produced”.
EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following minerals is formed by decomposition of rocks,
leaving a residual mass of weathered material?
(a) coal (b) bauxite (c) gold (d) zinc
(ii) Koderma, in Jharkhand is the leading producer of which one of the following
minerals?
(a) bauxite (b) mica (c) iron ore (d) copper
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 55
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 68 ---
(iii) Minerals are deposited and accumulated in the stratas of which of the
following rocks?
(a) sedimentary rocks (c) igneous rocks
(b) metamorphic rocks (d) none of the above
(iv) Which one of the following minerals is contained in the Monazite sand?
(a) oil (b) uranium (c) thorium (d) coal
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Distinguish between the following in not more than 30 words.
(a) ferrous and non-ferrous minerals
(b) conventional and non-conventional sources of energy
(ii) What is a mineral?
(iii) How are minerals formed in igneous and metamorphic rocks?
(iv) Why do we need to conserve mineral resources ?
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe the distribution of coal in India.
(ii) Why do you think that solar energy has a bright future in India?
ACTIVITY
Fill the name of the correct mineral in the crossword below:
2 1
M
2
M
4 3
M
4
T
1 5 5
T
6
o
7
y
56 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 69 ---
ACROSS DOWN
1. A ferrous mineral (9) 1. Found in placer deposit (4)
2. Raw material for cement industry (9) 2. Iron ore mined in Bailadila (8)
3. Finest iron ore with magnetic properties (9) 3. Indispensable for electrical industry (4)
4. Highest quality hard coal (10) 4. Geological Age of coal found in north east
5. Aluminium is obtained from this ore (7) India (8)
6. Khetri mines are famous for this mineral (6) 5. Formed in veins and lodes (3)
7. Formed due to evaporation (6)
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES 57
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 70 ---
On the occassion of Diwali, Harish went to IMPORTANCE OF MANUFACTURING
a market with his parents. They purchased
Manufacturing sector is considered the backbone
shoes and clothes for him. His mother
of development in general and economic
purchased utensils, sugar, tea and diyas
development in particular mainly because–
(earthen lamps). Harish observed that the
• Manufacturing industries not only help in
shops in the market were flooded with
modernising agriculture, which forms the
items for sale. He wondered how so many
backbone of our economy, they also reduce
items could be made in such large
the heavy dependence of people on
quantities. His father explained that shoes,
agricultural income by providing them jobs
clothes, sugar etc. are manufactured by
in secondary and tertiary sectors.
machines in large industries, some utensils
are manufactured in small industries, while • Industrial development is a precondition for
items like diyas are made by individual eradication of unemployment and poverty
artisans in household industry. from our country. This was the main
philosophy behind public sector industries
Do you have some ideas about these
and joint sector ventures in India. It was also
industries?
aimed at bringing down regional disparities
by establishing industries in tribal and
backward areas.
Production of goods in large quantities after
• Export of manufactured goods expands
processing from raw materials to more
trade and commerce, and brings in much
valuable products is called manufacturing. Do
needed foreign exchange.
you know that paper is manufactured from
• Countries that transform their raw
wood, sugar from sugarcane, iron and steel
materials into a wide variety of finished
from iron ore and aluminium from bauxite?
goods of higher value are prosperous.
Do you also know that some types of clothes
India’s prosperity lies in increasing and
are manufactured from yarn which itself is an
diversifying its manufacturing industries as
industrial product?
quickly as possible.
People employed in the secondary activities
manufacture the primary materials into Agriculture and industry are not exclusive
finished goods. The workers employed in steel of each other. They move hand in hand. For
factories, car, breweries, textile industries, instance, the agro-industries in India have
bakeries etc. fall into this category. Some people given a major boost to agriculture by raising
are employed in providing services. In this its productivity. They depend on the latter for
chapter, we are mainly concerned with raw materials and sell their products such as
manufacturing industries which fall in the irrigation pumps, fertilisers, insecticides,
secondary sector. pesticides, plastic and PVC pipes, machines
The economic strength of a country is and tools, etc. to the farmers. Thus,
measured by the development of development and competitiveness of
manufacturing industries.
58 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 71 ---
manufacturing industry has not only allowed on the assets of a unit. This limit
assisted agriculturists in increasing their has changed over a period of time. At
production but also made the production present the maximum investment allowed
processes very efficient. is rupees one crore.
In the present day world of globalisation,
On the basis of ownership:
our industry needs to be more efficient and
competitive. Self-sufficiency alone is not • Public sector, owned and operated by
enough. Our manufactured goods must be government agencies – BHEL, SAIL etc.
at par in quality with those in the • Private sector industries owned and
international market. Only then, will we be operated by individuals or a group of
able to compete in the international market. individuals –TISCO, Bajaj Auto Ltd.,
Dabur Industries.
• Joint sector industries which are jointly run
Classification of Industries by the state and individuals or a group of
individuals. Oil India Ltd. (OIL) is jointly
List the various manufactured products you
owned by public and private sector.
use in your daily life such as – transistors,
electric bulbs, vegetable oil, cement, • Cooperative sector industries are owned
glassware, petrol, matches, scooters, and operated by the producers or
automobiles, medicines and so on. If we suppliers of raw materials, workers or
both. They pool in the resources and share
classify the various industries based on a
the profits or losses proportionately. Such
particular criterion then we would be
examples are the sugar industry in
able to understand their manufacturing
Maharashtra, the coir industry in Kerala.
better. Industries may be classified as
follows:
Based on the bulk and weight of raw material
and finished goods:
On the basis of source of raw materials
used: • Heavy industries such as iron and steel
• Agro based: cotton, woollen, jute, silk • Light industries that use light raw
textile, rubber and sugar, tea, coffee, materials and produce light goods such
edible oil. as electrical goods industries.
• Mineral based: iron and steel, cement,
aluminium, machine tools,
petrochemicals.
Classify the following into two groups on the
According to their main role: basis of bulk and weight of raw material and
• Basic or key industries are those which finished goods.
supply their products as raw materials to (i) Oil (vi) Sewing Machines
manufacture other goods e.g. iron and
(ii)Knitting needles (vii) Shipbuilding
steel and copper smelting, aluminum
(iii) Brassware (viii)Electric Bulbs
smelting.
(iv) Fuse wires (ix) Paint brushes
• Consumer industries that produce goods
for direct use by consumers – sugar, (v)Watches (x)Automobiles
toothpaste, paper, sewing machines,
fans etc.
Agro-based Industries
On the basis of capital investment: Cotton, jute, silk, woollen textiles, sugar and
• A small scale industry is defined with edible oil, etc. industries are based on
reference to the maximum investment agricultural raw materials.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 59
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 72 ---
Fig. 6.1: Value addition in the textile industry
Textile Industry: The textile industry dyeing, designing, packaging, tailoring and
occupies unique position in the Indian sewing. The industry by creating demands
economy, because it contributes significantly supports many other industries, such as,
to industrial production, employment chemicals and dyes, packaging materials
generation and foreign exchange earnings. It and engineering works.
is the only industry in the country, which is While spinning continues to be centralised
self-reliant and complete in the value chain in Maharashtra, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu,
i.e., from raw material to the highest value weaving is highly decentralised to provide
added products. scope for incorporating traditional skills and
designs of weaving in cotton, silk, zari,
Cotton Textiles: In ancient India, cotton
embroidery, etc. India has world class
textiles were produced with hand spinning
production in spinning, but weaving supplies
and handloom weaving techniques. After
low quality of fabric as it cannot use much of
the 18th century, power-looms came into
the high quality yarn produced in the country.
use. Our traditional industries suffered a
Weaving is done by handloom, powerloom and
setback during the colonial period because in mills.
they could not compete with the mill-made The handspun khadi provides large scale
cloth from England. employment to weavers in their homes as a
cottage industry.
• The first successful textile mill was Why did Mahatma Gandhi lay emphasis on
established in Mumbai in 1854. spinning yarn and weaving khadi?
• The two world wars were fought in Europe, Why is it important for our country to
India was a British colony. There was a keep the mill sector loomage lower than
demand for cloth in U.K. hence, they gave power loom and handloom?
a boost to the development of the cotton
textile industry. Jute Textiles
India is the largest producer of raw jute and
jute goods and stands at second place as an
In the early years, the cotton textile
exporter after Bangladesh. Most of the mills are
industry was concentrated in the cotton
located in West Bengal, mainly along the banks
growing belt of Maharashtra and Gujarat.
of the Hugli river, in a narrow belt.
Availability of raw cotton, market, transport
including accessible port facilities, labour,
moist climate, etc. contributed towards its The first jute mill was set up near Kolkata in
localisation. This industry has close links 1855 at Rishra. After Partition in 1947, the
jute mills remained in India but three-fourth
with agriculture and provides a living to
of the jute producing area went to
farmers, cotton boll pluckers and workers
Bangladesh (erstwhile East Pakistan).
engaged in ginning, spinning, weaving,
60 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 73 ---
India: Distribution of cotton, woollen and silk industries
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 61
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 74 ---
Factors responsible for their location in the Mineral-based Industries
Hugli basin are: proximity of the jute producing
Industries that use minerals and metals as raw
areas, inexpensive water transport, supported
materials are called mineral-based industries.
by a good network of railways, roadways and
Can you name some industries that would fall
waterways to facilitate movement of raw
in this category?
material to the mills, abundant water for
processing raw jute, cheap labour from West Iron and Steel Industry
Bengal and adjoining states of Bihar, Odisha The iron and steel industry is the basic industry
and Uttar Pradesh. Kolkata as a large urban
since all the other industries — heavy, medium
centre provides banking, insurance and port and light, depend on it for their machinery.
facilities for export of jute goods.
Steel is needed to manufacture a variety of
engineering goods, construction material,
Sugar Industry
defence, medical, telephonic, scientific
India stands second as a world producer of equipment and a variety of consumer goods.
sugar but occupies the first place in the
production of gur and khandsari. The raw
material used in this industry is bulky, and in Make a list of all such goods made of steel
haulage its sucrose content reduces. The mills
that you can think of.
are located in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana and Production and consumption of steel is
Madhya Pradesh. Sixty per cent mills are in often regarded as the index of a country’s
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. This industry is development. Iron and steel is a heavy industry
seasonal in nature so, it is ideally suited to the because all the raw materials as well as
cooperative sector. Can you explain why this finished goods are heavy and bulky entailing
is so? heavy transportation costs. Iron ore, coking
In recent years, there is a tendency for the coal and lime stone are required in the ratio of
mills to shift and concentrate in the southern approximately 4 : 2 : 1. Some quantities of
and western states, especially in Maharashtra, manganese, are also required to harden the
This is because the cane produced here has a steel. Where should the steel plants be ideally
higher sucrose content. The cooler climate also located? Remember that the finished products
ensures a longer crushing season. Moreover, also need an efficient transport network for
the cooperatives are more successful in these their distribution to the markets and
states. consumers.
Processes of Manufacture of Steel
Fig. 6.2
62 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 75 ---
India: Iron and Steel Plants
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 63
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 76 ---
Chhotanagpur plateau region has the Aluminium smelting plants in the country
maximum concentration of iron and steel are located in Odisha, West Bengal, Kerala,
industries. It is largely, because of the relative Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and
advantages this region has for the development Tamil Nadu.
of this industry. These include, low cost of iron Bauxite, the raw material used in the
ore, high grade raw materials in proximity, smelters is a very bulky, dark reddish coloured
cheap labour and vast growth potential in the rock. The flow chart given below shows the
home market. process of manufacturing aluminium. Regular
supply of electricity and an assured source of
Aluminium Smelting
raw material at minimum cost are the two
Aluminium smelting is the second most prime factors for location of the industry.
important metallurgical industry in India. It is
Chemical Industries
light, resistant to corrosion, a good conductor of
heat, malleable and becomes strong when it is The Chemical industry in India is fast growing
mixed with other metals. It is used to and diversifying. It comprises both large and
manufacture aircraft, utensils and wires. It has small scale manufacturing units. Rapid growth
gained popularity as a substitute of steel, copper, has been recorded in both inorganic and
zinc and lead in a number of industries. organic sectors. Inorganic chemicals include
sulphuric acid (used to manufacture fertilizers,
synthetic fibres, plastics, adhesives, paints,
dyes stuffs), nitric acid, alkalies, soda ash (used
to make glass, soaps and detergents, paper)
and caustic soda. These industries are widely
spread over the country.
Why do you think it is so?
Organic chemicals include petrochemicals,
which are used for manufacturing of synthetic
fibers, synthetic rubber, plastics, dye-stuffs,
Fig. 6.3: Strip coasting mill at smelter of NALCO drugs and pharmaceuticals. Organic chemical
Fig. 6.4
Fig. 6.5
64 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 77 ---
plants are located near oil refineries or Automobile Industry
petrochemical plants. Automobiles provide vehicle for quick
The chemical industry is its own largest transport of good services and passengers.
consumer. Basic chemicals undergo processing Trucks, buses, cars, motor cycles, scooters,
to further produce other chemicals that are three-wheelers and multi-utility vehicles are
used for industrial application, agriculture or manufactured in India at various centres. After
directly for consumer markets. Make a list of the liberalisation, the coming in of new and
the products you are aware of. contemporary models stimulated the demand
for vehicles in the market, which led to the
Fertilizer Industry
healthy growth of the industry including
The fertilizer industry is centred around the
passenger cars, two and three-wheelers. The
production of nitrogenous fertilizers (mainly
industry is located around Delhi, Gurugram,
urea), phosphatic fertilizers and ammonium
Mumbai, Pune, Chennai, Kolkata, Lucknow,
phosphate (DAP) and complex fertilizers which
Indore, Hyderabad, Jamshedpur and
have a combination of nitrogen (N), phosphate
Bengaluru.
(P), and potash (K). The third, i.e. potash is
entirely imported as the country does not have Information Technology and
any reserves of commercially usable potash or Electronics Industry
potassium compounds in any form. The electronics industry covers a wide range
After the Green Revolution the industry of products from transistor sets to television,
expanded to several other parts of the country. telephones, cellular telecom, telephone
Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab exchange, radars, computers and many
and Kerala contribute towards half of the other equipments required by the
fertilizer production. Other significant telecommunication industry. Bengaluru has
producers are Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, emerged as the electronic capital of India. Other
Rajasthan, Bihar, Maharashtra, Assam, West important centres for electronic goods are
Bengal, Goa, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh and Mumbai, Delhi, Hyderabad, Pune, Chennai,
Karnataka. Kolkata, Lucknow and Coimbatore. The major
industry concentration is at Bengaluru, Noida,
Cement Industry
Mumbai, Chennai, Hyderabad and Pune. A
Cement is essential for construction activity major impact of this industry has been on
such as building houses, factories, bridges, employment generation. The continuing
roads, airports, dams and for other commercial growth in the hardware and software is the key
establishments. This industry requires bulky to the success of IT industry in India.
and heavy raw materials like limestone, silica
and gypsum. Coal and electric power are
needed apart from rail transportation.
Where would it be economically viable to
set up the cement manufacturing units?
The industry has strategically located
plants in Gujarat that have suitable access to
the market in the Gulf countries.
Find out where the plants are located in other
Fig. 6.6: Cable manufacturing facilities at HCL,
States of India. Find their names.
Rupnarainpur (West Bengal)
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 65
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 78 ---
Industrial Pollution and Environmental Dumping of wastes specially glass, harmful
Degradation chemicals, industrial effluents, packaging, salts
and garbage renders the soil useless. Rain
Although industries contribute significantly to
water percolates to the soil carrying the
India’s economic growth and development, the
pollutants to the ground and the ground water
increase in pollution of land, water, air, noise
also gets contaminated.
and resulting degradation of environment that
they have caused, cannot be overlooked. Noise pollution not only results in irritation
Industries are responsible for four types of and anger, it can also cause hearing
pollution: (a) Air (b) Water (c) Land (d) Noise. impairment, increased heart rate and blood
The polluting industries also include thermal pressure among other physiological effects.
power plants. Unwanted sound is an irritant and a source of
stress. Industrial and construction activities,
Air pollution is caused by the presence of high
machinery, factory equipment, generators,
proportion of undesirable gases, such as
saws and pneumatic and electric drills also
sulphur dioxide and carbon monoxide. Air-
make a lot of noise.
borne particulate materials contain both solid
and liquid particles like dust, sprays mist and
Control of Environmental Degradation
smoke. Smoke is emitted by chemical and
Every litre of waste water discharged by our
paper factories, brick kilns, refineries and
industry pollutes eight times the quantity of
smelting plants, and burning of fossil fuels in
freshwater. How can the industrial pollution of
big and small factories that ignore pollution
fresh water be reduced? Some suggestions are-
norms. Toxic gas leaks can be very hazardous
with long-term effects. Are you aware of the (i)minimising use water for processing by
Bhopal Gas tragedy that occurred? Air reusing and recycling it in two or more
pollution adversely affects human health, successive stages
animals, plants, buildings and the atmosphere (ii)harvesting of rainwater to meet water
as a whole. requirements
Water pollution is caused by organic and (iii) treating hot water and effluents before
inorganic industrial wastes and affluents releasing them in rivers and ponds.
discharged into rivers. The main culprits in this Treatment of industrial effluents can be
regard are paper, pulp, chemical, textile and done in three phases
dyeing, petroleum refineries, tanneries and (a) Primary treatment by mechanical means.
electroplating industries that let out dyes,
This involves screening, grinding,
detergents, acids, salts and heavy metals like
flocculation and sedimentation.
lead and mercury pesticides, fertilisers,
(b) Secondary treatment by biological process
synthetic chemicals with carbon, plastics and
rubber, etc. into the water bodies. Fly ash, (c) Tertiary treatment by biological,
phospo- gypsum and iron and steel slags are chemical and physical processes. This
the major solid wastes in India. involves recycling of wastewater.
Overdrawing of ground water reserves by
Thermal pollution of water occurs when hot
industry where there is a threat to ground
water from factories and thermal plants is
water resources also needs to be regulated
drained into rivers and ponds before cooling.
legally. Particulate matter in the air can be
What would be the effect on aquatic life?
reduced by fitting smoke stacks to factories
Wastes from nuclear power plants, nuclear
with electrostatic precipitators, fabric filters,
and weapon production facilities cause
scrubbers and inertial separators. Smoke
cancers, birth defects and miscarriages. Soil
can be reduced by using oil or gas instead
and water pollution are closely related.
66 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 79 ---
India: Some Software Technology Parks
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 67
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 80 ---
of coal in factories. Machinery and
(a) Optimum utilisation of equipment
equipment can be used and generators
adopting latest techniques and
should be fitted with silencers. Almost all
upgrading existing equipment.
machinery can be redesigned to increase
(b) Minimising waste generation by
energy efficiency and reduce noise. Noise
maximising ash utilisation.
absorbing material may be used apart from
(c) Providing green belts for nurturing ecological
personal use of earplugs and earphones.
balance and addressing the question of
The challenge of sustainable development
special purpose vehicles for afforestation.
requires integration of economic development
with environmental concerns. (d) Reducing environmental pollution through
ash pond management, ash water recycling
system and liquid waste management.
(e) Ecological monitoring, reviews and on-
line database management for all its
power stations.
Fig. 6.7: Sewage Treatment plant under Yamuna
action plan at Faridabad
NTPC shows the way
NTPC is a major power providing corporation
in India. It has ISO certification for EMS
(Environment Management System) 14001.
The corporation has a proactive approach
for preserving the natural environment and
resources like water, oil and gas and fuels Fig. 6.8: Ramagundam plant
in places where it is setting up power plants.
This has been possible through-
EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following industries uses bauxite as a raw material?
(a) Aluminium Smelting (b) Cement (c) Paper (d) Steel
(ii) Which one of the following industries manufactures telephones, computer, etc.
(a) Steel (c) Aluminium Smelting
(b) Electronic (d) Information Technology
2. Answer the following briefly in not more than 30 words.
(i) What is manufacturing?
(ii) What are basic industries? Give an example.
68 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 81 ---
3. Write the answers of the following questions in 120 words.
(i) How do industries pollute the environment?
(ii) Discuss the steps to be taken to minimise environmental degradation
by industry?
ACTIVITY
Give one word for each of the following with regard to industry. The number of
letters in each word are hinted in brackets.
(i) Used to drive machinery (5) P...........................
(ii) People who work in a factory (6) W..........................
(iii) Where the product is sold (6) M..........................
(iv) A person who sells goods (8) R...........................
(v) Thing produced (7) P...........................
(vi) To make or produce (11) M..........................
(vii) Land, Water and Air degraded (9) P...........................
PROJECT WORK
Select one agro-based and one mineral-based industry in your area.
(i) What are the raw materials they use?
(ii) What are the other inputs in the process of manufacturing that involve
transportation cost?
(iii) Are these factories following environmental norms?
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden
answers.
1. Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials
from agriculture are called…
2. The basic raw material for sugar industry.
3. This fibre is also known as the ‘Golden Fibre’.
4. Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry.
5. A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 69
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 82 ---
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden
answers.
G G G P V A R A N A S I
U O J I P G X K M Q W V
K S U G A R C A N E E N
O T T O N O Z V O P T R
A U E L U B H I L A I U
T K O C R A Q N T R L N
E I R O N S T E E L S J
E N A N O E P I T L R Y
G A N U J D R A G D T A
N T A R P O A P U E P Y
A S N A E N J D I Y S K
S M H V L I A J H S K G
1. Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials
from agriculture are called…
2. The basic raw material for sugar industry.
3. This fibre is also known as the ‘Golden Fibre’.
4. Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry.
5. A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh.
6. Railway diesel engines are manufactured in Uttar Pradesh at this place.
70 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 83 ---
We use different materials and services in our the help of equally developed communication
daily life. Some of these are available in our system. Therefore, transport, communication
immediate surroundings, while other and trade are complementary to each other.
requirements are met by bringing things from Today, India is well-linked with the rest of
other places. Goods and services do not move the world despite its vast size, diversity and
from supply locales to demand locales on their linguistic and socio-cultural plurality.
own. The movement of these goods and services Railways, airways, waterways, newspapers,
from their supply locations to demand locations radio, television, cinema and internet, etc. have
necessitates the need for transport. Some people been contributing to its socio-economic
are engaged in facilitating these movements. progress in many ways. The trades from local
These are known to be traders who make the to international levels have added to the vitality
products come to the consumers by of its economy. It has enriched our life and
transportation. Thus, the pace of development added substantially to growing amenities and
of a country depends upon the production of facilities for the comforts of life.
goods and services as well as their movement In this chapter, you will see how modern
over space. Therefore, efficient means of transport means of transport and communication serve
are prerequisites for fast development. as lifelines of our nation and its modern
Movement of these goods and services can be economy. It is thus, evident that a dense and
over three important domains of our earth i.e. land, efficient network of transport and
water and air. Based on these, transport can also communication is a prerequisite for local,
be classified into land, water and air transport. national and global trade of today.
Fig. 7.1
For a long time, trade and transport were TRANSPORT
restricted to a limited space. With the
Roadways
development in science and technology, the
area of influence of trade and transport India has second largest road networks in the
expanded far and wide. Today, the world has world, aggregating to about 62.16 lakh km
been converted into a large village with the help (2020–21). In India, roadways have preceded
of efficient and fast moving transport. railways. They still have an edge over railways
Transport has been able to achieve this with in view of the ease with which they can be built
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 84 ---
and maintained. The growing importance of
road transport vis-à-vis rail transport is
rooted in the following reasons; (a)
construction cost of roads is much lower
than that of railway lines, (b) roads can
traverse comparatively more dissected and
undulating topography, (c) roads can
negotiate higher gradients of slopes and as
such can traverse mountains such as the
Himalayas, (d) road transport is economical
in transportation of few persons and
relatively smaller amount of goods over
short distances, (e) it also provides door-
to-door service, thus the cost of loading
and unloading is much lower, (f) road
transport is also used as a feeder to other
modes of transport such as they provide a Fig.7.2: Ahmedabad- Vadodara Expressway
link between railway stations, air and
sea ports.
Collect information of National Highway
In India, roads are classified in the
numbers (old and new) from the website
following six classes according to their
morth.nic.in/national-highway-details. The
capacity. Look at the map of the National
historical Sher-Shah Suri Marg between
Highways and find out about the significant
Delhi and Amritsar is known by which
role played by these roads.
National Highway ?
• Golden Quadrilateral Super Highways:
The government has launched a major
road development project linking Delhi- • District Roads: These roads connect the
Kolkata-Chennai-Mumbai and Delhi by district headquarters with other places of
six-lane Super Highways. The North- the district.
South corridors linking Srinagar (Jammu • Other Roads: Rural roads, which link rural
& Kashmir) and Kanniyakumari (Tamil areas and villages with towns, are classified
Nadu), and East-West Corridor under this category. These roads received
connecting Silchar (Assam) and Porbander special impetus under the Pradhan Mantri
(Gujarat) are part of this project. The Grameen Sadak Yojana. Under this scheme
major objective of these Super Highways special provisions are made so that every
is to reduce the time and distance village in the country is linked to a major
between the mega cities of India. These town in the country by an all season
highway projects are being implemented motorable road.
by the National Highway Authority of
• Border Roads: Apart from these, Border
India (NHAI).
Roads Organisation a Government of India
• National Highways: National Highways undertaking constructs and maintains
link extreme parts of the country. These roads in the bordering areas of the
are the primary road systems. A number country. This organisation was established
of major National Highways run in North- in 1960 for the development of the roads
South and East-West directions. of strategic importance in the northern and
• State Highways: Roads linking a state north-eastern border areas. These roads
capital with different district headquarters have improved accessibility in areas of
are known as State Highways. difficult terrain and have helped in the
economic development of these area.
72 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 85 ---
India: National Highways
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 73
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 86 ---
and narrow. However, in recent years fast
development of road network has taken place
The World’s longest Highway tunnel-Atal in different parts of the country
Tunnel (9.02 Km) has been built by Border
Road Organisation. This tunnel connects Railways
Manali to Lahul-Spiti valley throughout the Railways are the principal mode of
year. Earlier the valley was cut off for about transportation for freight and passengers
6 months each year owing to heavy snowfall. in India. Railways also make it possible for
The tunnel is buit with ultra-modern people to conduct multifarious activities
specifications in the Pir Panjal range of like business, sightseeing, pilgrimage
Himalayas at an altitude of 3000 metres along with transportation of goods over
from the Mean Sea Level (MSL). longer distances. Apart from an important
Source: http://www.bro.gov.in/pagefimg. means of transport the Indian Railways
asp?imid=144,And PIBdelhi03October2020 have been a great integrating force for more
than 150 years. Railways in India bind the
economic life of the country as well as
accelerate the development of the industry
and agriculture.
The Indian Railways is the largest public
sector undertaking in the country. The first
train steamed off from Mumbai to Thane in
1853, covering a distance of 34 km.
The Indian Railway is now reorganised into
16 zones.
Fig. 7.3: Hilly Tracts Find out the current Railway zones and their
headquarters. Also locate the headquarters
of Railway zones on the map of India.
The distribution pattern of the Railway
network in the country has been largely
influenced by physiographic, economic and
administrative factors. The northern plains with
their vast level land, high population density
and rich agricultural resources provided the most
favourable condition for their growth. However,
a large number of rivers requiring construction
of bridges across their wide beds posed some
Fig. 7.4: Traffic on north-eastern border road
obstacles. In the hilly terrains of the peninsular
(Arunachal Pradesh)
region, railway tracts are laid through low hills,
Roads can also be classified on the basis of gaps or tunnels. The Himalayan mountainous
the type of material used for their construction regions too are unfavourable for the construction
such as metalled and unmetalled roads. of railway lines due to high relief, sparse
Metalled roads may be made of cement, population and lack of economic opportunities.
concrete or even bitumen of coal, therefore, Likewise, it was difficult to lay railway lines on
74 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 87 ---
Table 7.1: India: Railway Track
The Indian Railway network runs on multiple gauge operations
extending over 67,956 km.
Gauge in metres Route (Km)
Broad Gauge (1.676) 63950
Metre Gauge (1.000) 2,402
Narrow Gauge (0.762 and 0.610) 1,604
Total 67,956
Source:Railway Yearbook 2019–20, Ministry of Railways, Government of India.
Website: www.indianrailways.gov.in
the sandy plain of western Rajasthan, swamps subsequent running costs are minimal. It rules
of Gujarat, forested tracks of Madhya Pradesh, out trans-shipment losses or delays.
Chhattisgarh, Odisha and Jharkhand. The There are three important networks of
contiguous stretch of Sahyadri could be crossed pipeline transportation in the country.
only through gaps or passes (Ghats). In recent • From oil field in upper Assam to Kanpur
times, the development of the Konkan railway (Uttar Pradesh), via Guwahati, Barauni and
along the west coast has facilitated the movement Allahabad. It has branches from Barauni to
of passengers and goods in this most important Haldia, via Rajbandh, Rajbandh to
economic region of India. It has also faced a Maurigram and Guwahati to Siliguri.
number of problem such as sinking of track in
• From Salaya in Gujarat to Jalandhar in
some stretches and landslides.
Punjab, via Viramgam, Mathura, Delhi and
Today, the railways have become more
Sonipat. It has branches to connect Koyali
important in our national economy than all
(near Vadodara, Gujarat) Chakshu and
other means of transport put together. However,
other places.
rail transport suffers from certain problems as
• The first 1,700 km long Hazira-Vijaipur-
well. Many passengers travel without tickets.
Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas
Thefts and damaging of railway property has
pipeline, linked Mumbai High and Bassein
not yet stopped completely. People stop the
gas fields with various ferilizer, power and
trains, pull the chain unnecessarily and this
industrial complexes in western and
causes heavy damage to the railway. Think over
northern India. Overall, India’s gas pipeline
it, how we can help our railway in running as
infrastructure has expanded from 1,700 km
per the scheduled time?
to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines.
Pipelines
Waterways
Pipeline transport network is a new arrival on Since the ancient period, India was one of the
the transportation map of India. In the past, seafaring countries. Its seamen sailed far and
these were used to transport water to cities and near, thus, carrying and spreading Indian
industries. Now, these are used for transporting commerce and culture. Waterways are the
crude oil, petroleum products and natural gas cheapest means of transport. They are most
from oil and natural gas fields to refineries, suitable for carrying heavy and bulky goods.
fertilizer factories and big thermal power plants. It is a fuel-efficient and environment friendly
Solids can also be transported through a mode of transport. India has inland navigation
pipeline when converted into slurry. The far waterways of 14,500 km in length. Out of these
inland locations of refineries like Barauni, only 5685 km are navigable by mechanised
Mathura, Panipat and gas based fertilizer plants vessels. The following waterways have been
could be thought of only because of pipelines. declared as the National Waterways by the
Initial cost of laying pipelines is high but Government.
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 75
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 88 ---
Activity
Railway line has been extended from Banihal to Baramula in the Kashmir Valley. Locate these
two towns on the map of India.
76 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 89 ---
Deendayal Port, is a tidal port. It caters to the
convenient handling of exports and imports of
highly productive granary and industrial belt
stretching across UT of Jammu and Kashmir,
and the states of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan and Gujarat.
Fig. 7.5: Inland waterways widely used in
north-eastern states
• The Ganga river between Allahabad and
Haldia (1620 km)-N.W. No.1
• The Brahmaputra river between Sadiya and
Dhubri (891 km)-N.W. No.2
• The West-Coast Canal in Kerala Fig. 7.6: Trucks being driven into the vessel at
(Kottapurma-Kollam, Udyogamandal and Mumbai port
Champakkara canals-205 km) – N.W. No.3
Mumbai is the biggest port with a spacious
• Specified stretches of Godavari and Krishna
natural and well-sheltered harbour. The
rivers along with Kakinada Puducherry
Jawaharlal Nehru port was planned with a view
stretch of canals (1078 km) – N.W. No.4
to decongest the Mumbai port and serve as a
• Specified stretches of river Brahmani along
hub port for this region. Marmagao port (Goa)
with Matai river, delta channels of Mahanadi
is the premier iron ore exporting port of the
and Brahmani rivers and East Coast Canal
country. This port accounts for about fifty per
(588 km) – N.W. No.5
cent of India’s iron ore export. New Mangalore
There are some other inland water ways
port, located in Karnataka caters to the export
on which substantial transportation takes
of iron ore concentrates from Kudremukh
place. These are Mandavi, Zuari and
mines. Kochchi is the extreme south-western
Cumberjua, Sunderbans, Barak and
port, located at the entrance of a lagoon with a
backwaters of Kerala.
natural harbour.
Apart from these, India’s trade with foreign
countries is carried from the ports located
along the coast. 95 per cent of the country’s
trade volume (68 per cent in terms of value) is
moved by sea.
Major Sea Ports
With a long coastline of 7,516.6 km, India is
dotted with 12 major and 200 notified non-
majors (minor/intermediate) ports. These
Fig. 7.7: Tanker discharging crude oil at New
major ports handle 95 per cent of India’s
Mangalore port
foreign trade.
Kandla in Kuchchh was the first port Moving along the east coast, you would see
developed soon after Independence to ease the extreme south-eastern port of Tuticorin,
the volume of trade on the Mumbai port, in in Tamil Nadu. This port has a natural harbour
the wake of loss of Karachi port to Pakistan and rich hinterland. Thus, it has a flourishing
after the Partition. Kandla also known as the trade handling of a large variety of cargoes to
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 77
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 90 ---
even our neighbouring countries like Sri terrains like high mountains, dreary
Lanka, Maldives, etc. and the coastal regions deserts, dense forests and also long
of India. Chennai is one of the oldest artificial oceanic stretches with great ease. Think of
ports of the country. It is ranked next to the north-eastern part of the country,
Mumbai in terms of the volume of trade and marked with the presence of big rivers,
cargo. Vishakhapatnam is the deepest dissected relief, dense forests and frequent
landlocked and well-protected port. This port floods and international frontiers, etc. in
was, originally, conceived as an outlet for iron the absence of air transport. Air travel has
ore exports. Paradwip port located in Odisha, made access easier.
specialises in the export of iron ore. Kolkata is Pawanhans Helicopters Ltd. provides
an inland riverine port. This port serves a very helicopter services to Oil and Natural Gas
large and rich hinterland of Ganga- Corporation in its off-shore operations, to
Brahmaputra basin. Being a tidal port, it inaccessible areas and difficult terrains like the
requires constant dredging of Hoogly. Haldia north-eastern states and the interior parts of
port was developed as a subsidiary port, in Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and
order to relieve growing pressure on the Uttarakhand.
Kolkata port. Air travel is not within the reach of the
common people. It is only in the north-
eastern states that special provisions are
made to extend the services to the
common people.
Communication
Ever since humans appeared on the earth,
they have used different means of
communication. But, the pace of change,
has been rapid in modern times. Long
distance communication is far easier
Fig. 7.8: Handling of oversize cargo at Tuticorin port
without physical movement of the
Airways communicator or receiver. Personal
communication and mass communication
The air travel, today, is the fastest, most
including television, radio, press, films, etc.
comfortable and prestigious mode of
are the major means of communication in
transport. It can cover very difficult
the country. The Indian postal network is
the largest in the world. It handles
parcels as well as personal written
communications. Cards and envelopes are
considered first-class mail and are airlifted
between stations covering both land and
air. The second-class mail includes book
packets, registered newspapers and
periodicals. They are carried by surface
mail, covering land and water transport. To
facilitate quick delivery of mails in large
towns and cities, six mail channels have
been introduced recently. They are called
Rajdhani Channel, Metro Channel, Green
Why is air travel preferred in the north- Channel, Business Channel, Bulk Mail
eastern states? Channel and Periodical Channel.
Fig. 7.9
78 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 91 ---
India: Major Ports and Some International Airports
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 79
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 92 ---
of India, is one of the largest terrestrial
networks in the world. It broadcasts a variety
Digital India is an umbrella programme
of programmes from entertainment,
to prepare India for a knowledge based
educational to sports, etc. for people of different
transformation. The focus of Digital India
age groups.
Programme is on being transformative to
realise – IT (Indian Talent) + IT (Information India publishes a large number of
Technology)=IT (India Tomorrow) and is newspapers and periodicals annually. They
on making technology central to enabling are of different types depending upon their
change. periodicity. Newspapers are published in
about 100 languages and dialects. Did you
know that the largest number of newspapers
published in the country are in Hindi, followed
by English and Urdu? India is the largest
producer of feature films in the world. It
produces short films; video feature films and
video short films. The Central Board of Film
Certification is the authority to certify both
Indian and foreign films.
International Trade
The exchange of goods among people, states
and countries is referred to as trade. The
Fig.7.10 : Emergency call box on NH-8 market is the place where such exchanges
take place. Trade between two countries is
India has one of the largest telecom called international trade. It may take place
networks in Asia. Excluding urban places more through sea, air or land routes. While local
than two-thirds of the villages in India have trade is carried in cities, towns and villages,
already been covered with Subscriber Trunk state level trade is carried between two or more
Dialling (STD) telephone facility. In order to states. Advancement of international trade of
strengthen the flow of information from the a country is an index to its economic
grassroot to the higher level, the government prosperity. It is, therefore, considered the
has made special provision to extend twenty- economic barometer for a country.
four hours STD facility to every village in the As the resources are space bound, no
country. There is a uniform rate of STD country can survive without international
facilities all over India. It has trade. Export and import are the components
been made possible by integrating the of trade. The balance of trade of a country is
development in space technology with the difference between its export and import.
communication technology. When the value of export exceeds the value
Mass communication provides of imports, it is called a favourable balance
entertainment and creates awareness among of trade. On the contrary, if the value of
people about various national programmes imports exceeds the value of exports, it is
and policies. It includes radio, television, termed as unfavourable balance of trade.
newspapers, magazines, books and films. All India has trade relations with all the major
India Radio (Akashwani) broadcasts a variety trading blocks and all geographical regions
of programmes in national, regional and local of the world. The commodities exported from
languages for various categories of people, India to other countries include gems and
spread over different parts of the country. jewellery, chemicals and related products,
Doordarshan, the national television channel agriculture and allied products, etc.
80 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 93 ---
The commodities imported to India adventure tourism, cultural tourism, medical
include petroleum crude and products, tourism and business tourism.
gems and jewellery, chemicals and related
products, base metals, electronic items, There is a vast potential for development of
machinery, agriculture and allied products. tourism in all parts of the country. Efforts are
India has emerged as a software giant at the being made to promote different types of
international level and it is earning large tourism for this upcoming industry.
foreign exchange through the export of
information technology.
On the map of India show important tourist
Tourism as a Trade
places of your State/UT and its connectivity
Tourism in India has grown substantially over with other parts of the country by railways/
the last three decades. roadways/airways.
More than 15 million people are directly Discuss in the class:
engaged in the tourism industry. Tourism also • What type of tourism may be developed in
promotes national integration, provides your state/UT and why?
support to local handicrafts and cultural • Which areas in your state/UT you find more
pursuits. It also helps in the development of attractive for development of tourism and why?
international understanding about our • How tourism may be helpful for the economic
development of a region adopting sustainable
culture and heritage. Foreign tourists visit
development approach?
India for heritage tourism, eco tourism,
Prepare a project on the heritage tourism in India.
*Source: Annual Report 2016–17, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, Government of India.
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 81
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 94 ---
EXERCISES EXERCISES E XERCISES EXERCISES EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which two of the following extreme locations are connected by the east-
west corridor?
(a) Mumbai and Nagpur (c) Mumbai and Kolkata
(b) Silchar and Porbandar (d) Nagpur and Siligudi
(ii) Which mode of transportation reduces trans-shipment losses and delays?
(a) Railways (c) Pipeline
(b) Roadways (d) Waterways
(iii) Which one of the following states is not connected with the H.V.J. pipeline?
(a) Madhya Pradesh (c) Gujarat
(b) Maharashtra (d) Uttar Pradesh
(iv) Which one of the following ports is the deepest land-locked and well-
protected port along the east coast?
(a) Chennai (c) Tuticorin
(b) Paradwip (d) Vishakhapatnam
(v) Which one of the following is the most important modes of transportation
in India?
(a) Pipeline (c) Roadways
(b) Railways (d) Airways
(vi) Which one of the following terms is used to describe trade between two or
more countries?
(a) Internal trade (c) External trade
(b) International trade (d) Local trade
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) State any three merits of roadways.
(ii) Where and why is rail transport the most convenient means of
transportation?
(iii) What is the significance of the border roads?
(iv) What is meant by trade? What is the difference between international
and local trade?
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Why are the means of transportation and communication called the
lifelines of a nation and its economy?
(ii) Write a note on the changing nature of the international trade in the last
fifteen years.
Q D
UIZ RIVE
1. Northern terminal of the North-south corridor.
2. The name of National Highway No.2.
3. The headquarter of the southern railway zone.
4. The rail gauge with a track width of 1.676 m.
5. The southern terminal of the National Highway No.7.
6. A Riverine Port.
7. Busiest railway junction in Northern India.
82 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 95 ---
A
CTIVITY
Start your search vertically, horizontally or diagonally and reach various
destinations across the country!
S H E R S H A H S U R I M A R G
A R T P R N X E L A T A D L A Y
J M M X I P O R A Y M P G H T X
Y C H E N N N A I I K M C A I M
O D C D A L M C S O T P O R C P
A P T R G S K J M J L E A N E R
R A E T A J P O R M W M A S X O
I L S B R O A D G A U G E L O T
A S N L C M E C U K Z M A A J E
L M U G H A L S A R A I B S N A
G O E T V R A Y F T O R E A J M
K Q A I P M N Y R Y A Y H L I N
Q K O L K A T A E U I T W B E A
N I T N K D E M O U R P N P J D
LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 83
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 96 ---
AAAAAppppppppppeeeeennnnndddddiiiiixxxxx-----IIIII
Websites you can see
Bombay Natural History Society: http://www.bnhs.org/
Birding in India and South Asia: http://www.birding.in/
Website of Project Tiger: http://projecttiger.nic.in/
Nature Conservation Foundation: http://www.ncf-india.org/
Wildlife Conservation Society of India: http://www.wildlife.in/
Wildlife Trust of India: http://www.wildlifetrustofindia.org/
Kalpavriksh Environment Action Group: http://www.kalpavriksh.org/
Down to Earth Magazine: http://www.downtoearth.org.in/
Centre for Environment Education, India: http://www.ceeindia.org/cee/index.html
World Steel Association : http://www.worldsteel.org
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 97 ---
AAAAAppppppppppeeeeennnnndddddiiiiixxxxx-----IIIIIIIIII
Steel Plants Year of Establishment Collaborating Location
Country
IISCO 1870-1913 (Private initially) (Nationalised Kulti and
in 1972) Burnpur (W.B.)
TISCO 1907 (Private ownership) Jamshedji Tata Jamshedpur
(Jharkhand)
VISL 1923 Private as MISCO Nationalised later Bhadravati
(Karnataka)
Bhilai 1959 (Public Sector) Soviet Union Bhilai (M.P.)
Bokaro 1972 (Public Sector) Soviet Union Bokaro
(Jharkhand)
Durgapur 1959 (Public Sector) U.K. Durgapur (W.B.)
Rourkela — (Public Sector) Germany Rourkela
(Odisha)
Vishakhapatnam — (Public Sector) — Vishakhapatnam
Andhra Pradesh
Salem — (Public Sector) — Salem (T. Nadu)
Vijay Nagar — Public Sector — Karnataka
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 98 ---
GGGGGlllllooooossssssssssaaaaarrrrryyyyy
Anticline: A fold in sedimentary strata that resembles an arch.
Gross Domestic Product: It is a monetary measure of the value of goods and services
produced within a natural economy at a given period of time. Normally it is one year.
Gross Value Added (GVA): The GVA is estimated from GDP by adding subsidies on
production and substracting indirect taxes.
Geologist: A scientist who studies the composition, structure and history of the
earth.
Geothermal Gradient: The gradual increase in temperature with depth in the
crust. The average is 30°C per kilometer in the upper crust.
Humus: Dead and decayed organic matter adds to the fertility of the top soil.
Igneous Rocks: Rocks which have solidified from molten magma.
Manganese Nodules: A type of sediment scattered on the ocean floor, consisting
mainly of manganese and iron, and usually containing small amounts of copper,
nickel and cobalt.
Metamorphic Rocks: Rocks which were originally igneous or sedimentary, but have
changed in character and appearance.
Oil Trap: A geological structure that allows for significant amounts of oil and gas to
accumulate.
Rock: A consolidated mixture of minerals
Sedimentary Rocks: Rocks which have been deposited as beds and layers of
sediments.
86 CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 99 ---
N
OTES
APPENDIX 87
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 100 ---
N
OTES
Rationalised-2023-24