--- PAGE 1 ---
S S
OCIAL CIENCE
C I -I
ONTEMPORARY NDIA
T G C IX
EXTBOOK IN EOGRAPHY FOR LASS
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 2 ---
0968 – CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
ISBN 81-7450-520-2
Textbook in Geography for Class IX
FFFFFiiiiirrrrrsssssttttt EEEEEdddddiiiiitttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
March 2006 Phalguna 1927
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
RRRRReeeeeppppprrrrriiiiinnnnnttttteeeeeddddd transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
November 2006, December 2007 ,
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent,
February 2009, January 2010, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
November 2010, January 2012, form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
November 2012, November 2013, q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
December 2014, February 2016, and should be unacceptable.
December 2016, December 2017,
January 2019, January 2020, OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
August 2021, November 2021 DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
RRRRReeeeevvvvviiiiissssseeeeeddddd EEEEEdddddiiiiitttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
Sri Aurobindo Marg
October 2022 Kartika 1944 New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
PD 620T RSP
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
©©©©© NNNNNaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnnaaaaalllll CCCCCooooouuuuunnnnnccccciiiiilllll ooooofffff EEEEEddddduuuuucccccaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnnaaaaalllll Phone : 080-26725740
RRRRReeeeessssseeeeeaaaaarrrrrccccchhhhh aaaaannnnnddddd TTTTTrrrrraaaaaiiiiinnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg,,,,, 22222000000000066666,,,,, 22222000002222222222 Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
` 65.00 Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production : Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business : Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor (In charge) : Bijnan Sutar
Editor : Benoy Banerjee
Production Assistant : Prakash Veer Singh
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division CCCCCooooovvvvveeeeerrrrr
by the Secretary, National Council of Sarita Verma Mathur
Educational Research and Training, IIIIIlllllllllluuuuussssstttttrrrrraaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss CCCCCaaaaarrrrrtttttooooogggggrrrrraaaaappppphhhhhyyyyy
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and Sarita Verma Mathur Cartographic
printed at Nutech Print Services India, Praveen Mishra Designs Agency
Plot No. 3-4, Sector-59, Phase-II, Anil Sharma Praveen Mishra
Faridabad-121 004 (Haryana)
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 3 ---
F
OREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework, (NCF) 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle
marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to
shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and community.
The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to
implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and
the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope
these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred
system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and
to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with
the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook
as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources
and sites of learning are ignored. Including creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers
of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority
and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in
small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for
this book, Professor M. H. Qureshi for guiding the work of this committee.
Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful
to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions
and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their
resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 4 ---
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department
of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource
Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an
organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in
the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 5 ---
R C T
ATIONALISATION OF ONTENT IN THE EXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on students.
The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content load and
providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In this
background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks
across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across classes
have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same
class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-
learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes given
above.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 7 ---
T D C
EXTBOOK EVELOPMENT OMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCE AT THE
SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
M. H. Qureshi, Professor, CSRD, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
MEMBERS
K. Jaya, PGT, Convent of Jesus and Mary, Bangla Sahib Road, New Delhi
Punam Behari, Reader, Miranda House, Chhatra Marg, University of Delhi, Delhi
Saroj Sharma, TGT (Retd.), Mother’s International School, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi
Sudeshna Bhattacharya, Reader, Miranda House, Chhatra Marg, University
of Delhi, Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Tannu Malik, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 8 ---
A
CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the
contributions of B.S. Butola, Professor, CSRD, JNU; Jebachh Singh, PGT Geography,
Sir G. D. Patliputra Inter School, Patna, and Krishna Kumar Upadhyaya, PGT Geography,
K.V.A.F.S., Bareily, in the development of this textbook.
Acknowledgements are also due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Social Science and Humanities, NCERT, for her valuable support at
every stage of preparation of this textbook.
The Council is also grateful to the individuals and organisations as listed below for
providing various photographs and illustrations used in this textbook:
M.H. Qureshi, Professor, CSRD, JNU, for Figure 2.5; ITDC/Ministry of Tourism,
Government of India for Figures 2.4, 2.6, 2.7, 3.5 and pictures of river, migratory birds
and a picture of montane forests on pages 23, 48 and 51 respectively, picture of desert
on Cover I, picture of clouds on Cover IV; cross-section interactive for a picture of lions
on page 48; Tourism of Andaman and Nicobar, Government of India for
Figure 2.9; Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India for Figures
2.3, 3.6, picture of corals on page 15 and picture of forest on Cover I; Photo Division,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India for Figure 2.8; Business
Line for Figure 3.2; and Hindustan Times, New Delhi, for news in two collages given on
pages 38 and 50.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Anil Sharma and
Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators; Sameer Khatana and Amar Kumar Prusty, Copy Editors;
Shreshtha and Deepti Sharma, Proof Readers; and Dinesh Kumar, In-charge,
Computer Station, who have helped in giving a final shape to this textbook. The efforts
of the Publication Division, NCERT, are also duly acknowledged.
The following are applicable to all the maps of India used in this book
© Government of India, Copyright 2006
1. The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher.
2. The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from
the appropriate base line.
3. The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh.
4. The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are
as interpreted from the ‘North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act,1971,’ but have yet to be verified.
5. The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by
Survey of India.
6. The state boundaries between Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand, and Chhattisgarh
and Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned.
7. The spellings of names in this map have been taken from various sources.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 9 ---
C
ONTENTS
FOREWORD iii
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS v
CHAPTER 1
India – Size and Location 1
CHAPTER 2
Physical Features of India 7
CHAPTER 3
Drainage 17
CHAPTER 4
Climate 26
CHAPTER 5
Natural Vegetation and Wildlife 39
CHAPTER 6
Population 48
GLOSSARY 55
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 10 ---
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 11 ---
1
I – S L
NDIA IZE AND OCATION
I
ndia is one of the ancient civilisations in the The Tropic of Cancer (23° 30'N) divides the
world. It has achieved multi-faceted socio- country into almost two equal parts. To the
economic progress during the last five southeast and southwest of the mainland, lie
decades. It has moved forward displaying the Andaman and Nicobar islands and the
remarkable progress in the field of Lakshadweep islands in Bay of Bengal and
agriculture, industry, technology and overall Arabian Sea respectively. Find out the extent
economic development. India has also of these groups of islands from your atlas.
contributed significantly to the making of
world history.
• The southernmost point of
the Indian Union– ‘Indira Point’ got submerged under
the sea water in 2004 during the Tsunami.
LOCATION
India is a vast country. Lying entirely in the
SIZE
Northern hemisphere (Figure 1.1) the main The land mass of India has an area of 3.28
land extends between latitudes 8°4'N and million square km. India’s total area accounts
37°6'N and longitudes 68°7'E and 97°25'E. for about 2.4 per cent of the total geographical
180°W 150° 120° 90° 60° 30°W 0° 30°E 60° 90° 120° 150° 180°E
75°N
60°
North
America
Europe
Asia 45°
30°
PACIFIC ATLANTIC Africa PACIFIC 15°N
OCEAN OCEAN OCEAN
0°
South INDIAN
OCEAN
America
15°S
Australia
30°
45°
60°
Antartica 75°S
Figure 1.1 : India in the World
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 12 ---
area of the world. From Figure 1.2 it is clear
that India is the seventh largest country of
• Why 82°30'E has been selected as the Standard
the world. India has a land boundary of
Meridian of India?
about 15,200 km and the total length of the
• Why is the difference between the durations
coastline of the mainland, including of day and night hardly felt at Kanniyakumari
Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep, but not so in Kashmir?
is 7,516.6 km.
India is bounded by the young fold INDIA AND THE WORLD
mountains in the northwest, north and
The Indian landmass has a central location
northeast. South of about 22° north
between the East and the West Asia. India is a
latitude, it begins to taper, and extends
southward extension of the Asian continent. The
towards the Indian Ocean, dividing it into
trans Indian Ocean routes, which connect the
two seas, the Arabian Sea on the west and
countries of Europe in the West and the
the Bay of Bengal on its east.
countries of East Asia, provide a strategic central
Look at Figure 1.3 and note that the location to India. Note that the Deccan Peninsula
latitudinal and longitudinal extent of the protrudes into the Indian Ocean, thus helping
mainland is about 30°. Despite this fact, the India to establish close contact with West Asia,
east-west extent appears to be smaller than Africa and Europe from the western coast and
the north-south extent. with Southeast and East Asia from the eastern
From Gujarat to Arunachal Pradesh, coast. No other country has a long coastline on
there is a time lag of two hours. Hence, time the Indian Ocean as India has and indeed, it is
along the Standard Meridian of India India’s eminent position in the Indian Ocean,
(82°30'E) passing through Mirzapur (in which justifies the naming of an Ocean after it.
Uttar Pradesh) is taken as the standard time
for the whole country. The latitudinal extent
Since the opening of the
influences the duration of day and night, as Suez Canal in 1869, India’s distance from Europe
one moves from south to north. has been reduced by 7,000 km.
Source : United Nations Demographic Year Book 2015
Figure 1.2 : Seven Largest Countries of the World
2 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 13 ---
Figure 1.3 : India : Extent and Standard Meridian
INDIA – SIZE AND LOCATION 3
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 14 ---
Figure 1.4 : India on International Highway of Trade and Commerce
India’s contacts with the World have
continued through ages but her relationships • The number of Union Territories
along the western and eastern coasts.
through the land routes are much older than
• Area-wise which is the smallest and which is
her maritime contacts. The various passes across
the largest state?
the mountains in the north have provided • The states which do not have an international
passages to the ancient travellers, while the border or lie on the coast.
oceans restricted such interaction for a long time. • Classify the states into four groups each
These routes have contributed in the having common frontiers with
(i) Pakistan, (ii) China, (iii) Myanmar, and
exchange of ideas and commodities since
(iv) Bangladesh.
ancient times. The ideas of the Upanishads
and the Ramayana, the stories of Panchtantra,
India shares its land boundaries with
the Indian numerals and the decimal system
Pakistan and Afghanistan in the northwest,
thus could reach many parts of the world. The
China (Tibet), Nepal and Bhutan in the north
spices, muslin and other merchandise were
and Myanmar and Bangladesh in the east.
taken from India to different countries. On the
Our southern neighbours across the sea
other hand, the influence of Greek sculpture,
consist of the two island countries, namely
and the architectural styles of dome and
minarets from West Asia can be seen in
different parts of our country.
Before 1947, there were two
types of states in India — the provinces and the
INDIA’S NEIGHBOURS Princely states. Provinces were ruled directly by
British officials, who were appointed by the
India occupies an important strategic position
Viceroy. Princely states were ruled by local,
in South Asia. India has 28 states and Eight hereditary rulers, who acknowledged sovereignity
Union Territories (Figure 1.5). in return for local autonomy.
4 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 15 ---
Figure 1.5 : India and Adjacent Countries
Sri Lanka and Maldives. Sri Lanka is India has had strong geographical and
separated from India by a narrow channel historical links with her neighbours. Look
of sea formed by the Palk Strait and the Gulf at the physical map of Asia in your atlas,
of Mannar, while Maldives Islands are situated and note how India stands apart from the
to the south of the Lakshadweep Islands. rest of Asia.
School Bhuvan is a portal providing map-based learning to bring awareness among the
students about the country’s natural resources, environment and their role in sustainable development. It
is an initiative of Bhuvan — NRSC/ISRO based on NCERT syllabus. You can explore various maps of
India related to the secondary stage on https://bhuvan-app1.nrsc.gov.in/mhrd_ncert/
INDIA – SIZE AND LOCATION 5
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 16 ---
E
XERCISE
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) The Tropic of Cancer does not pass through
(a) Rajasthan (c) Chhattisgarh
(b) Odisha (d) Tripura
(ii) The easternmost longitude of India is
(a) 97° 25' E (c) 77° 6' E
(b) 68° 7' E (d) 82° 32' E
(iii) Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim have common
frontiers with
(a) China (c) Nepal
(b) Bhutan (d) Myanmar
(iv) If you intend to visit Kavarati during your summer vacations, which one of
the following Union Territories of India you will be going to
(a) Puducherry (c) Andaman and Nicobar
(b) Lakshadweep (d) Daman and Diu
(v) My friend hails from a country which does not share land boundary with
India. Identify the country.
(a) Bhutan (c) Bangladesh
(b) Tajikistan (d) Nepal
2 Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) Name the group of islands lying in the Arabian Sea.
(ii) Name the countries which are larger than India.
(iii) Which island group of India lies to its south-east?
(iv) Which island countries are our southern neighbours?
3 The sun rises two hours earlier in Arunachal Pradesh as compared to Gujarat
in the west but the watches show the same time. How does this happen?
4 The central location of India at the head of the Indian Ocean is considered of
great significance. Why?
MAP SKILLS
1. Identify the following with the help of map reading.
(i) The island groups of India lying in the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal.
(ii) The countries constituting Indian subcontinent.
(iii) The States through which the Tropic of Cancer passes.
(iv) The northernmost latitude in degrees.
(v) The southernmost latitude of the Indian mainland in degrees.
(vi) The eastern and the western-most longitude in degrees.
(vii) The place situated on the three seas.
(viii) The strait separating Sri Lanka from India.
(ix) The Union Territories of India.
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
(i) Find out the longitudinal and latitudinal extent of your state.
(ii) Collect information about the ‘Silk Route’. Also find out the new
developments, which are improving communication routes in the regions of
high altitude.
6 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 17 ---
2
P F I
HYSICAL EATURES OF NDIA
Y
ou have already learnt earlier that India (1) The Himalayan Mountains
is a vast country with varied land forms. (2) The Northern Plains
What kind of terrain do you live in? If (3) The Peninsular Plateau
you live in the plains, you are familiar with the (4) The Indian Desert
vast stretches of plain land. In contrast, if you (5) The Coastal Plains
live in hilly region, the rugged terrain with (6) The Islands
mountains and valleys are common features.
The Himalayan Mountains
In fact, our country has practically all major
physical features of the earth, i.e., mountains, The Himalayas, geologically young and
plains, deserts, plateaus and islands.
structurally fold mountains stretch over the
The land of India displays great physical
northern borders of India. These mountain
variation. Geologically, the Peninsular Plateau
ranges run in a west-east direction from the
constitutes one of the ancient landmasses on
Indus to the Brahmaputra. The Himalayas
the earth’s surface. It was supposed to be one
represent the loftiest and one of the most
of the most stable land blocks. The Himalayas
rugged mountain barriers of the world. They
and the Northern Plains are the most recent
form an arc, which covers a distance of about
landforms. From the view point of geology,
2,400 Km. Their width varies from 400 Km in
Himalayan mountains form an unstable zone.
Kashmir to 150 Km in Arunachal Pradesh. The
The whole mountain system of Himalaya
altitudinal variations are greater in the eastern
represents a very youthful topography with
half than those in the western half. The
high peaks, deep valleys and fast flowing rivers.
Himalaya consists of three parallel ranges in
The northern plains are formed of alluvial
deposits. The peninsular plateau is composed its longitudinal extent. A number of valleys lie
of igneous and metamorphic rocks with gently between these ranges. The northern-most
rising hills and wide valleys. range is known as the Great or Inner
Himalayas or the Himadri. It is the most
MAJOR PHYSIOGRAPHIC DIVISIONS continuous range consisting of the loftiest
peaks with an average height of
The physical features of India can be grouped
under the following physiographic divisions 6,000 metres. It contains all prominent
(Figure 2.2): Himalayan peaks.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 18 ---
Figure 2.1 : Himalayas
Some Highest Peaks of the Himalayas The range lying to the south of the
Peak Country Height Himadri forms the most rugged mountain
in metres system and is known as Himachal or lesser
Mt. Everest Nepal 8848 Himalaya. The ranges are mainly composed
Kanchenjunga India 8598
of highly compressed and altered rocks. The
Makalu Nepal 8481
Dhaulagiri Nepal 8172 altitude varies between 3,700 and 4,500
Nanga Parbat India 8126 metres and the average width is of 50 Km.
Annapurna Nepal 8078
While the Pir Panjal range forms the longest
Nanda Devi India 7817
Kamet India 7756 and the most important range, the Dhaula
Namcha Barwa India 7756
Dhar and the Mahabharat ranges are also
Gurla Mandhata Nepal 7728
prominent ones. This range consists of the
The folds of the Great Himalayas are famous valley of Kashmir, the Kangra and
asymmetrical in nature. The core of this part Kullu Valley in Himachal Pradesh. This
of Himalayas is composed of granite. It is region is well-known for its hill stations.
perennially snow bound, and a number of
glaciers descend from this range.
• Location of Mussoorie, Nainital,
Ranikhet from your atlas and also name the state
where they are located.
• The names of the glaciers and passes
that lie in the Great Himalayas.
• The name of the states where the highest The outer-most range of the Himalayas is
peaks are located. called the Shiwaliks. They extend over a width
8 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 19 ---
Figure 2.2 : Relief
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA 9
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 20 ---
Figure 2.3 : The Himalayas
of 10-50 Km and have an altitude varying categories. Find out some regional names of
between 900 and 1100 metres. These ranges the Himalayas
are composed of unconsolidated sediments The Brahmaputra marks the eastern-most
brought down by rivers from the main boundary of the Himalayas. Beyond the Dihang
Himalayan ranges located farther north. gorge, the Himalayas bend sharply to the south
These valleys are covered with thick and spread along the eastern boundary of
gravel and alluvium. The longitudinal valley India. They are known as the Purvachal or the
lying between lesser Himalaya and the Eastern hills and mountains. These hills
Shiwaliks are known as Duns. Dehra Dun,
running through the north-eastern states are
Kotli Dun and Patli Dun are some of the
mostly composed of strong sandstones, which
well-known Duns.
are sedimentary rocks. Covered with dense
Besides the longitudinal divisions, the
forests, they mostly run as parallel ranges
Himalayas have been divided on the basis of
and valleys. The Purvachal comprises the
regions from west to east. These divisions
Patkai hills, the Naga hills, the Manipur hills
have been demarcated by river valleys. For
and the Mizo hills.
example, the part of Himalayas lying between
Indus and Satluj has been traditionally
known as Punjab Himalaya but it is also
known regionally as Kashmir and Himachal
Himalaya from west to east respectively. The
part of the Himalayas lying between Satluj
and Kali rivers is known as Kumaon
Himalayas. The Kali and Teesta rivers
demarcate the Nepal Himalayas and the part
lying between Teesta and Dihang rivers is
known as Assam Himalayas. There are
regional names also in these broad
Figure 2.4 : Mizo Hills
10 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 21 ---
The Northern Plain The Northern Plain is broadly divided into
three sections. The Western part of the Northern
The northern plain has been formed by the
Plain is referred to as the Punjab Plains.
interplay of the three major river systems,
Formed by the Indus and its tributaries, the
namely — the Indus, the Ganga and the
larger part of this plain lies in Pakistan. The
Brahmaputra along with their tributaries. This
Indus and its tributaries — the Jhelum, the
plain is formed of alluvial soil. The deposition
Chenab, the Ravi, the Beas and the Satluj
of alluvium in a vast basin lying at the foothills
originate in the Himalaya. This section of the
of the Himalaya over millions of years, formed
plain is dominated by the doabs.
this fertile plain. It spreads over an area of 7
lakh sq. km. The plain being about 2400 km
long and 240 to 320 km broad, is a densely ‘Doab’ is made up of two words
populated physiographic division. With a rich — ‘do’ meaning two and ‘ab’ meaning water. Similarly
‘Punjab’, is also made up two words — ‘Punj’ meaning
soil cover combined with adequate water
five and ‘ab’ meaning water.
supply and favourable climate it is
agriculturally a productive part of India.
The Ganga plain extends between Ghaggar
and Teesta rivers. It is spread over North India in
Haryana, Delhi, U.P., Bihar, partly Jharkhand and
West Bengal. In the East, particularly in Assam
lies the Brahmaputra plain.
The northern plains are generally described
as flat land with no variations in its relief. It is
not true. These vast plains also have diverse
relief features. According to the variations in
relief features, the Northern plains can be
divided into four regions. The rivers, after
descending from the mountains deposit
pebbles in a narrow belt of about 8 to 16 km
in width lying parallel to the slopes of the
Figure 2.5 : The Northern Plains Shiwaliks. It is known as bhabar. All the
streams disappear in this bhabar belt. South
of this belt, the streams and rivers re-emerge
The rivers coming from northern
and create a wet, swampy and marshy region
mountains are involved in depositional work.
known as terai. This was a thickly forested
In the lower course, due to gentle slope, the
region full of wildlife. The forests have been
velocity of the river decreases, which results in
cleared to create agricultural land and to settle
the formation of riverine islands.
migrants from Pakistan after partition. Locate
Dudhwa National Park in this region.
Majuli, in the Brahmaputra
The largest part of the northern plain is
river, is the largest inhabited riverine island in the
world. formed of older alluvium. It lies above the
floodplains of the rivers and presents a terrace-
The rivers in their lower course split into like feature. This part is known as bhangar.
numerous channels due to the deposition of silt. The soil in this region contains calcareous
These channels are known as distributaries. deposits, locally known as kankar. The
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA 11
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 22 ---
newer, younger deposits of the floodplains The Chotanagpur plateau marks the
are called khadar. They are renewed almost further eastward extension, drained by the
every year and so are fertile, thus, ideal for Damodar river.
intensive agriculture. The Deccan Plateau is a triangular landmass
that lies to the south of the river Narmada. The
The Peninsular Plateau
Satpura range flanks its broad base in the north,
The Peninsular plateau is a tableland while the Mahadev, the Kaimur hills and the
composed of the old crystalline, igneous and Maikal range form its eastern extensions. Locate
metamorphic rocks. It was formed due to the these hills and ranges in the Physical map of
breaking and drifting of the Gondwana land India. The Deccan Plateau is higher in the west
and thus, making it a part of the oldest and slopes gently eastwards. An extension of the
landmass. The plateau has broad and shallow Plateau is also visible in the northeast, locally
valleys and rounded hills. This plateau consists known as the Meghalaya, Karbi-Anglong Plateau
of two broad divisions, namely, the Central and North Cachar Hills. It is separated by a fault
Highlands and the Deccan Plateau. The part from the Chotanagpur Plateau. Three prominent
of the Peninsular plateau lying to the north of hill ranges from the west to the east are the Garo,
the Narmada river, covering a major area of the the Khasi and the Jaintia Hills.
Malwa plateau, is known as the Central
The Western Ghats and the Eastern Ghats
Highlands. The Vindhyan range is bounded
mark the western and the eastern edges of the
by the Satpura range on the south and the
Deccan Plateau respectively. Western Ghats lie
Aravalis on the northwest. The further
parallel to the western coast. They are continuous
westward extension gradually merges with the
and can be crossed through passes only. Locate
sandy and rocky desert of Rajasthan. The
the Thal, Bhor and Pal Ghats in the Physical
flow of the rivers draining this region, namely
map of India.
the Chambal, the Sind, the Betwa and the Ken
The Western Ghats are higher than the
is from southwest to northeast, thus indicating
Eastern Ghats. Their average elevation is 900–
the slope. The Central Highlands are wider in
1600 metres as against 600 metres of the
the west but narrower in the east. The eastward
Eastern Ghats. The Eastern Ghats stretch
extensions of this plateau are locally known
from the Mahanadi Valley to the Nigiris in the
as the Bundelkhand and Baghelkhand.
south. The Eastern Ghats are discontinuous
and irregular and dissected by rivers draining
into the Bay of Bengal. The Western Ghats
cause orographic rain by facing the rain
bearing moist winds to rise along the western
slopes of the Ghats. The Western Ghats are
known by different local names. The height of
the Western Ghats progressively increases
from north to south. The highest peaks
include the Anai Mudi (2,695 metres) and the
Doda Betta (2,637 metres). Mahendragiri
(1,501 metres) is the highest peak in the
Eastern Ghats. Shevroy Hills and the Javadi
Hills are located to the southeast of the
Figure 2.6 : A Waterfall in Chotanagpur Plateau
12 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 23 ---
Eastern Ghats. Locate the famous hill stations more prominent near the Indo-Pakistan
of Udagamandalam, popularly known as boundary. If you visit Jaisalmer, you may go
Ooty and the Kodaikanal. to see a group of barchans.
One of the distinct features of the
Peninsular plateau is the black soil area The Coastal Plains
known as Decean Trap. This is of volcanic
The Peninsular plateau is flanked by stretch
origin, hence, the rocks are igneous. Actually,
of narrow coastal strips, running along the
these rocks have denuded over time and are
Arabian Sea on the west and the Bay of Bengal
responsible for the formation of black soil. The
on the east. The western coast, sandwiched
Aravali Hills lie on the western and
between the Western Ghats and the Arabian
northwestern margins of the Peninsular
Sea, is a narrow plain. It consists of three
plateau. These are highly eroded hills and are
sections. The northern part of the coast is called
found as broken hills. They extend from
the Konkan (Mumbai – Goa), the central stretch
Gujarat to Delhi in a southwest-northeast
is called the Kannad Plain, while the southern
direction.
stretch is referred to as the Malabar coast.
The Indian Desert
The Indian desert lies towards the western
margins of the Aravali Hills. It is an undulating
sandy plain covered with sand dunes. This
region receives very low rainfall below 150 mm
per year. It has arid climate with low vegetation
cover. Streams appear during the rainy
season. Soon after they disappear into the
sand as they do not have enough water to
reach the sea. Luni is the only large river in
this region.
Figure 2.8 : The Coastal Plains
The plains along the Bay of Bengal are wide
and level. In the northern part, it is referred to
as the Northern Circar, while the southern part
is known as the Coromandel Coast. Large
rivers, such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari,
the Krishna and the Kaveri have formed
extensive delta on this coast. Lake Chilika is
an important feature along the eastern coast.
Figure 2.7 : The Indian Desert
The Chilika Lake is the
Barchans (crescent-shaped dunes) cover largest salt water lake in India. It lies in the state
larger areas but longitudinal dunes become of Odisha, to the south of the Mahanadi delta.
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA 13
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 24 ---
The Islands Now you see the elongated chain of islands
located in the Bay of Bengal extending from
You have already seen that India has a vast
north to south. These are Andaman and
mainland. Besides this, the country has two groups
Nicobar islands. They are bigger in size and
of islands. Can you identify these island groups?
are more numerous and scattered. The entire
group of islands is divided into two broad
categories – The Andaman in the north and
the Nicobar in the south. It is believed that these
islands are an elevated portion of submarine
mountains. These island groups are of great
strategic importance for the country. There is
great diversity of flora and fauna in this group
of islands too. These islands lie close to equator
and experience equatorial climate and has
thick forest cover.
Figure 2.9 : An Island
Locate the Lakshadweep Islands group India’s only active volcano is
lying close to the Malabar coast of Kerala. This found on Barren island in Andaman and Nicobar
group of Islands.
group of islands is composed of small coral
isalnds. Earlier they were known as Laccadive,
Minicoy and Amindive. In 1973, these were A detailed account of the different
named as Lakshadweep. It covers small area physiographic units highlights the unique
of 32 sq km. Kavaratti island is the
features of each region. It would, however,
administrative headquarters of Lakshadweep.
be clear that each region complements the
This island group has great diversity of flora
other and makes the country richer in its
and fauna. The Pitti island, which is
natural resources. The mountains are the
uninhabited, has a bird sanctuary.
major sources of water and forest wealth.
The northern plains are the granaries of the
Corals country. They provide the base for early
civilisations. The plateau is a storehouse
Coral polyps are short-lived microscopic
organisms, which live in colonies. They flourish of minerals, which has played a crucial role
in shallow, mud-free and warm waters. They
in the industrialisation of the country. The
secrete calcium carbonate. The coral secretion
and their skeletons from coral deposits in the coastal region and island groups provide
form of reefs: they are mainly of three kinds:
sites for fishing and port activities. Thus,
barrier reef. fringing reef and atolls. The Great
Barrier Reef of Australia is a good example of the the diverse physical features of the land
first kind of coral reefs. Atolls are circular or have immense future possibilities
horse shoe-shaped coral reefs.
of development.
14 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 25 ---
E
XERCISE
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) A landmass bounded by sea on three sides is referred to as
(a) Coast (c) Peninsula
(b) Island (d) None of the above
(ii) Mountain ranges in the eastern part of India forming its boundary with
Myanmar are collectively called
(a) Himachal (c) Purvachal
(b) Uttarakhand (d) None of the above
(iii) The western coastal strip, south of Goa is referred to as
(a) Coromandel (c) Kannad
(b) Konkan (d) Northern Circar
(iv) The highest peak in the Eastern Ghats is
(a) Anai Mudi (c) Mahendragiri
(b) Kanchenjunga (d) Khasi
2 Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) What is the bhabar?
(ii) Name the three major divisions of the Himalayas from north to south.
(iii) Which plateau lies between the Aravali and the Vindhyan ranges?
(iv) Name the island group of India having coral origin.
3. Distinguish between
(i) Bhangar and Khadar
(ii) Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats
4. Which are the major physiographic divisions of India? Contrast the relief of the
Himalayan region with that of the Peninsular plateau.
5. Give an account of the Northern Plains of India.
6. Write short notes on the following.
(i) The Indian Desert
(ii) The Central Highlands
(iii) The Island groups of India
MAP SKILLS
On an outline map of India show the following.
(i) Mountain and hill ranges – the Karakoram, the Zaskar, the Patkai Bum,
the Jaintia, the Vindhya range, the Aravali, and the Cardamom hills.
(ii) Peaks – K2, Kanchenjunga, Nanga Parbat and the Anai Mudi.
(iii) Plateaus, Chotanagpur and Malwa
(iv) The Indian Desert, Western Ghats, Lakshadweep Islands
PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA 15
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 26 ---
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
Locate the peaks, passes, ranges, plateaus, hills, and duns hidden in the puzzle.
Try to find where these features are located. You may start your search
horizontally, vertically or diagonally.
16 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 27 ---
3
D
RAINAGE
T
he term drainage describes the river DRAINAGE SYSTEMS IN INDIA
system of an area. Look at the physical
The drainage systems of India are mainly
map. You will notice that small streams
controlled by the broad relief features of the
flowing from different directions come together
subcontinent. Accordingly, the Indian rivers
to form the main river, which ultimately drains
are divided into two major groups:
into a large water body such as a lake or a sea
• the Himalayan rivers; and
or an ocean. The area drained by a single river
• the Peninsular rivers.
system is called a drainage basin. A closer
Apart from originating from the two major
observation on a map will indicate that any
physiographic regions of India, the Himalayan
elevated area, such as a mountain or an upland,
and the Peninsular rivers are different from
separates two drainage basins. Such an upland
each other in many ways. Most of the
is known as a water divide (Figure 3.1).
Himalayan rivers are perennial. It means
that they have water throughout the year.
SSrtreeaa
mm
BB
These rivers receive water from rain as well
SSrtereaa mm A A W
ater
D ivid
a
m
th
s
o
e
u
f
I
n
r
n
t
o
d
a
m
u
in
s
s
m
.
a
T
n
e
h
d
l
e
t e
t
t
h
w
d
e
o
s
m
B
n
r
a
a
o
j
h
o
w
r
m
H
f
a
r
i
p
m
o
u
m
a
t
l
r
a
a
y
t
a
h
o
n
r
e
i
r
g
i
i
l
v
n
o
e
a
f
r
t
t
s
y
e
,
e from the north of the mountain ranges. They
have cut through the mountains making
gorges. The Himalayan rivers have long
courses from their source to the sea.
Figure 3.1 : Water Divide
The world’s largest drainage
basin is of the Amazon river
• Which river has the largest basin in India?
Figure 3.2 : A Gorge
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 28 ---
They perform intensive erosional activity in The Himalayan Rivers
their upper courses and carry huge loads of
The major Himalayan rivers are the Indus, the
silt and sand. In the middle and the lower
Ganga and the Brahmaputra. These rivers are
courses, these rivers form meanders, oxbow
long, and are joined by many large and
lakes, and many other depositional features
important tributaries. A river alongwith its
in their floodplains. They also have well-
tributaries may be called a river system.
developed deltas (Figure 3.3).
The Indus River System
Source of River The river Indus rises in Tibet, near Lake
Mansarowar. Flowing west, it enters India in the
Upper Course
Ladakh. It forms a picturesque gorge in this
part. Several tributaries, the Zaskar, the Nubra,
the Shyok and the Hunza, join it in the Kashmir
region. The Indus flows through Baltistan and
Middle Course
Gilgit and emerges from the mountains at Attock.
The Satluj, the Beas, the Ravi, the Chenab and
the Jhelum join together to enter the Indus near
Mithankot in Pakistan. Beyond this, the Indus
Meander
Ox-Bow Lake flows southwards eventually reaching the
Arabian Sea, east of Karachi. The Indus plain
Lower has a very gentle slope. With a total length of
Course
2900 km, the Indus is one of the longest rivers
of the world. A little over a third of the Indus
basin is located in India Ladakh, Jammu and
Delta
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab and the
rest is in Pakistan.
Figure 3.3 : Some Features Made by Rivers
A large number of the Peninsular rivers are
• According to the regulations
seasonal, as their flow is dependent on rainfall.
of the Indus Water Treaty (1960), India can
During the dry season, even the large rivers use only 20 per cent of the total water carried by
the Indus river system. This water is used for
have reduced flow of water in their channels.
irrigation in Punjab, Haryana and the southern
The Peninsular rivers have shorter and and the western parts of Rajasthan.
shallower courses as compared to their
Himalayan counterparts. However, some of
The Ganga River System
them originate in the central highlands and flow
The headwaters of the Ganga, called the
towards the west. Can you identify two such
‘Bhagirathi’ is fed by the Gangotri Glacier and
large rivers? Most of the rivers of peninsular
joined by the Alaknanda at Devaprayag in
India originate in the Western Ghats and flow
Uttarakhand. At Haridwar, the Ganga emerges
towards the Bay of Bengal. from the mountains on to the plains.
18 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 29 ---
Figure 3.4 : Major Rivers and Lakes
DRAINAGE 19
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 30 ---
the northernmost point of the Ganga delta. The
river bifurcates here; the Bhagirathi-Hooghly
(a distributary) flows southwards through the
deltaic plains to the Bay of Bengal. The
mainstream, flows southwards into
Bangladesh and is joined by the Brahmaputra.
Further downstream, it is known as the
Meghna. This mighty river, with waters from
the Ganga and the Brahmaputra, flows into
the Bay of Bengal. The delta formed by these
rivers is known as the Sundarban Delta.
Figure 3.5 : Confluence of Bhagirathi and Alaknanda at
Devaprayag
• The Sundarban Delta derived
The Ganga is joined by many tributaries its name from the Sundari tree, which grows well
from the Himalayas, a few of them being major in marshland.
• It is the world’s largest and fastest growing delta.
rivers, such as the Yamuna, the Ghaghara, the
It is also the home of Royal Bengal tiger.
Gandak and the Kosi. The river Yamuna rises
from the Yamunotri Glacier in the Himalayas. The length of the Ganga is over 2500 km.
It flows parallel to the Ganga and as a right Look at Figure 3.4; can you identify the type of
bank tributary meets the Ganga at Allahabad. drainage pattern formed by the Ganga river
The Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi rise system? Ambala is located on the water divide
in the Nepal Himalaya. They are the rivers, between the Indus and the Ganga river systems.
which flood parts of the northern plains every The plains from Ambala to the Sunderban
year, causing widespread damage to life and stretch over nearly 1800 km, but the fall in its
property, whereas, they enrich the soil for
slope is hardly 300 metres. In other words, there
agricultural use.
is a fall of just one metre for every 6 km.
The main tributaries, which come from the
Therefore, the river develops large meanders.
peninsular uplands, are the Chambal, the
Betwa and the Son. These rise from semi-arid The Brahmaputra River System
areas, have shorter courses and do not carry
The Brahmaputra rises in Tibet east of
much water in them. Find out where and how
Mansarowar lake very close to the sources of
they ultimately join the Ganga.
the Indus and the Satluj. It is slightly longer
than the Indus, and most of its course lies
outside India. It flows eastwards parallel to
• The Namami Gange Programme
is an Integrated Conservation Mission approved as the Himalayas. On reaching the Namcha
a ‘flagship programme’ by the Union Government
Barwa (7757 m), it takes a ‘U’ turn and enters
in June 2014 to accomplish the twin objectives of
effective abatement of pollution, conservation and India in Arunachal Pradesh through a gorge.
rejuvenation of the national river, Ganga. You may
Here, it is called the Dihang and it is joined by
explore about this project at http://nmcg.nic.in/
NamamiGanga.sspx# the Dibang, the Lohit, and many other
tributaries to form the Brahmaputra in Assam.
Enlarged with the waters from its right and
left bank tributaries, the Ganga flows • Brahmaputra is known as
eastwards till Farakka in West Bengal. This is the Tsang Po in Tibet and Jamuna in Bangladesh.
20 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 31 ---
In Tibet, the river carries a smaller volume of
water and less silt as it is a cold and a dry area. • The Narmada river
In India, it passes through a region of high conservation mission has been undertaken by the
government of Madhya Pradesh by a scheme named
rainfall. Here the river carries a large volume of
Namami Devi Narmade. You may visit their website.
water and considerable amount of silt. The
http://www.namamidevinarmade.mp.gov.in to
Brahmaputra has a braided channel in its entire
learn more about it.
length in Assam and forms many riverine islands.
Do you remember the name of the world’s largest All tributaries of the Narmada are very short
riverine island formed by the Brahmaputra? and most of these join the main stream at right
Every year during the rainy season, the angles. The Narmada basin covers parts of
river overflows its banks, causing widespread Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat.
devastation due to floods in Assam and The Tapi Basin
Bangladesh. Unlike other north Indian rivers,
The Tapi rises in the Satpura ranges, in the
the Brahmaputra is marked by huge deposits
Betul district of Madhya Pradesh. It also flows
of silt on its bed causing the riverbed to rise.
in a rift valley parallel to the Narmada but it is
The river also shifts its channel frequently.
much shorter in length. Its basin covers parts
of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Maharashtra.
The Peninsular Rivers
The coastal plains between Western Ghats
The main water divide in Peninsular India is and the Arabian Sea are very narrow. Hence,
formed by the Western Ghats, which runs from the coastal rivers are short. The main west
north to south close to the western coast. Most flowing rivers are Sabarmati, Mahi,
Bharathpuzha and Periyar. Find out the states
of the major rivers of the Peninsula, such as
in which these rivers drain the water.
the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and
the Kaveri flow eastwards and drain into the The Godavari Basin
Bay of Bengal. These rivers make deltas at
The Godavari is the largest Peninsular river. It
their mouths. There are numerous small
rises from the slopes of the Western Ghats in
streams flowing west of the Western Ghats.
the Nasik district of Maharashtra. Its length is
The Narmada and the Tapi are the only long
about 1500 km. It drains into the Bay of Bengal.
rivers, which flow west and make esturies. The Its drainage basin is also the largest among the
drainage basins of the peninsular rivers are peninsular rivers. The basin covers parts of
comparatively smaller in size. Maharashtra (about 50 per cent of the basin
area lies in Maharashtra), Madhya Pradesh,
The Narmada Basin
Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. The Godavari is
The Narmada rises in the Amarkantak hills joined by a number of tributaries, such as the
in Madhya Pradesh. It flows towards the west Purna, the Wardha, the Pranhita, the Manjra,
in a rift valley formed due to faulting. On its the Wainganga and the Penganga. The last three
way to the sea, the Narmada creates many tributaries are very large. Because of its length
picturesque locations. The ‘Marble rocks’, and the area it covers, it is also known as the
Dakshin Ganga.
near Jabalpur, where the Narmada flows
through a deep gorge, and the ‘Dhuadhar The Mahanadi Basin
falls, where the river plunges over steep rocks,
The Mahanadi rises in the highlands of
are some of the notable ones.
Chhattisgarh. It flows through Odisha to reach
DRAINAGE 21
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 32 ---
the Bay of Bengal. The length of the river is Imagine that if Srinagar, Nainital and other
about 860 km. Its drainage basin is shared by tourists places did not have a lake would they
Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, have been as attractive as they are today? Have
and Odisha. you ever tried to know the importance of lakes
in making a place attractive to tourists? Apart
The Krishna Basin
from attraction for tourists, lakes are also useful
Rising from a spring near Mahabaleshwar, the to human beings in many ways.
Krishna flows for about 1400 km and reaches
the Bay of Bengal. The Tungabhadra, the • Lakes of large extent are called seas,
Koyana, the Ghatprabha, the Musi and the like the Caspian, the Dead and the Aral seas.
Bhima are some of its tributaries. Its drainage
India has many lakes. These differ from
basin is shared by Maharasthra, Karnataka
each other in size and other characteristics.
and Andhra Pradesh.
Most lakes are permanent; some contain water
The Kaveri Basin only during the rainy season, like the lakes in
the basins of inland drainage of semi-arid
The Kaveri rises in the Brahmagri range of the regions. There are some lakes which are the
Western Ghats and it reaches the Bay of Bengal result of the action of glaciers and ice sheets,
in south of Cuddalore in Tamil Nadu. The total while others have been formed by wind, river
length of the river is about 760 km. Its main action and human activities.
tributaries are Amravati, Bhavani, Hemavati A meandering river across a floodplain
and Kabini. Its basin drains parts of Karnataka, forms cut-offs that later develops into ox-bow
Kerala and Tamil Nadu. lakes. Spits and bars form lagoons in the
coastal areas, e.g. the Chilika lake, the Pulicat
• The river Kaveri makes the lake and the Kolleru lake. Lakes in the region
second biggest waterfall in India, known as of inland drainage are sometimes seasonal; for
Shivasamudram Falls. The hydroelectric power
example, the Sambhar lake in Rajasthan, which
generated from the falls is supplied to Mysuru,
is a salt water lake. Its water is used for
Bengaluru and the Kolar Gold Field.
producing salt.
Most of the freshwater lakes are in the
• The name of the biggest waterfall
Himalayan region. They are of glacial origin.
in India.
In other words, they formed when glaciers
Besides these major rivers, there are some dug out a basin, which was later filled with
smaller rivers flowing towards the east. The snowmelt. The Wular lake in Jammu and
Damoder, the Brahmani, the Baitarni and the Kashmir, in contrast, is the result of tectonic
Subarnrekha are some notable examples. activity. It is the largest freshwater lake in
Locate them in your atlas. India. The Dal lake, Bhimtal, Nainital, Loktak
and Barapani are some other important
• 71 per cent of the world’s freshwater lakes.
surface is covered with water, but 97 per cent of
that is salt water.
• Of the 3 per cent that is available as freshwater,
three quarters of it is trapped as ice.
LAKES
You may be familiar with the valley of Kashmir
and the famous Dal Lake, the house boats and
shikaras, which attract thousands of tourists
every year. Similarly, you may have visited
some other tourist spot near a lake and enjoyed
boating, swimming and other water games. Figure 3.6 : Loktak Lake
22 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 33 ---
Apart from natural lakes, the damming of
the rivers for the generation of hydel power has
also led to the formation of lakes, such as Guru National River Conservation Plan
Gobind Sagar (Bhakra Nangal Project). (NRCP)
The river cleaning programme in the
Activity country was initiated with the launching
Make a list of natural and artificial of the Ganga Action Plan (GAP)
lakes with the help of the atlas. in 1985. The Ganga Action Plan was
expanded to cover other rivers under the
Lakes are of great value to human beings. National River Conservation Plan
A lake helps to regulate the flow of a river. (NRCP) in the year 1995. The objective
During heavy rains, it prevents flooding and of the NRCP is to improve the water
during the dry season, it helps to maintain quality of the rivers, which are major
an even flow of water. Lakes can also be used water sources in the country, through
for developing hydel power. They moderate the the implementation of pollultion
abatement work.
climate of the surroundings; maintain the
Source: http://nrcd.nic.in/nrcp.pd as on
aquatic ecosystem, enhance natural beauty,
25.07.17
help develop tourism and provide recreation.
ROLE OF RIVERS IN THE ECONOMY
Rivers have been of fundamental importance result, more and more water is being drained
throughout the human history. Water from out of the rivers reducing their volume. On the
rivers is a basic natural resource, essential other hand, a heavy load of untreated sewage
for various human activities. Therefore, and industrial effluents are emptied into the
riverbanks have attracted settlers from ancient rivers. This affects not only the quality of water
times. These settlements have now become big but also the self-cleansing capacity of the river.
cities. Make a list of cities in your state which For example, given the adequate streamflow,
are located on the bank of a river. the Ganga water is able to dilute and assimilate
Using rivers for irrigation, navigation, pollution loads within 20 km of large cities.
hydro-power generation is of special But the increasing urbanisation and
significance — particularly to a country like industrialisation do not allow it to happen and
India, where agriculture is the major source the pollution level of many rivers has been
of livelihood of the majority of its population. rising. Concern over rising pollution in our
rivers led to the launching of various action
plans to clean the rivers. Have you heard about
RIVER POLLUTION
such action plans? How does our health get
The growing domestic, municipal, industrial affected by polluted river water? Think about
and agricultural demand for water from rivers “life of human beings without fresh water”.
naturally affects the quality of water. As a Arrange a debate on this topic in the class.
E
XERCISE
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) In which of the following states is the Wular lake located?
(a) Rajasthan (c) Punjab
(b) Uttar Pradesh (d) Jammu and Kashmir
DRAINAGE 23
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 34 ---
(ii) The river Narmada has its source at
(a) Satpura (c) Amarkantak
(b) Brahmagiri (d) Slopes of the Western Ghats
(iii) Which one of the following lakes is a salt water lake?
(a) Sambhar (c) Wular
(b) Dal (d) Gobind Sagar
(iv) Which one of the following is the longest river of the Peninsular India?
(a) Narmada (c) Godavari
(b) Krishna (d) Mahanadi
(v) Which one amongst the following rivers flows through a rift valley?
(a) Mahanadi (c) Krishna
(b) Tungabhadra (d) Tapi
2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) What is meant by a water divide? Give an example.
(ii) Which is the largest river basin in India?
(iii) Where do the rivers Indus and Ganga have their origin?
(iv) Name the two headstreams of the Ganga. Where do they meet to form the Ganga?
(v) Why does the Brahmaputra in its Tibetan part have less silt, despite a
longer course?
(vi) Which two Peninsular rivers flow through trough?
(vii) State some economic benefits of rivers and lakes.
3. Below are given names of a few lakes of India. Group them under two categories
– natural and created by human beings.
(a) Wular (b) Dal
(c) Nainital (d) Bhimtal
(e) Gobind Sagar (f) Loktak
(g) Barapani (h) Chilika
(i) Sambhar (j) Rana Pratap Sagar
(k) Nizam Sagar (l) Pulicat
(m) Nagarjuna Sagar (n) Hirakund
4. Discuss the significant difference between the Himalayan and the Peninsular
rivers.
5. Compare the east flowing and the west flowing rivers of the Peninsular plateau.
6. Why are rivers important for the country’s economy?
Map Skills
(i) On an outline map of India mark and label the following rivers: Ganga,
Satluj, Damodar, Krishna, Narmada, Tapi, Mahanadi, and Brahmaputra.
(ii) On an outline map of India mark and label the following lakes: Chilika,
Sambhar, Wular, Pulicat, Kolleru.
24 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 35 ---
Project/Activity
Solve this crossword puzzle with the help of given clues.
Across
1. Nagarjuna Sagar is a river valley project. Name the river?
2. The longest river of India.
3. The river which originates from a place known as Beas Kund.
4. The river which rises in the Betul district of MP and flows westwards.
5. The river which was known as the “Sorrow” of West Bengal.
6. The river on which the reservoir for Indira Gandhi Canal has been built.
7. The river whose source lies near Rohtang Pass.
8. The longest river of Peninsular India?
Down
9. A tributary of Indus originating from Himachal Pradesh.
10. The river flowing through fault, drains into the Arabian Sea.
11. A river of south India, which receives rainwater both in summer and winter.
12. A river which flows through Ladakh, Gilgit and Pakistan.
13. An important river of the Indian desert.
14. The river which joins Chenab in Pakistan.
15. A river which rises at Yamunotri glacier.
DRAINAGE 25
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 36 ---
4
C
LIMATE
I
n the last two chapters you have read about The climate of India is described as the
the landforms and the drainage of ‘monsoon’ type. In Asia, this type of climate
our country. These are the two of the three is found mainly in the south and the southeast.
basic elements that one learns about the natural Despite an overall unity in the general pattern,
environment of any area. In this chapter you there are perceptible regional variations in
will learn about the third, that is, the climatic conditions within the country. Let us
atmospheric conditions that prevail over our take two important elements – temperature and
country. Why do we wear woollens in December precipitation, and examine how they vary from
or why it is hot and uncomfortable in the month place to place and season to season.
of May, and why it rains in June - July? The In summer, the mercury occasionally
answers to all these questions can be found out touches 50°C in some parts of the Rajasthan
by studying about the climate of India. desert, whereas it may be around 20°C in
Climate refers to the sum total of weather Pahalgam in Jammu and Kashmir. On a winter
conditions and variations over a large area for night, temperature at Drass in Jammu and
a long period of time (more than thirty years). Kashmir may be as low as minus 45°C.
Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere Thiruvananthapuram, on the other hand, may
over an area at any point of time. The elements have a temperature of 22°C.
of weather and climate are the same, i.e.
temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind, In certain places there is a
wide difference between day and night
humidity and precipitation. You may have
temperatures. In the Thar Desert the day
observed that the weather conditions fluctuate
temperature may rise to 50°C, and drop down
very often even within a day. But there is some to near 15°C the same night. On the other hand,
common pattern over a few weeks or months, there is hardly any difference in day and night
i.e. days are cool or hot, windy or calm, cloudy temperatures in the Andaman and Nicobar
islands or in Kerala.
or bright, and wet or dry. On the basis of the
generalised monthly atmospheric conditions,
Let us now look at precipitation. There are
the year is divided into seasons such as winter,
variations not only in the form and types of
summer or rainy seasons.
precipitation but also in its amount and the
The world is divided into a number of
seasonal distribution. While precipitation is
climatic regions. Do you know what type of
mostly in the form of snowfall in the upper parts
climate India has and why it is so? We will
of Himalayas, it rains over the rest of the
learn about it in this chapter.
country. The annual precipitation varies from
• The word monsoon is over 400 cm in Meghalaya to less than 10 cm
derived from the Arabic word ‘mausim’ which
in Ladakh and western Rajasthan. Most parts
literally means season.
• ‘Monsoon’ refers to the seasonal reversal in the of the country receive rainfall from June to
wind direction during a year. September. But some parts like the Tamil Nadu
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 37 ---
coast gets a large portion of its rain during
October and November. •Why most of the world’s deserts are
In general, coastal areas experience less located in the western margins of continents in the
subtropics?
contrasts in temperature conditions. Seasonal
contrasts are more in the interior of the
Finally, relief too plays a major role in
country. There is decrease in rainfall generally
determining the climate of a place. High mountains
from east to west in the Northern Plains. These
act as barriers for cold or hot winds; they may
variations have given rise to variety in lives of
also cause precipitation if they are high enough
people – in terms of the food they eat, the
and lie in the path of rain-bearing winds. The
clothes they wear and also the kind of houses
leeward side of mountains remains relatively dry.
they live in.
• Why the houses in Rajasthan have thick FACTORS AFFECTING INDIA’S CLIMATE
walls and flat roofs?
• Why is it that the houses in the Tarai region and
Latitude
in Goa and Mangalore have sloping roofs?
• Why houses in Assam are built on stilts? The Tropic of Cancer passes through the middle
of the country from the Rann of Kuchchh in the
CLIMATIC CONTROLS west to Mizoram in the east. Almost half of the
country, lying south of the Tropic of Cancer,
There are six major controls of the climate of
belongs to the tropical area. All the remaining
any place. They are: latitude, altitude,
area, north of the Tropic, lies in the sub-tropics.
pressure and wind system, distance from
Therefore, India’s climate has characteristics of
the sea (continentality), ocean currents and
tropical as well as subtropical climates.
relief features.
Due to the curvature of the earth, the
Altitude
amount of solar energy received varies
according to latitude. As a result, air India has mountains to the north, which have
temperature generally decreases from the an average height of about 6,000 metres. India
equator towards the poles. As one goes from also has a vast coastal area where the
the surface of the earth to higher altitudes, maximum elevation is about 30 metres. The
Himalayas prevent the cold winds from Central
the atmosphere becomes less dense and
Asia from entering the subcontinent. It is
temperature decreases. The hills are therefore
because of these mountains that this
cooler during summers. The pressure and
subcontinent experiences comparatively
wind system of any area depend on the
milder winters as compared to central Asia.
latitude and altitude of the place. Thus it
influences the temperature and rainfall
Pressure and Winds
pattern. The sea exerts a moderating influence
on climate: As the distance from the sea The climate and associated weather conditions
increases, its moderating influence decreases in India are governed by the following
and the people experience extreme weather atmospheric conditions:
conditions. This condition is known as
• PPPPPrrrrreeeeessssssssssuuuuurrrrreeeee aaaaannnnnddddd sssssuuuuurrrrrfffffaaaaaccccceeeee wwwwwiiiiinnnnndddddsssss;;;;;
continentality (i.e. very hot during summers
• UUUUUppppppppppeeeeerrrrr aaaaaiiiiirrrrr ccccciiiiirrrrrcccccuuuuulllllaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn;;;;; aaaaannnnnddddd
and very cold during winters). Ocean currents
• WWWWWeeeeesssssttttteeeeerrrrrnnnnn cccccyyyyyccccclllllooooonnnnniiiiiccccc dddddiiiiissssstttttuuuuurrrrrbbbbbaaaaannnnnccccceeeeesssss aaaaannnnnddddd
along with onshore winds affect the climate of
tttttrrrrrooooopppppiiiiicccccaaaaalllll cccccyyyyyccccclllllooooonnnnneeeeesssss.
the coastal areas, For example, any coastal
area with warm or cold currents flowing past India lies in the region of north easterly
it, will be warmed or cooled if the winds are winds. These winds originate from the
onshore. subtropical high-pressure belt of the northern
CLIMATE 27
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 38 ---
hemisphere. They blow southwards, get advancing monsoon and the retreating
deflected to the right due to the Coriolis force, monsoon with some regional variations.
and move towards the equatorial low-pressure
area. Generally, these winds carry little The Cold Weather Season (Winter)
moisture as they originate and blow over land.
The cold weather season begins from mid-
Therefore, they bring little or no rain. Hence,
November in northern India and stays till
India should have been an arid land, but it is
February. December and January are the
not so. Let us see why?
coldest months in the northern part of India.
The temperature decreases from south to the
Coriolis force: An apparent force caused by the north. The average temperature of Chennai, on
earth’s rotation. The Coriolis force is responsible for
the eastern coast, is between 24°– 25° Celsius,
deflecting winds towards the right in the northern
hemisphere and towards the left in the southern while in the northern plains, it ranges between
hemisphere. This is also known as ‘Ferrel’s Law’. 10°C and 15° Celsius. Days are warm and
nights are cold. Frost is common in the north
The pressure and wind conditions over and the higher slopes of the Himalayas
experience snowfall.
India are unique. During winter, there is a
During this season, the northeast trade
high-pressure area north of the Himalayas.
winds prevail over the country. They blow from
Cold dry winds blow from this region to the
land to sea and hence, for most part of the
low-pressure areas over the oceans to the
country, it is a dry season. Some amount of
south. In summer, a low-pressure area
rainfall occurs on the Tamil Nadu coast from
develops over interior Asia, as well as, over
these winds as, here they blow from sea to land.
northwestern India. This causes a complete
In the northern part of the country, a feeble
reversal of the direction of winds during
high-pressure region develops, with light winds
summer. Air moves from the high-pressure
moving outwards from this area. Influenced by
area over the southern Indian Ocean, in a
the relief, these winds blow through the Ganga
south-easterly direction, crosses the equator,
valley from the west and the northwest. The
and turns right towards the low-pressure areas
weather is normally marked by clear sky, low
over the Indian subcontinent. These are known temperatures and low humidity and feeble,
as the Southwest Monsoon winds. These winds variable winds.
blow over the warm oceans, gather moisture A characteristic feature of the cold weather
and bring widespread rainfall over the season over the northern plains is the inflow of
mainland of India. cyclonic disturbances from the west and the
northwest. These low-pressure systems,
originate over the Mediterranean Sea and
THE SEASONS
western Asia and move into India, along with
The monsoon type of climate is characterised the westerly flow. They cause the much-needed
by a distinct seasonal pattern. The weather winter rains over the plains and snowfall in the
conditions greatly change from one season to mountains. Although the total amount of
the other. These changes are particularly winter rainfall locally known as ‘mahawat’ is
noticeable in the interior parts of the country. small, they are of immense importance for the
The coastal areas do not experience much cultivation of ‘rabi’ crops.
variation in temperature though there is The peninsular region does not have a well-
variation in rainfall pattern. How many seasons defined cold season. There is hardly any
are experienced in your place? Four main noticeable seasonal change in temperature
seasons can be identified in India – the cold pattern during winters due to the moderating
weather season, the hot weather season, the influence of the sea.
28 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 39 ---
Figure 4.1 : Advancing Monsoon
CLIMATE 29
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 40 ---
The Hot Weather Season (Summer) Advancing Monsoon (The Rainy Season)
Due to the apparent northward movement of By early June, the low-pressure condition over
the sun, the global heat belt shifts northwards. the northern plains intensifies. It attracts, the
As such, from March to May, it is hot weather trade winds of the southern hemisphere. These
season in India. The influence of the shifting of south-east trade winds originate over the
warm subtropical areas of the southern oceans.
the heat belt can be seen clearly from
They cross the equator and blow in a south-
temperature recordings taken during March-
westerly direction entering the Indian peninsula
May at different latitudes. In March, the highest
as the south-west monsoon. As these winds
temperature is about 38° Celsius, recorded on
blow over warm oceans, they bring abundant
the Deccan plateau. In April, temperatures in
moisture to the subcontinent. These winds are
Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are around 42°
strong and blow at an average velocity of 30
Celsius. In May, temperature of 45° Celsius is
km per hour. With the exception of the extreme
common in the northwestern parts of the
north-west, the monsoon winds cover the
country. In peninsular India, temperatures country in about a month.
remain lower due to the moderating influence The inflow of the south-west monsoon into
of the oceans. India brings about a total change in the
The summer months experience rising weather. Early in the season, the windward
temperature and falling air pressure in the side of the Western Ghats receives very heavy
northern part of the country. Towards the end rainfall, more than 250 cm. The Deccan
of May, an elongated low-pressure area Plateau and parts of Madhya Pradesh also
develops in the region extending from the Thar receive some amount of rain in spite of lying
in the rain shadow area. The maximum rainfall
Desert in the northwest to Patna and
of this season is received in the north-eastern
Chotanagpur plateau in the east and
part of the country. Mawsynram in the
southeast. Circulation of air begins to set in
southern ranges of the Khasi Hills receives the
around this trough.
highest average rainfall in the world. Rainfall
A striking feature of the hot weather season
in the Ganga valley decreases from the east to
is the ‘loo’. These are strong, gusty, hot, dry
the west. Rajasthan and parts of Gujarat get
winds blowing during the day over the north
scanty rainfall.
and northwestern India. Sometimes they even
Another phenomenon associated with the
continue until late in the evening. Direct monsoon is its tendency to have ‘breaks’ in
exposure to these winds may even prove to be rainfall. Thus, it has wet and dry spells. In
fatal. Dust storms are very common during the other words, the monsoon rains take place
month of May in northern India. These storms only for a few days at a time. They are
bring temporary relief as they lower the interspersed with rainless intervals. These
temperature and may bring light rain and cool breaks in monsoon are related to the
movement of the monsoon trough. For
breeze. This is also the season for localised
various reasons, the trough and its axis keep
thunderstorms, associated with violent winds,
on moving northward or southward, which
torrential downpours, often accompanied by
determines the spatial distribution of rainfall.
hail. In West Bengal, these storms are known
When the axis of the monsoon trough lies over
as the ‘Kaal Baisakhi’.
the plains, rainfall is good in these parts. On
Towards the close of the summer season,
the other hand, whenever the axis shifts closer
pre-monsoon showers are common especially, to the Himalayas, there are longer dry spells
in Kerala and Karnataka. They help in the early in the plains, and widespread rain occur in
ripening of mangoes, and are often referred to the mountainous catchment areas of the
as ‘mango showers’. Himalayan rivers. These heavy rains bring in
30 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 41 ---
Figure 4.2 : Retreating Monsoon
CLIMATE 31
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 42 ---
their wake, devastating floods causing The low-pressure conditions, over north-
damage to life and property in the plains. The western India, get transferred to the Bay of
frequency and intensity of tropical Bengal by early November. This shift is
depressions too, determine the amount and associated with the occurrence of cyclonic
duration of monsoon rains. These depressions, which originate over the
depressions form at the head of the Bay of Andaman Sea. These cyclones generally cross
Bengal and cross over to the mainland. The the eastern coasts of India cause heavy and
depressions follow the axis of the “monsoon widespread rain. These tropical cyclones are
trough of low pressure”. The monsoon is often very destructive. The thickly populated
known for its uncertainties. The alternation deltas of the Godavari, the Krishna and the
of dry and wet spells vary in intensity, Kaveri are frequently struck by cyclones, which
frequency and duration. While it causes heavy cause great damage to life and property.
floods in one part, it may be responsible for Sometimes, these cyclones arrive at the coasts
droughts in the other. It is often irregular in of Odisha, West Bengal and Bangladesh. The
its arrival and its retreat. Hence, it sometimes bulk of the rainfall of the Coromandel Coast is
disturbs the farming schedule of millions of derived from depressions and cyclones.
farmers all over the country.
DISTRIBUTION OF RAINFALL
Retreating/Post Monsoons
Parts of western coast and northeastern India
(The Transition Season)
receive over about 400 cm of rainfall annually.
However, it is less than 60 cm in western
During October-November, with the apparent
Rajasthan and adjoining parts of Gujarat,
movement of the sun towards the south, the
Haryana and Punjab. Rainfall is equally low
monsoon trough or the low-pressure trough
in the interior of the Deccan plateau, and east
over the northern plains becomes weaker. This
of the Sahyadris. Why do these regions receive
is gradually replaced by a high-pressure
low rainfall? A third area of low precipitation
system. The south-west monsoon winds
is around Leh in Jammu and Kashmir. The rest
weaken and start withdrawing gradually. By
of the country receives moderate rainfall.
the beginning of October, the monsoon
Snowfall is restricted to the Himalayan region.
withdraws from the Northern Plains.
Owing to the nature of monsoons, the
The months of October-November form a
annual rainfall is highly variable from year to
period of transition from hot rainy season to
year. Variability is high in the regions of low
dry winter conditions. The retreat of the
rainfall, such as parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat
monsoon is marked by clear skies and rise in
and the leeward side of the Western Ghats. As
such, while areas of high rainfall are liable to
be affected by floods, areas of low rainfall are
Mawsynram, the wettest drought-prone (Figure 4.3).
place on the earth is also reputed for its
stalagmite and stalactite caves.
MONSOON AS A UNIFYING BOND
temperature. While day temperatures are You have already known the way the Himalayas
high, nights are cool and pleasant. The land protect the subcontinent from extremely cold
is still moist. Owing to the conditions of high winds from central Asia. This enables northern
temperature and humidity, the weather India to have uniformly higher temperatures
becomes rather oppressive during the day. compared to other areas on the same latitudes.
This is commonly known as ‘October heat’. In
Similarly, the Peninsular plateau, under the
the second half of October, the mercury begins
influence of the sea from three sides, has
to fall rapidly in northern India.
moderate temperatures. Despite such
32 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 43 ---
Figure 4.3 : Annual Rainfall
CLIMATE 33
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 44 ---
34
CONTEMPORARY
INDIA-I
Activity
(i) On the basis of the news items above, find out the names of places and the seasons described.
(ii) Compare the rainfall description of Chennai and Mumbai and explain the reasons for the difference.
(iii) Evaluate flood as a disaster with the help of a case study.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 45 ---
moderating influences, there are great entire agricultural calendar and the life of the
variations in the temperature conditions. people, including their festivities, revolve
Nevertheless, the unifying influence of the around this phenomenon. Year after year,
monsoon on the Indian subcontinent is quite people of India from north to south and from
perceptible. The seasonal alteration of the wind east to west, eagerly await the arrival of the
systems and the associated weather conditions monsoon. These monsoon winds bind the
provide a rhythmic cycle of seasons. Even the whole country by providing water to set the
uncertainties of rain and uneven distribution agricultural activities in motion. The river
are very much typical of the monsoons. The valleys which carry this water also unite as a
Indian landscape, its animal and plant life, its single river valley unit.
E
XERCISE
1. Choose the correct answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Which one of the following places receives the highest rainfall in the world?
(a) Silchar
(c) Cherrapunji
(b) Mawsynram
(d) Guwahati
(ii) The wind blowing in the northern plains in summers is known as:
(a) Kaal Baisakhi
(c) Trade Winds
(b) Loo
(d) None of the above
(iii) Monsoon arrives in India approximately in:
(a) Early May
(c) Early June
(b) Early July
(d) Early August
(iv) Which one of the following characterises the cold weather season in India?
(a) Warm days and warm nights
(b) Warm days and cold nights
(c) Cool days and cold nights
(d) Cold days and warm nights
2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) What are the controls affecting the climate of India?
(ii) Why does India have a monsoon type of climate?
(iii) Which part of India does experience the highest diurnal range of temperature
and why?
(iv) Which winds account for rainfall along the Malabar coast?
(v) Define monsoons. What do you understand by “break” in monsoon?
(vi) Why is the monsoon considered a unifying bond?
3. Why does the rainfall decrease from the east to the west in Northern India.
CLIMATE 35
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 46 ---
4. Give reasons as to why.
(i) Seasonal reversal of wind direction takes place over the Indian
subcontinent?
(ii) The bulk of rainfall in India is concentrated over a few months.
(iii) The Tamil Nadu coast receives winter rainfall.
(iv) The delta region of the eastern coast is frequently struck by cyclones.
(v) Parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat and the leeward side of the Western Ghats are
drought-prone.
5. Describe the regional variations in the climatic conditions of India with the help
of suitable examples.
6. Give an account of weather conditions and characteristics of the cold season.
7. Give the characteristics and effects of the monsoon rainfall in India.
MAP SKILLS
On an outline map of India, show the following.
(i) Areas receiving rainfall over 400 cm.
(ii) Areas receiving less than 20 cm of rainfall.
(iii) The direction of the south-west monsoon over India.
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
(i) Find out which songs, dances, festivals and special food preparations are
associated with certain seasons in your region. Do they have some
commonality with other regions of India?
(ii) Collect photographs of typical rural houses, and clothing of people from
different regions of India. Examine whether they reflect any relationship
with the climatic condition and relief of the area.
FOR DOING IT YOURSELF Figure 1 : Temperature and Rainfall of Delhi
1. In Table-I, the average mean monthly
temperatures and amounts of rainfall of 10
representative stations have been given. It
is for you to study on your own and convert
them into ‘temperature and rainfall’ graphs.
A glance at these visual representations will
help you to grasp instantly the smilarities
and differences between them. One such
graph (Figure 1) is already prepared for
you. See if you can arrive at some broad
generalisations about our diverse climatic
conditions. We hope you are in for a great
joy of learning. Do the following activities.
2. Re-arrange the 10 stations in two different
sequences:
36 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 47 ---
(i) According to their distance from the equator.
(ii)According to their altitude above mean sealevel.
3. (i) Name two rainiest stations.
(ii)Name two driest stations.
(iii) Two stations with most equable climate.
(iv)Two stations with most extreme climate.
(v)Two stations influenced by retreating monsoons.
(vi)The two hottest stations in the months of
(a) February (b) April (c) May (d) June
Table I
Stations Latitude Altitude Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May. Jun. Jul. Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.Dec.Annual
(Metres) Rainfall
Temperature (°C) 20.5 22.7 25.2 27.1 26.7 24.2 23.0 23.0 23.1 22.9 18.9 20.2
Bengaluru 12°58'N 909
Rainfall (cm) 0.7 0.9 1.1 4.5 10.7 7.1 11.1 13.7 16.4 15.3 6.1 1.3 88.9
Temperature (°C) 24.4 24.4 26.7 28.3 30.0 28.9 27.2 27.2 27.2 27.8 27.2 25.0
Mumbai 19° N 11
Rainfall (cm) 0.2 0.2 – – 1.8 50.6 61.0 36.9 26.9 4.8 1.0 – 183.4
Temperature (°C) 19.6 22.0 27.1 30.1 30.4 29.9 28.9 28.7 28.9 27.6 23.4 19.7
Kolkata 22°34' N 6
Rainfall (cm) 1.2 2.8 3.4 5.1 13.4 29.0 33.1 33.4 25.3 12.7 2.7 0.4 162.5
Temperature (°C) 14.4 16.7 23.3 30.0 33.3 33.3 30.0 29.4 28.9 25.6 19.4 15.6
Delhi 29° N 219
Rainfall (cm) 2.5 1.5 1.3 1.0 1.8 7.4 19.3 17.8 11.9 1.3 0.2 1.0 67.0
Temperature (°C) 16.8 19.2 26.6 29.8 33.3 33.9 31.3 29.0 20.1 27.0 20.1 14.9
Jodhpur 26°18' N 224
Rainfall (cm) 0.5 0.6 0.3 0.3 1.0 3.1 10.8 13.1 5.7 0.8 0.2 0.2 36.6
Temperature (°C) 24.5 25.7 27.7 30.4 33.0 32.5 31.0 30.2 29.8 28.0 25.9 24.7
Chennai 13°4' N 7
Rainfall (cm) 4.6 1.3 1.3 1.8 3.8 4.5 8.7 11.3 11.9 30.6 35.0 13.9 128.6
Temperature (°C) 21.5 23.9 28.3 32.7 35.5 32.0 27.7 27.3 27.9 26.7 23.1 20.7
Nagpur 21°9' N 312
Rainfall (cm) 1.1 2.3 1.7 1.6 2.1 22.2 37.6 28.6 18.5 5.5 2.0 1.0 124.2
Temperature (°C) 9.8 11.3 15.9 18.5 19.2 20.5 21.1 20.9 20.0 17.2 13.3 10.4
Shillong 24°34' N 1461
Rainfall (cm) 1.4 2.9 5.6 14.6 29.5 47.6 35.9 34.3 30.2 18.8 3.8 0.6 225.3
Temperature (°C) 26.7 27.3 28.3 28.7 28.6 26.6 26.2 2.6.2 26.5 26.7 26.6 26.5
Thiruvananthapuram 8°29' N 61
Rainfall (cm) 2.3 2.1 3.7 10.6 20.8 35.6 22.3 14.6 13.8 27.3 20.6 7.5 181.2
Temperature (°C) – 8.5 – 7.2 – 0.6 6.1 10.0 14.4 17.2 16.1 12.2 6.1 0.0 – 5.6
Leh34° N 34°N 3506
Rainfall (cm) 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.5 0.5 0.5 1.3 1.3 0.8 0.5 – 0.5 8.5
CLIMATE 37
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 48 ---
4. Now find out
(i)Why are Thiruvananthapuram and Shillong rainier in June than in July?
(ii)Why is July rainier in Mumbai than in Thiruvananthapuram?
(iii)Why are southwest monsoons less rainy in Chennai?
(iv)Why is Shillong rainier than Kolkata?
(v)Why is Kolkata rainier in July than in June unlike Shillong which is rainier in June than
in July?
(vi)Why does Delhi receive more rain than Jodhpur?
5. Now think why
—Thiruvananthapuram has equable climate?
—Chennai has more rains only after the fury of monsoon is over in most parts of the country?
—Jodhpur has a hot desert type of climate?
—Leh has moderate precipitation almost throughut the year?
—while in Delhi and Jodhpur most of the rain is confined to nearly three months, in
Thiruvananthapuram and Shillong it is almost nine months of the year?
In spite of these facts see carefully if there are strong evidences to conclude that the monsoons
still provide a very strong framework lending overall climatic unity to the whole country.
38 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 49 ---
5
N V W
ATURAL EGETATION AND ILDLIFE
H
ave you observed the type of trees, TYPES OF VEGETATION
bushes, grasses and birds in the fields
The following major types of vegetation may
and parks in and around your school?
be identified in our country (Figure 5.4).
Are they similar or there are variations? India
(i) Tropical Evergreen Forests
being a vast country you can imagine the
(ii) Tropical Deciduous Forests
types of bio-forms available throughout the
(iii) Tropical Thorn Forests and Scrubs
country.
(iv) Montane Forests
Our country India is one of the 12 mega
(v) Mangrove Forests
bio-diversity countries of the world. With
about 47,000 plant species India occupies
tenth place in the world and fourth in Asia in
plant diversity. There are about 15,000
flowering plants in India, which account for
6 per cent in the world’s total number of
flowering plants. The country has many non-
flowering plants, such as ferns, algae and
fungi. India also has approximately 90,000
species of animals, as well as, a rich variety of
fish in its fresh and marine waters.
Natural vegetation refers to a plant
community, which has grown naturally
without human aid and has been left
undisturbed by humans for a long time. This
is termed as a virgin vegetation. Thus,
cultivated crops and fruits, orchards form part
of vegetation but not natural vegetation.
The virgin vegetation, which
are purely Indian are known as endemic or
indigenous species but those which have come
from outside India are termed as exotic plants.
The term flora is used to denote plants of
a particular region or period. Similarly, the
species of animals are referred to as fauna. Figure 5.1 : Tropical Evergreen Forest
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE 39
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 50 ---
Tropical Evergreen Forests type shed their leaves for about six to eight
weeks in dry summer.
These forests are restricted to heavy rainfall
On the basis of the availability of water,
areas of the Western Ghats and the island
these forests are further divided into moist and
groups of Lakshadweep, Andaman and
dry deciduous. The former is found in areas
Nicobar, upper parts of Assam and Tamil Nadu
receiving rainfall between 200 and 100 cm.
coast. They are at their best in areas having
more than 200 cm of rainfall with a short dry These forests exist, therefore, mostly in the
season. The trees reach great heights up to 60 eastern part of the country — northeastern
metres or even above. Since the region is warm states, along the foothills of the Himalayas,
and wet throughout the year, it has a luxuriant Jharkhand, West Odisha and Chhattisgarh,
vegetation of all kinds — trees, shrubs and and on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats.
creepers giving it a multilayered structure. There Teak is the most dominant species of this forest.
is no definite time for trees to shed their leaves. Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair,
As such, these forests appear green all the kusum, arjun and mulberry are other
year round. commercially important species.
Some of the commercially important trees The dry deciduous forests are found in areas
of this forest are ebony, mahogany, rosewood, having rainfall between 100 cm and 70 cm.
rubber and cinchona. These forests are found in the rainier parts of
The common animals found in these forests the Peninsular plateau and the plains of Bihar
are elephant, monkey, lemur and deer. One- and Uttar Pradesh. There are open stretches,
horned rhinoceroses are found in the jungles in which teak, sal, peepal and neem grow. A
of Assam and West Bengal. Besides these large part of this region has been cleared for
animals, plenty of birds, bats, sloth, scorpions cultivation and some parts are used for grazing.
and snails are also found in these jungles. In these forests, the common animals found
are lion, tiger, pig, deer and elephant. A huge
Tropical Deciduous Forests
variety of birds, lizards, snakes and tortoises
These are the most widespread forests of India. are also found here.
They are also called the monsoon forests and
The Thorn Forests and Scrubs
spread over the region receiving rainfall
between 200 cm and 70 cm. Trees of this forest In regions with less than 70 cm of rainfall, the
natural vegetation consists of thorny trees and
Figure 5.2 : Tropical Deciduous Forest Figure 5.3 : Thorn Forests and Scrubs
40 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 51 ---
Figure 5.4 : Natural Vegetation
Study the given map for the forest cover and try to find the reasons as to why certain states have more forest area
as compared to others?
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE 41
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 52 ---
bushes. This type of vegetation is found in the coniferous trees, like pine, deodar, silver fir,
north-western part of the country, including spruce and cedar, are found. These forests
semi-arid areas of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya cover mostly the southern slopes of the
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and Himalayas, places having high altitude in
Haryana. Acacias, palms, euphorbias and cacti southern and north-east India. At higher
are the main plant species. Trees are scattered elevations, temperate grasslands are common.
and have long roots penetrating deep into the At high altitudes, generally, more than 3,600
soil in order to get moisture. The stems are metres above the sea level, temperate forests
succulent to conserve water. Leaves are mostly and grasslands give way to the Alpine
thick and small to minimise evaporation. These vegetation. Silver fir, junipers, pines and
birches are the common trees of these forests.
forests give way to thorn forests and scrubs in
However, they get progressively stunted as
arid areas.
they approach the snow-line. Ultimately,
In these forests, the common animals are
through shrubs and scrubs, they merge into
rats, mice, rabbits, fox, wolf, tiger, lion, wild ass,
the Alpine grasslands. These are used
horses and camels.
extensively for grazing by nomadic tribes, like
Montane Forests the Gujjars and the Bakarwals. At higher
altitudes, mosses and lichens form part of
In mountainous areas, the decrease in
tundra vegetation.
temperature with increasing altitude leads to
The common animals found in these forests
the corresponding change in natural
are Kashmir stag, spotted dear, wild sheep, jack
vegetation. As such, there is a succession of rabbit, Tibetan antelope, yak, snow leopard,
natural vegetation belts in the same order as squirrels, Shaggy horn wild ibex, bear and rare
we see from the tropical to the tundra region. red panda, sheep and goats with thick hair.
The wet temperate type of forests are found
between a height of 1000 and 2000 metres. Mangrove Forests
Evergreen broad-leaf trees, such as oaks and The mangrove tidal forests are found in the
chestnuts predominate. Between 1500 and areas of coasts influenced by tides. Mud and
3000 metres, temperate forests containing silt get accumutated on such coasts. Dense
Figure 5.5 : Montane Forests Figure 5.6 : Mangrove Forests
42 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 53 ---
mangroves are the common varieties with roots Royal Bengal Tiger is the famous animal
of the plants submerged under water. The in these forests. Turtles, crocodiles, gharials
deltas of the Ganga, the Mahanadi, the Krishna, and snakes are also found in these forests.
the Godavari and the Kaveri are covered by
LLLLLeeeeettttt uuuuusssss dddddiiiiissssscccccuuuuussssssssss ::::: What will happen if plants and
such vegetation. In the Ganga-Brahmaputra
animals disappear from the earth’s surface? Can
delta, sundari trees are found, which provide the human beings survive under such a situation?
durable hard timber. Palm, coconut, keora, Why is biodiversity necessary and why should it be
conserved?
agar, etc., also grow in some parts of the delta.
MEDICINAL PLANTS
India is known for its herbs and spices from ancient times. Some 2,000 plants have been described in Ayurveda
and at least 500 are in regular use. The World Conservation Union’s Red List has named 352 medicinal plants
of which 52 are critically threatened and 49 endangered. The commonly used plants in India are:
Sarpagandha : Used to treat blood pressure; it is found only in India.
Jamun : The juice from ripe fruit is used to prepare vinegar, which is carminative and diuretic, and
has digestive properties. The powder of the seed is used for controlling diabetes.
Arjun : The fresh juice of leaves is a cure for earache. It is also used to regulate blood pressure.
Babool : Leaves are used as a cure for eye sores. Its gum is used as a tonic.
Neem : Has high antibiotic and antibacterial properties.
Tulsi : Is used to cure cough and cold.
Kachnar : Is used to cure asthma and ulcers. The buds and roots are good for digestive problems.
Identify more medicinal plants in your area. Which plants are used as medicines by local
people to cure some diseases?
Source : Medicinal Plants by Dr. S.K. Jain, 5th edition 1994, National Book Trust of India
The elephants are the most
majestic animals among the
mammals. They are found in the hot
wet forests of Assam, Karnataka and
Kerala. One-horned rhinoceroses are
the other animals, which live in
swampy and marshy lands of Assam
and West Bengal. Arid areas of the
Rann of Kachchh and the Thar
AAAAAccccctttttiiiiivvvvviiiiitttttyyyyy Desert are the habitat for wild ass
Can you identify the type of forest shown in this picture? and camels respectively. Indian
Identify some trees in it. What type of similarity/
bison, nilgai (blue bull), chousingha
dissimilarity you notice in this type of vegetation from
(four-horned antelope), gazel and
the one found in your region?
different species of deer are some
other animals found in India. It also has several
WILDLIFE
species of monkeys.
Like its flora, India is also rich in its fauna. It
has approximately 90,000 animal species. Wildlife Protection Act was
The country has about 2,000 species of birds. implemented in 1972 in India.
They constitute 13% of the world’s total. There
India is the only country in the world that
are 2,546 species of fish, which account for
has both tigers and lions. The natural habitat
nearly 12% of the world’s stock. It also shares
of the Indian lion is the Gir forest in Gujarat.
between 5 and 8 per cent of the world’s
Tigers are found in the forests of Madhya
amphibians, reptiles and mammals.
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE 43
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 54 ---
Pradesh, the Sundarbans of West Bengal and In the rivers, lakes and coastal areas,
the Himalayan region. Leopards, too, are turtles, crocodiles and gharials are found. The
members of the cat family. They are important latter is the only representative of a variety of
among animals of prey. crocodile, found in the world today.
Bird life in India is colourful. Peacocks,
pheasants, ducks, parakeets, cranes and
Do you know
pigeons are some of the birds inhabiting the
The Gir Forest is the
forests and wetlands of the country.
last remaining habitat
of the Asiatic lion. We have selected our crops from a
bio-diverse environment, i.e., from the reserve
of edible plants. We also experimented and
The Himalayas harbour a hardy range of
animals, which survive in extreme cold. selected many medicinal plants. The animals
Ladakh’s freezing high altitudes are a home to were selected from large stock provided by
yak, the shaggy horned wild ox weighing nature as milch animal. They also provided us
around one tonne, the Tibetan antelope, the draught power, transportation, meat and eggs.
bharal (blue sheep), wild sheep, and the kiang The fish provide nutritive food. Many insects
(Tibetan wild ass). Furhtermore, the ibex, bear, help in pollination of crops and fruit trees and
snow-leopard and rare red panda are found exerting biological control on such insects is
in certain pockets. harmful. Every species has a role to play in the
AAAAAccccctttttiiiiivvvvviiiiitttttyyyyy
(i) Find out from the above newspaper cuttings, the main concern highlighted in the given news items.
(ii) Collect more information about various endangered species from newspapers and magazines.
(iii) Find out various steps taken by the Indian government to protect them.
(iv) Describe how you can contribute to the protection of endangered animals and birds.
44 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 55 ---
Dampara
Figure 5.7 : Wildlife Reserves
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE 45
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 56 ---
ecosystem. Hence, conservation is essential. As
Eighteen Bio-reserves
has been mentioned earlier due to excessive
exploitation of plant and animal resources by • Sundarbans • Simlipal
human beings, the ecosystem has been • Gulf of Mannar • Dihang-Dibang
disturbed. About 1,300 plant species are
• Nilgiri • Dibru Saikhowa
endangered and 20 species are extinct. Quite
• Nanda Devi • Agasthyamalai
a few animal species are also endangered and
• Nokrek • Kangchendzonga
some have become extinct.
The main causes for this major threat to • Great Nicobar • Pachmarhi
nature are hunting by greedy hunters for • Manas • Achanakmar-Amarkantak
commercial purposes. Pollution due to • Kachchh • Cold Desert
chemical and industrial waste, acid deposits,
• Seshachalam • Panna
introduction of alien species and reckless
cutting of the forests to bring land under
cultivation and habitation, are also responsible (ii) Financial and technical assistance is
for the imbalance. provided to many botanical gardens by the
To protect the flora and fauna of the government since 1992.
country, the government has taken many (iii) Project Tiger, Project Rhino, Project
steps. Great Indian Bustard and many other
eco-developmental projects have been
(i) Eighteen biosphere reserves have been
introduced.
set up in the country to protect flora and
(iv) 103 National Parks, 563 Wildlife
fauna. Twelve out of these, the Sundarbans
sanctuaries and Zoological gardens are set
Nanda Devi, the Gulf of Mannar, the Nilgiri,
up to take care of natural heritage.
Nokrek, Great Nicobar, Simlipal,
Pachmarhi, Achanakmar-Amarkantak, All of us must realise the importance of the
Agasthyamalai, Kangchendzonga and natural ecosystem for our own survival. It is
Panna have been included in the world possible if indiscriminate destruction of natural
network of biosphere reserves. environment is put to an immediate end.
Migratory Birds
Some of the wetlands of India are popular
with migratory birds. During winter,
birds, such as Siberian Crane, come
in large numbers. One such place
favourable with birds is the Rann of
Kachchh. At a place where the desert
merges with the sea, flamingo with their
brilliant pink plumage come in thousands
to build nest mounds from the salty mud
and raise their young ones. It is one
among many extraordinary sights in the
country. Is it not a rich natural heritage
of ours?
46 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 57 ---
E
XERCISE
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below:
(i) To which one of the following types of vegetation does rubber belong to?
(a) Tundra (c) Himalayan
(b) Tidal (d) Tropical Evergreen
(ii) Cinchona trees are found in the areas of rainfall more than
(a) 100 cm (c) 70 cm
(b) 50 cm (d) less than 50 cm
(iii) In which of the following state is the Simlipal bio-reserve located?
(a) Punjab (b) Delhi
(c) Odisha (d) West Bengal
(iv) Which one of the following bio-reserves of India is not included in the world
network of bioreserve?
(a) Manas (c) Gulf of Mannar
(b) Nilgiri (d) Panna
2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) What is a bio-reserve? Give two examples.
(ii) Name two animals having habitat in tropical and montane type of vegetation.
3. Distinguish between
(i) Flora and Fauna
(ii) Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous forests
4. Name different types of Vegetation found in India and describe the vegetation of
high altitudes.
5. Quite a few species of plants and animals are endangered in India. Why?
6. Why has India a rich heritage of flora and fauna?
Map Skills
On an outline map of India, label the following.
(i) Areas of Evergreen Forests
(ii) Areas of Dry Deciduous Forests
(iii) Two national parks each in Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western parts
of the Country
Project/Activity
(i) Find some trees in your neighbourhood having medicinal values.
(ii) Find ten occupations getting raw material from forests and wildlife.
(iii) Write a poem or paragraph showing the importance of wildlife.
(iv) Write the script of a street play giving the importance of tree plantation and
try to enact it in your locality.
(v) Plant a tree either on your birthday or one of your family member’s birthday.
Note the growth of the tree and notice in which season it grows faster.
NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE 47
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 58 ---
6
P
OPULATION
C
an you imagine a world without human POPULATION SIZE AND DISTRIBUTION
beings? Who would have utilised
India’s Population Size and Distribution
the resources and created social and
by Numbers
cultural environment? The people are
important to develop the economy and the India’s population as on March 2011 stood at
society. The people make and use resources 1,210.6 million, which account for 17.5 per
and are themselves resources with varying cent of the world’s population. These 1.21
quality. Coal is but a piece of rock, until people billion people are unevenly distributed over our
were able to invent technology to obtain it and country’s vast area of 3.28 million square km,
make it ‘resource’. Natural events, like a flood
which accounts for 2.4 per cent of the world’s
or a Tsunami, becomes a ‘disaster’ only when
area (Figure 6.1).
they affect a crowded village or a town.
The 2011 Census data reveal that Uttar
Hence, population is the pivotal element in
Pradesh with a population size of 199 million
social studies. It is the point of reference from
is the most populous state of India. Uttar
which all other elements are observed and from
Pradesh accounts for about 16 per cent of the
which they derive significance and meaning.
country’s population. On the other hand, the
‘Resources’, ‘calamities’ and ‘disasters’ are all
Himalayan state of Sikkim has a population of
meaningful only in relation to human beings.
just about 0.6 million and Lakshadweep has
Their numbers, distribution, growth and
only 64,429 people.
characteristics or qualities provide the basic
Almost half of India’s population lives in
background for understanding and
appreciating all aspects of the environment. just five states. These are Uttar Pradesh,
Human beings are producers and Maharashtra, Bihar, West Bengal and Andhra
consumers of earth’s resources. Therefore, it Pradesh. Rajasthan, the biggest state in terms
is important to know how many people are of area, has only 5.5 per cent of the total
there in a country, where do they live, how and population of India (Figure 6.2)
why their numbers are increasing and what
are their characteristics. The census of India • What could be the reason
provides us with information regarding the of uneven distribution of population in India?
population of our country.
Census
A census is an official enumeration of population done periodically. In India, the first census was held in the year
1872. The first complete census, however, was taken in the year 1881. Since then, censuses have been held
regularly every tenth year.
The Indian Census is the most comprehensive source of demographic, social and economic data. Have you
ever seen a census report? Check in your library if it has one.
48 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 59 ---
India’s Population Distribution by Density
POPULATION
Population density provides a better picture
Restoftheworld,82.5%
of the uneven distribution. Population density
is calculated as the number of persons per unit
area. India is one of the most densely populated
countries of the world.
India,17.5%
Only Bangladesh and Japan have
Do You Know
higher average population densities
than India. Find out the population
AREA
densities of Bangladesh and Japan.
Restoftheworld,97.6%
The population density of India in the year
2011 was 382 persons per sq km. Densities
vary from 1,102 persons per sq km in Bihar to
only 17 persons per sq km in Arunachal
Pradesh. A study of the Figure 6.3 shows the
India,2.4%
pattern of uneven distribution of population
Fig 6.1 : India’s Share of World’s Area and Population densities at the State level.
Fig. 6.2: Distribution of Population
Source: Census of India, 2011
POPULATION 49
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 60 ---
Fig. 6.3: Density of Population (Census of India 2011)
Note: Telangana became the 29th State of India in June 2014.
* State of Jammu and Kashmir was bifurcated into two union territories namely Jammu and
Kashmir and Ladakh on 05.08.19.
50 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 61 ---
2 per cent per annum means that in a given
AAAAAccccctttttiiiiivvvvviiiiitttttyyyyy
year, there was an increase of two persons for
Study the Figure 6.3 and compare it with
every 100 persons in the base population. This
Figure 2.4 and Figure 4.7. Do you find any
corelation between these maps? is referred to as the annual growth rate.
India’s population has been steadily
increasing from 361 million in 1951 to 1210
Note the States with population densities
million in 2011.
below 250 persons per square km. Rugged
terrain and unfavourable climatic conditions Table 6.1 : The Magnitude and Rate of India’s
Population Growth
are primarily responsible for sparse population
in these areas. Which states have density below Year Total Absolute Annual
Population Increase in Growth
250 persons per square km?
(in million) the Decade Rate
Assam and most of the Peninsular states
(in million) ( % )
have moderate population densities. Hilly,
1951 361.0 42.43 1.25
dissected and rocky nature of the terrain, 1961 439.2 78.15 1.96
moderate to low rainfall, shallow and less fertile 1971 548.2 108.92 2.20
1981 683.3 135.17 2.22
soils have influenced population densities in
1991 846.4 163.09 2.16
these areas. 2001 1028.7 182.32 1.97
The Northern plains and Kerala in the south 2011 1210.6 181.46 1.64
have high to very high population densities
because of the flat plains with fertile soils and Table 6.1 and Figures 6.4 (a) and 6.4 (b)
abundant rainfall. Identify the three states of reveal that from 1951 to 1981, the annual
rate of population growth was steadily
the Northern Plains with high population
increasing; which explains the rapid increase
densities.
in population from 361 million in 1951 to
683 million in 1981.
POPULATION GROWTH AND PROCESSES
OF POPULATION CHANGE • Table 6.1 reveals that despite the
Population is a dynamic phenomenon. The decline in growth rates, the number of people being
numbers, distribution and composition of the added every decade is steadily increasing. Why?
population are constantly changing. This is the
influence of the interaction of the three processes, Since 1981, however, the rate of growth
namely — births, deaths and migrations. started declining gradually. During this period,
birth rates declined rapidly. Still 182 million
Population Growth people were added to the total population in
the 1990s alone (an annual addition larger
Growth of population refers to the change in
than ever before).
the number of inhabitants of a country/territory
It is essential to realise that India has a very
during a specific period of time, say during the
large population. When a low annual rate is
last 10 years. Such a change can be expressed
applied to a very large population, it yields a
in two ways: in terms of absolute numbers and
in terms of percentage change per year. large absolute increase. When more than a
The absolute numbers added each year or billion people increase even at a lower rate, the
decade is the magnitude of increase. It is total number being added becomes very large.
obtained by simply subtracting the earlier India’s annual increase in population is large
population (e.g. that of 2001) from the later enough to neutralise efforts to conserve the
population (e.g. that of 2011). It is referred to resource endowment and environment.
as the absolute increase. The declining trend of the growth rate is
The rate or the pace of population increase
indeed a positive indicator of the efforts of birth
is the other important aspect. It is studied in
control. Despite that, the total additions to the
per cent per annum, e.g. a rate of increase of
population base continue to grow, and India
POPULATION 51
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 62 ---
Fig. 6.4(a): India’s Population Growth Rates during 1951-2011
Fig. 6.4(b): India’s Population 1901-2011
may overtake China in 2045 to become the The natural increase of population is the
most populous country in the world. difference between birth rates and death rates.
Birth rate is the number of live births per
Processes of Population Change/Growth thousand persons in a year. It is a major
There are three main processes of change of component of growth because in India, birth
population : birth rates, death rates and rates have always been higher than death
migration. rates.
52 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 63 ---
Death rate is the number of deaths per population in 1951 to 31.80 per cent in 2011.
thousand persons in a year. The main cause There has been a significant increase in the
of the rate of growth of the Indian population number of ‘million plus cities’ from 35 to 53 in
just one decade, i.e., 2001 to 2011.
has been the rapid decline in death rates.
Till 1980, high birth rates and declining
Adolescent Population
death rates led to a large difference between
birth rates and death rates resulting in higher The most significant feature of the Indian
rates of population growth. Since 1981, birth population is the size of its adolescent
rates have also started declining gradually, population. It constitutes one-fifth of the total
resulting in a gradual decline in the rate of population of India. Adolescents are,
generally, grouped in the age group of 10 to
population growth. What are the reasons for
19 years. They are the most important
this trend?
resource for the future. Nutrition
The third component of population growth
requirements of adolescents are higher than
is migration. Migration is the movement of
those of a normal child or adult. Poor nutrition
people across regions and territories. Migration
can lead to deficiency and stunted growth.
can be internal (within the country) or
But in India, the diet available to adolescents
international (between the countries).
is inadequate in all nutrients. A large number
Internal migration does not change the size
of adolescent girls suffer from anaemia. Their
of the population, but influences the
problems have so far not received adequate
distribution of population within the nation.
attention in the process of development. The
Migration plays a very significant role in
adolescent girls have to be sensitised to the
changing the composition and distribution of
problems they confront. Awareness among
population. them can be improved through the spread of
literacy and education.
AAAAAccccctttttiiiiivvvvviiiiitttttyyyyy
On a map, trace the migration of each National Population Policy
of your grandparents and parents
since their birth. Try and analyse the Recognising that the planning of families
reasons for each move.
would improve individual health and
welfare, the Government of India initiated a
In India, most migrations have been from comprehensive Family Planning Programme
rural to urban areas because of the “push” in 1952. The Family Welfare Programme has
factor in rural areas. These are adverse sought to promote responsible and planned
conditions of poverty and unemployment in the parenthood on a voluntary basis. The National
rural areas and the “pull” of the city in terms Population Policy (NPP) 2000 is a
of increased employment opportunities and culmination of years of planned efforts.
better living conditions. The NPP 2000 provides a policy
Migration is an important determinant of framework for imparting free and compulsory
population change. It changes not only the school education up to 14 years of age,
population size but also the population reducing infant mortality rate to below 30 per
composition of urban and rural populations 1000 live births, achieving universal
in terms of age and sex composition. In India, immunisation of children against all vaccine
the rural-urban migration has resulted in a preventable diseases, promoting delayed
steady increase in the percentage of population marriage for girls, and making family welfare
in cities and towns. The urban population has a people-centred programme.
increased from 17.29 per cent of the total
POPULATION 53
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 64 ---
E
XERCISE
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Migrations change the number, distribution and composition of the
population in
(a) the area of departure (c) both the area of departure and arrival
(b) the area of arrival (d) none of the above
(ii) A large proportion of children in a population is a result of
(a) high birth rates (c) high death rates
(b) high life expectancies (d) more married couples
(iii) The magnitude of population growth refers to
(a) the total population of an area
(b) the number of persons added each year
(c) the rate at which the population increases
(d) the number of females per thousand males
(iv) According to the Census, a “literate” person is one who
(a) can read and write his/her name
(b) can read and write any language
(c) is 7 years old and can read and write any language with understanding
(d) knows the 3 ‘R’s (reading, writing, arithmetic)
2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) Why is the rate of population growth in India declining since 1981?
(ii) Discuss the major components of population growth.
(iii) Define age structure, death rate and birth rate.
(iv) How is migration a determinant factor of population change?
3. Distinguish between population growth and population change.
4. What is the relation between occupational structure and development?
5. What are the advantages of having a healthy population?
6. What are the significant features of the National Population Policy 2000?
PROJECT/ACTIVITY
Conduct a class census by preparing a questionnaire. The questionnaire
should contain minimum five questions. Questions should relate to students,
their family members, their class performance, their health, etc. Each student
is required to fill in the questionnaire. Compile the information in numerical
terms (in terms of percentage). Present the information through pie-chart,
bar-diagram or in any other way.
54 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 65 ---
GLOSSARY
Adolescence : Adolescence is a period in which a person is no longer a child and
not yet an adult. Such persons are grouped in the age group of
10 to 19 years.
Alluvial plain : A level tract of land made up of alluvium or fine rock material
brought down by a river.
Base population : The total population of an area at the beginning of a given time
period.
Biome : Plant communities occuring in distinct groups in areas having
similar climatic conditions.
Birth rate : The number of live births for every 1000 persons in a year.
Depression : In meteorology; it denotes an area of relatively low atmospheric
pressure, which is found mainly in temperate regions. In geology,
it refers to a hollow sunken area of the earth’s surface.
Death rate : The number of deaths per 1000 persons in year.
Density of population : The average number of persons per unit area, such as a square
kilometre.
Dependency ratio : The ratio of people of dependent age (below 15 and above 60 years)
to people of economically active ages (15-59 years).
Ecosystem : A system which comprises the physical environment and the
organisms living therein.
Environment : Surroundings or the conditions under which a person or thing
exists and develops his or its character. It covers both physical
and cultural elements.
Fault : A linear break in rocks of the earth’s crust along which there has
been displacement in a horizontal, vertical or oblique direction.
Fauna : The animal life of a given area.
Flora : The total vegetation or plant cover of a region.
Fold : A bend in the rock strata resulting from compression of an area of
the earth’s crust.
Geosyncline : A narrow, shallow, elongated basin with a sinking bottom in which
a considerable thickness of sediments was deposited by the rivers
coming from Angara and Gondwanaland.
Glacier : A mass of snow and ice that moves slowly under the influence of
gravity along a confined course away from its place of accumulation.
Growth rate of population : The growth rate of population indicates the rate at which the
population is growing. In estimating the growth rate the increase
in population is compared with the base population. It can be
measured annually or over a decade.
Indian mainland : It refers to the contiguous stretch of landmass from Jammu and
Kashmir to Kanniyakumari and from Gujarat to Arunachal Pradesh.
Indian Standard Time : The local time along the Standard Meridian of India (82°30'E).
Inland drainage : A drainage system in which the waters of the rivers do not reach
the oceans but fall into an inland sea or lake.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 66 ---
Igneous rocks : Rocks formed as a result of solidification of magma either below
the earth’s surface or above it.
Lagoon : A salt-water lake separated from the sea by the sandbars and spits.
Lake : A body of water that lies in a hollow in the earth’s surface and is
entirely surrounded by land.
Lithospheric plates : Large segments of the earth’s crust composed of continental and
oceanic lithospheric parts, floating above the asthenosphere.
Life expectancy : The average number of years one is expected to live.
Local time : The time of a place determined by the midday sun is called the
local time.
Metamorphic rocks : Deformation and alteration of pre-existing igneous and
sedimentary rocks as a result of changes in physical and chemical
conditions due to intense heat or pressure.
Migration : Movement of people from one place to another. Internal migration
means movement of people within a country and external migration
means movement of people between countries. When people come
to a country from another country, it is called immigration and
when they leave that country, it is called emigration.
Million plus cities : Cities with a population of more than one million or 10 lakh.
Monsoon : A complete reversal of winds over a large area leading to a change
of seasons.
Mountain : An upward projected features of the earth’s surface that rises to
high altitude and usually possesses steep slopes.
National park : A reserved area for preserving its natural vegetation, wildlife and
the natural environment.
Plain : An extensive area of flat or gently undulating land.
Plateau : An extensive elevated area of relatively flat land.
Plate tectonics : The scientific concept that explains the movements of the crustal
plates.
Relief : The differences in elevation or the physical outline of the land
surface or ocean floor.
Subsidence : In meteorology, it is the downward movement of the air. In geology,
it refers to the sinking of a portion of the earth’s surface.
Sedimentary rocks : Rocks composed of sediments and generally having a layered
structure.
Sex-ratio : Sex-ratio is defined as the number of females per thousand males.
Subcontinent : A big landmass, which stands out as a distinct geographical unit
from the rest of the continent.
Tectonic : Forces originating within the earth and responsible for bringing
widespread changes in the landform features.
Young mountains : The fold mountains formed during the most recent major phase
of folding in the earth’s crust.
56 CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 67 ---
Notes
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 68 ---
Notes
Rationalised 2023-24