--- PAGE 080 ---
grazing has almost disappeared from the major
‘Stasslands. The herders were wandering tribes e.g.
x the Kirghiz, the Kazakhs, and the Kalmuk. They
used to travel over long distances like the Bedouin
_ Of the Arabian Desert, in search of grass and water
for their animals-cattle, sheep, goats and horses.
“From these domesticated animals they obtained
meat, milk, wool, hides, bones and horn. You
would be surprised at the number of things they made
Out of these. The wool was woven into felt for
_tents and garments. The leather was used for making
boots, saddles and belts, which were very essential
im a country where the chief riding animal was the
horse. The bones and horns were not wasted but
‘Made into tools, utensils and weapons. Many of
their home-made products were exchanged at trading
0 ts or with the caravans for guns, canned food,
grains, tea, coffee, sugar, medicines and other essential

_ The harsh environment of the nomads, with long
roughts and unreliable showers made the Kirghiz
| toug and fearless people, ‘the Tartars’, and they
long resisted subjugation by the Russians. Now,

owever, under the Communist regime they are
ng forced to settle down. The steppes which they
to wander have been made into huge collective
and state farms for ranching or producing

2. Extensive mechanized wheat cultivation. The tem-
erate grasslands are ideal for extensive wheat
. The cool, moist spring stimulates early

Fig. 139 The Black Earth region of Ukraine, part of the Eurasian Steppes

growth and the light showers in the ripening period
help to swell the grains to ensure a good yield. The
warm, sunny summer is not only advantageous for
harvesting, but also enables the straw to be dried

for farm use. In addition, the levelness of the
Steppes and other temperate grasslands all over the

world makes ploughing and harvesting a compar
tively easy job. Mechanical ploughs loosen the
soil and get the fields ready for sowing in the shortest
possible time. In the Prairies, the Argentinian
Pampas, the Ukrainian Steppes and the Downs of
Australia combine-harvesters, reap, thresh, winnow
and sack the grains almost as soon as the stalks
gathered.

One distinct drawback of this form of extensive
mechanized farming is the consequent low yield,
For example, the average yield of wheat in the
Prairies is about 23 bushels per acre (1 bushel is
approximately equivalent to 60 Ib. in weight or 8
gallons in volume). In the Pampas and the Australian
Downs, the yields are even lower, not more than
20 bushels per acre! In comparison, the wheat yield
in countries that practise intensive farming are much
higher, at times almost thrice the yield. It is 50
bushels per acre in the United Kingdom, 57 bushels
in Denmark and almost 59 bushels in the Netherlands!
This is attributed to the greater attention given to a
smaller piece of land, which is not practicable in
the extensive wheat-lands where a farmer owns
anything from 600 to 40,000 acres as in the Prairies.
But if we consider the yield per man, this is very

a-

are

a > a

A ship is loaded with grain for export at Port Arthur,
Ontario Paul Popper

much higher in the extensive farms. In this respect,
the sparsely populated temperate grasslands of the
mid-latitudes produce the greatest quantity of wheat
per capita amongst the world’s wheat-growing
nations. They are, naturally the greatest wheat
exporters. Three-quarters of Canada’s 10 million
tons of annual wheat production is exported, mainly
to Europe which does not produce sufficient wheat to
feed her very dense population, despite her high
wheat yield. Her wheat needs are so great that
shipments of wheat and flour arrive at her ports
from almost every part of the temperate grasslands,

from the U.S.A., Argentina, Uruguay, Australia and
the USSR.

hree-quarters of the world’s wheat is winter
Wheat, i.e. wheat sown in winter or late autumn.
It is a hard wheat with a low moisture contend.
being ripened in the hot, sunny, continental summer.
It is best for bread-making and is extensively traded.
Polewards, where the winter temperatures are too
cold for the wheat seedlings to survive, spring wheat
is grown. It is the less important soft wheat, more
suitable for making cakes, biscuits and pastes rather
than bread. In North America, winter wheat is
dominant south of the Great Lakes in U.S.A., while
spring wheat is sown mainly in the Canadian Prairie
provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba.
Scientific plant breeding has now devised cold-
resistant varieties that can mature within 110 days.
This has resulted in the northward extension of the
wheat cultivation into the Peace River region in
Canada. In the warmer, wetter regions, maize is
increasingly grown.
3. Pastoral farming. When pioneer settlers first
moved into the temperate grasslands, there were
very few animals. The natural conditions suit animal
farming. Subsequently, cattle, sheep, pigs and horses
were introduced, and they proved very successful.
With the development of refrigerated ships in the late
nineteenth century, the temperate grasslands became
major pastoral regions, exporting large quantities
of beef, mutton, wool, hides. Milk, butter, cheese
and other dairy products are also important in some
parts of the North American grasslands. The
development was particularly spectacular in the
southern hemisphere, (Figs. 141, 142 and 143)

Fig. 140 Wheat and beef production in the North American grasslands

153



--- PAGE 081 ---
Fig. 141 Sheep, cattle, wheat and maize production
in southern South America

where the winters are milder and the rainfall] js

evenly distributed. The original tuft-grass lore
ploughed up and replaced by sown alfalfa iy
A. The

semi-wild cattle in the Pampas were either; cro
with or replaced by the imported Pedigree stop
from Europe. Soon the Pampas became ec
volved with the pastoral industry that it took the
lead in the world’s export of beef. Large estiner
(ranches) were established, linked to the frivorifinn.
(meat-packing factories) in the coastal ports aoe
dense network of roads and railways. The oa
was rapid and towns like Buenos Aires, Bahia B]
Fray Bentos and Monteviedeo became known
throughout the world. This is also true of other
temperate grasslands. Much beef is produced a
the Great Plains of U.S.A., and Australia became
the world’s leading wool exporter, accounting for a
third of its total production. In the Burasian
Steppes, too, increasing emphasis is being placed on
the ranching of animals for meat production.

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

1. Compare and contrast tropical
and temperate grasslands in respect of
(a) their seasonal responses to climatic changes
(b) their economic importance

SSed

in-

anca,

2. Each of the following temperate grasslands is
paired with an important aspect of its
economic life.

For any three of them, give a reasoned account

(a) Asiatic Steppes: nomadic herding

(b) Canadian Prairies: spring wheat cultivation
(c) Argentine Pampas: beef cattle ranching
(d) S. African Veld: maize growing

(e) Australian Downs: sheep grazing

=

Explain why

(a) The annual temperature range of Winnipeg,
Canada is much greater than that of Pretoria,
South Africa.

(b) When Chinooks are more frequent in the
Prairies, the winters are milder.

(c) Wheat yields in the Pampas are much
lower than those of Denmark.

4. The temperate grasslands are the granaries of
the world. To what extent this is true?
Account for the geographical factors that make
this possible.

a Write a geographical account of the international
trade in wheat.

——

Chapter 21 The Warm Temperate Eastern Margin

(China Type) Climate

Distribution
This type of found on the eastern
margins of continents in warm temperate latitudes,

climate is

just outside the tropics (Fig. 144). It has compara-
tively more rainfall than the Mediterranean climate
in the same latitudes, coming mainly in the summer.
It is, in fact, the climate of most parts of China—a
modified form of monsoonal climate. It is thus also
called the Zemperate Monsoon or China Type of
climate. In south-eastern U.S.A., bordering the
Gulf of Mexico, continental heating in summer
induces an inflow of air from the cooler Atlantic
Ocean. Though less pronounced, the overall climatic
features resemble those of the China type. It is
sometimes referred to as the Gulf type of climate.

In the southern hemisphere, this kind of climate
is experienced along the warm temperate eastern
coastlands of all the three continents: in New South
Wales with its eucalyptus forests; in Natal where
cane sugar thrives; and in the maize belt of the
Parana-Paraguay-Uruguay basin. As the regions
are influenced by the on-shore Trade Winds all the
year round, without any monsoon variations, the

Fig. 144 Regions with a Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate

climate cannot be described as temperate monsoon
It is sometimes referred to as the Natal type of
climate.

Climate
The Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate is
typified by a warm moist summer and a cool, Gry
winter. The mean monthly temperature varies be-
tween 40°F, and 78°F. and is strongly modified by
maritime influence. Occasionally, the penetration
of cold air from the continental interiors may bring
down the temperature to freezing point. Though
frosts are rare they occasionally occur in the colder
interiors. For most of the time, it is pleasantly
warm. The relative humidity is a little high in mid-
summer when the heat becomes oppressive and can
be very trying to the white settlers, e.g. in Natal.
Rainfall is more than moderate, anything from
25 inches to 60 inches. This is adequate for all
agricultural purposes and the Warm Temperate
Eastern Margin Climate supports a wide range of
crops. Areas which experience this climate are very

Berg Wind

Warm temperate eastern margin regions
Local winds



--- PAGE 082 ---
densely populated. Another important feature is the
fairly uniform distribution of rainfall throughout
the year. There is rain every month, except in the
interior of central China, where there is a distinct
dry season. Rain comes either from convectional
sources or as orographic rain in summer, or from
depressions in prolonged showers in winter. Local
storms, e.g. typhoons, and hurricanes, also occur.
There is a good deal of variation in detail within
the eastern margins and it is essential to examine
them by reference to specific areas, where the local
factors affect the climates. We shall sub-divide them
into three main types.
1. The China type: central and north China,
including southern Japan (temperate monsoonal).
2. The Gulf type: south-eastern United States,
(slight-monsoonal).
3. The Natal type: all the warm temperate eastern
margin (non-monsoonal areas) of the southern
hemisphere including Natal, eastern Australia and
southern Brazil—Paraguay—Uruguay and northern
Argentina.
1. The China type. This is the most typical climate
of the warm temperate eastern margin. The great
land mass of the Asiatic continent with its mountain-
_ ous interior induces great pressure changes between
_ Summer and winter, Intense heating in ‘the heart
_ of Asia’ sets up a region of low pressure in summer
and the tropical Pacific air stream is drawn in as the
tation occurs in most parts of China, decreasing
inland. As illustrated in Fig. 145(a), the wettest
onths of Nanking are in summer with more than
third of the annual rainfall falling in June and July
of 42 inches), though the monsoon
as enly, nor ‘pour’ as heavily
(cep pressure gradient is
» of Mongolia and

JFMAMJJASON
months

Nanking J FMAM JJ A SON D sangenotal

Temp. 36 39 47 58 69 76 81 81 73 63 51 40 45°F

Precip. 1.62.03.04.03.27.28.1463.7201.61.2 42"

Place: Nanking, China (32°N.,1 19°E.)
Altitude: 34 feet

Annual precipitation: 42 inches

Annual temperature range: 45°F (81°-36°F)

Fig. 145 (a) Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate
in the northern hemisphere (China type)

south and along the coast, the temperature differences
are much less, e.g. 28°F. in Canton, 27°F. in Swatow
and only 22°F. in Hong Kong.

Another climatic feature associated with the
China type of climate in southern China is the
occurrence of typhoons—intense tropical cyclones
that originate in the Pacific Ocean, and move west-
wards to the coastlands bordering the South China
Sea. They are most frequent in late summer, from
July to September and can be very disastrous. The
winds blow with tremendous strength, the sky is
Overcast and there are torrential downpours. AS
much as 24 inches in a day have been recorded and
flooding is widespread. In the Swatow typhoon
of August 1922, the huge waves set up by the violent
typhoon drowned as many as 50,000 inhabitants.

2. The Gulf type. The Gulf-Atlantic regions of the
United States experience a type of climate similar
to that of central China except that the monsoonal

characteristics are less well established. There is

no complete seasonal wind reversal, for the pressure
gradient between mainland America and the Atlantic
is marked. As can be seen from the
5 (b) for Miami, Florida, the difference

) and the on-shore Trade Winds

ture between mid-summer (July, 82°F)
ter (January, 68°F) is only 14°F. The —

O-—-NW BROOD ~ @ om inches

JFMAMJJASOND
months

Miami J F MAM J J AS ON DOD fange/total

Temp. 68 68 71 74 77 80 82 82 81 78 73 69 14°F

Precip, 2.51.92.33.47.1745364899.03.31.7 59~

Place: Miami, Florida, U.S.A. (26°N., 80°W.)
Altitude: 5 feet

Annual precipitation: 59 inches

Annual temperature range: 14°F, (82-68°F)

(b) Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate
in the northern hemisphere (Gulf type)

Summers are warm and pleasant, Miami, being an
important holiday resort, and it rarely snows in
winter.

The annual rainfall is heavy with 59 inches in
Miami, and New Orleans; 52 inches in Montgomery
and 41 inches in Charleston. There is no distinct
dry period as in monsoon lands, and the abundant
moisture has stimulated extensive cultivation of
cotton and maize, in the Cotton and Corn Belts both
of which are the world’s leading areas for these crops.
From the rainfall pattern in Fig. 145 (b), it is clear that
there is a tendency towards a Summer maximum,
brought by the on-shore Trade Winds which swing
landwards from the Atlantic. The amount of rain
is increased by the frequent thunderstorms in summer
and by hurricanes in September and October.

Some stations, eg. Montgomery in Alabama,
also show a secondary maximum in late winter when
cyclonic activities are greatest. Sometimes, violent
tornadoes occur, due to intense local heating on
land. Though these whirling storms follow only a
narrow path in the central plain (Mississippi basin),
they leave behind a trail of destruction.

3. The Natal type. There are three distinct areas
mn the eastern coasts of the southern continents,
ying just sou 1¢ Tropic of Capricorn which

O-N W© & Mo inches

JFMAMJJASOND
months

Sydney F MAM J J AS ON OD range/total
Temp. 72 71 69 65 59 55 53 55 59 64 67 70 19°F
Precip, 3.74.348565148463029322829 45°

Place: Sydney, New South Wales, Australia
(34°S., 151°E.)

Altitude: 138 feet

Annual precipitation: 48 inches

Annual temperature range: 19°F. (72°-53°F)

(c) Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate
in the southern hemisphere (Natal type)

influence eliminate the monsoonal elements which
characterize the corresponding climates of the north-
ern hemisphere. The South-East Trade Winds bring
about a more even distribution of rainfall throughout
the year as illustrated by the climatic graph for
Sydney, Australia. It has a mean monthly precipi-
tation of 4 inches, which is adequate for most agri-
cultural activities. The annual amount of 48 inches
is fairly representative of this climatic type in the
southern hemisphere. The annual precipitation of
Durban in Natal is 45 inches and that of Asuncion in
Paraguay is 52 inches. The passage of depressions
across the southern edges of the warm temperate
eastern margins results in a slight autumn or winter
maximum, typified by Sydney (Fig. 145(c)) which
has its wettest months in March, April, May, June
and July (the autumn-winter part of the year). The
rain comes in prolonged showers. Much of the
water seeps into the ground and there is little run-off,
so the regions are well suited to agriculture and are
some of the best settled parts of the southern con-
tinents, :
- Another feature to note is the small annual
temperature range, without any really cold month.

The annual range for Sydney is 19°F. and the coldest

‘month is 21°F. above freezing. The range is smaller —

for Durban, only 13°F, with July, the coldest month |
at 63°F, In Asuncion, it is even less, the range is



--- PAGE 083 ---
only 8°F., and the climate is pleasantly warm all
the time.

However, the southern continents also have
violent local storms, which, though not as severe
as the typhoon, hurricane or tornado, are nevertheless,
quite significant. The Southerly Burster, a violent
cold wind blowing along the coast of New South
Wales, leads to a sudden fall in temperature. It is
most frequent in spring and summer. The corres-
ponding cold wind in Argentina and Uruguay is the
Pampero. which is often accompanied by thunder
and lightning besides the rain and dust. In south-
eastern Africa, a hot, dry wind called the Berg Wind
comes down from the interior plateau. It is compar-
able to the Fohn or Chinook, and brings unplea-
santly high temperatures and oppressive weather.

Natural Vegetation

The eastern margins of warm temperate latitudes
have a much heavier rainfall than either the western
margins or the continental interiors and thus have a
luxuriant vegetation. The lowlands carry both ever-
green broad-leaved forests and deciduous trees quite
similar to those of the tropical monsoon forests,
On the highlands, are various species of conifers such
as pines and cypresses which are important soft-
woods. As the perennial plant growth is not checked
by either a dry season as in the Mediterranean, or a
cold _Season as in the cool temperate regions,
conditions are well suited to a rich variety of plant life
including grass, ferns, lianas, bamboos, palms and
forests, The well distributed rainfall all the year

round makes the regions look green at all times,
It is interesting to note that the warm temperate
eastern margins are the homes of a number of valuable
timber species. In eastern Australia the most im-
Portant are eucalyptus trees, with scanty foliage and
- thick fern undergrowth. Some of the eucalyptus
Alps of Victoria and the

warm Mozambique current encourages heavy pregj-
pitation along the coast and many species of nefa
trees thrive. The highlands yield extensive forests
of chestnuts, ironwood and blackwoods. An unusual
occupation is the commercial cultivation of wattle
trees in plantations for tanning extracts and for use
in Natal’s coal mines as pit-props.

The forests of China and southern Japan also have
considerable economic value and include oak. cam-
phor, camelia and magnolia. Unfortunately the
tremendous population pressure in the two countries
has caused much of the original forest to be Cleared
for fuel or crop cultivation.
resulted in many barren hill-slopes that are still
feeling the impact of soil erosion. The Gulf States
of U.S.A. have lowland
trees grow close together with thick undergrowth
and leafy branches. Walnut, oak, hickory and
maple are some of the more common species, while
in the more sandy regions grow pines. Much of
the forest cover has given way to the cultivation
of sub-tropical crops like cotton, maize and fruits.

Deforestation has

deciduous forests, The

Economic Development

The warm temperate eastern margins are the most
productive parts of the middle latitudes, There is
adequate rainfall, no prolonged drought, and the
cold season is warm enough for most crops to survive.
Thus the growing season is almost continuous,
though summer is the busiest part of the farming
year. Monsoon China together with southern Japan
and other parts of the eastern margin climatic zone
accounts for almost a third of the world population.
Food has to be raised to feed the teeming population.
The hills are terraced, fields are irrigated, and agri-
culture is extended to the limits of production. It is
NO exaggeration to say that the temperate monsoon
lands are the most intensively tilled parts of the
earth. Besides the widespread cultivation of maize
and cotton in the Corn and Cotton Belts of U.S.A.
fruit and tobacco are also grown. Rice, tea and
mulberries are extensively grown in monsoon China.
Elsewhere are found other products of economic
importance, e.g. cane sugar in Natal, coffee and
maize in South America and dairying in New South
Wales and Victoria. Let us now examine some of the
regions more closely.

de ge, in monsoon China. Undoubtedly this

of the world’s tice is grown in China, though the

ion of 750 million leaves very little for
cl, in normal years, imports of rice and

i
|

“TR ee agtltne
> 4 ee, ~. Wee

ia

 '
HE ; ie

Terraced Land for rice farming in Japan

other food grains are essential. The Chinese pea-
sants raise ‘wet padi’ or ‘swamp rice’ in flooded
fields that call for endless hard labour for the greater
part of the year. It is said that nowhere else is there
so much manual labour devoted to raise a food crop
that gives so little economic return. Farming is
usually on a subsistence basis. Despite increasing
mechanization in padi-cultivation, very few farmers
actually make use of new machines because they are
expensive and may be impractical in some areas.
The only progress that has been made is towards
double or treble cropping, which has increased the
annual total rice production. When compared with
the rapid population growth of the rice-eating
nations, the increased production has in no way
relieved the critical food problem of Monsoon Asia.
Furthermore, milled rice which forms the stable food
of the Orient is a seriously deficient diet; the people
are therefore not only inadequately fed also physically
undernourished.

Monsoon China has all the ideal conditions for
padi cultivation; a warm climate, moderately wet
throughout the year, and extensive lowlands with
fertile moisture-retentive alluvial soil, which if neces-
sary, can be easily irrigated. The land has been
tilled from generation to generation, and yet there is
little deterioration in soil fertility. The muddy
irrigation water from the river basins is silty and

constantly brings new soil to the fields The water
is greatly enriched during floods, though these are
far less frequent now, with the improvement made
in flood control by the Communist regime In
practice, the Chinese peasants add all kinds of
Organic wastes to enrich their fields. Rice straw,
ashes, clippings, animal dung, refuse, and last but
not least, human manure.

The most intensively farmed areas are the basins

of the Si-kiang, Yang-tze Kiang and Hwang Ho,
which are also the most densely peopled areas.
The eastern coastlands are equally important. As
the flat lands are insufficient for rice cultivation,
farmers move up the hill-slopes and grow padi on
terraced uplands. The artificial terraces retain the
excess water as it flows down the slope. Besides rice
the other important crops are fea, grown for home
consumption and mulberry leaves gathered for feed-
ing silk worms, though sericulture is declining.
2. Agriculture in the Gulf states. Agriculture in the
Gulf states of America differs from that of monsoon
China, though they have a similar climate. Lack
of population pressure and the urge to export, make
rice cultivation a relatively unimportant occupation.
It is grown only in a few areas in the southern coast-
lands of the Mississippi delta. Americans are bread-
eaters and one can well imagine how insignificant is
rice in the economy of the Gulf states. The most
important crops are corn, cotton and tobacco.

(a) Corn. The chief food crop raised is, in fact
corn or maize. The humid air, the sunny summer and
the heavy showers suit the crop well. It is grown
right from the Gulf coast to the Mid-west south of
the Great Lakes, with the greatest concentration
in the Corn Belt of Nebraska, lowa, Indiana and
Ohio. The region accounts for more than half the
world’s production of corn, but only 3 per cent of the
world’s export. This is because most of the corn
is used for fattening animals, mostly cattle and pigs.
Many farmers do not harvest the corn but instead
allow the cattle or pigs ‘to hog the corn down’ in the
field itself. The fattened animals are then sold to
the meat plants in Chicago and Cincinnati to be
slaughtered and processed into ‘corned beef’ or
frozen and chilled beef. Very little corn is consumed
as a staple food in America, though the cereal
originated in America as the food crop of the native
Indian people. Apart from its ease of cultivation

in respect of soil, climatic and labour reqi met



--- PAGE 084 ---
why it is so widely cultivated in both the warm
temperate and the tropical latitudes.

(b) Cotton. Of the cash crops grown in the
Gulf states. none is comparable with cotton. In the
Deep South, the fibre is so vital to the economic
well-being of the southerners that ‘cotton is king’!
It shapes the destiny of the southern states, being
directly responsible for their trade, prosperity and
politics. In the early days of America millions of
Negroes were brought from Africa as salve labour for
the cotton plantations. because the climate was too
hot for the white settlers to harvest the cotton them-
selves. Although slavery was abolished in the nine-
teenth century, the Negroes are still poor and under-
privileged. This is the cause of the present problems
between the blacks and the whites in America.

The Gulf type of climate is undoubtedly the best
for cotton growing. Its long, hot growing season
with 200 days frost free and a moderately high tem-
perature of about 75°F. permits the crop to grow
slowly and mature within six months. Like most
fibres, cotton likes ample rain and an annual preci-
pitation of around 40 inches is essential. In fact,
an adequate moisture supply coming from frequent
light showers with bright sunshine between them
gives the highest yield. Fine quality cotton also
comes from irrigated fields in the drier west provided
sufficient water is supplied during the growing season.
The Cotton Belt is thus limited by the 20-inch isohyet

USA is not the only important cotton producer. India’s
largest industry is cotton textiles. Here yarn is being
processed at the Birla mills New Delhi Press Information
Bureau, India

on the west and 77°F. isotherm in the nortj
within which there are at least 200 days Witho :
frost. In the very south, in the Gulf-lands ie
heavy rainfall damages the lint. This area is hen
fore less suitable for cotton and is devoted to ee
fruits, cane sugar and market gardening, as in Florida
The commerical cultivation of cotton is now Eee
centrated only in the most favourable areas aren
are the Mississppi flood plains, the clayey Atlantic
coastlands of Georgia and South Carolina, the
Black Prairies of Texas and the Red Prairies of
Oklahoma. Fig. 146 shows the chief cotton areas

Generally speaking, the best cotton comes from
the maritime districts where the sea breezes and the
warming effect of the ocean are most strongly felt
The Sea Island Cotton grown in the islands off the
coast of Georgia and South Carolina is long-stapled
(the fibres are between 1-5 and 2-3 inches in length)
and is the best in the world. Further inland, the
staples are shorter (about an inch long). This is
typical of the bulk of the ‘American’ cotton. Be-
sides the problem of soil exhaustion and erosion
caused by prolonged cotton cultivation, the most
dreaded enemy of the Cotton Belt is the boll-weevil.
The pest multiplies so rapidly that a pair of boll-
weevils, if left unchecked, will breed over 10 million
grubs within a single season! The pest is responsible
for the westward migration of the Cotton Belt.
When it first appeared in 1892 in the eastern U.S.A.
it attacked the Sea Island Cotton. Aerial spraying
with insecticides and the thorough burning of old
cotton stalks, have been found effective in eliminating
the boll-weevil.

(c) Tobacco. Another interesting crop closely
associated with the Gulf type of climate is tobacco,
which incidentally is also a native crop of America.
Though it is cultivated in many parts of the world,
and the finished products range from Turkish
tobacco to Havana cigars and Malaysian cheroots,
there is none so universally known as the Virginia
tobacco. It is the raw material from which most
of the world’s cigarettes are blended to suit the.
smokers’ taste. The humid atmosphere, the warmth
and the well-drained soils of the Gulf states, enable
tobacco to be successfully cultivated in many of
the eastern states of U.S.A., e.g. Virginia, Maryland,
Georgia, North and South Carolina, Kentucky and
Tennessee. No less than half the tobacco that
enters international trade comes from these states.
Regardless of the views that doctors and school
teachers may hold, cigar and cigarette-smoking
has long been a universal habit that cannot be

of GOUND
‘Ah “wy .
oWsUB- TROPIC

Gulf of Mexico

CORN BELT x x

>

/
:

WARM GULF STREAM

Fig. 146 The Cotton Belt

|
S of the U.S.A.
AS
Se
4

dispensed with. It is the basis of an industry and
provides, through duty, a valuable source of income
to the government.

3. Crop cultivation in the eastern margins of the
southern hemisphere. A close look at the economic
map of the southern hemisphere will at once reveal
the agricultural importance of its eastern margins
which experience a Natal type of climate. The
warm moist summers and frost-free winters not only
support many crops but also animals. In the
coastlands of Natal, cane sugar is the dominant
crop, followed by cotton and tobacco in the interior.
Recent expansion of these crops has come about with
improved irrigation. Maize is extensively cultivated
for use both as ‘mealie’ an important food item for
Africans and ‘silage’, an animal fodder for cattle
rearing. But in comparison with the maize yield
of the Corn Belt of U.S.A., the African yield is rather
low, often only half. Improvements can be made,
if farmers attempt some form of crop rotation to
arrest the rapid rate of soil exhaustion in regions of
maize monoculture. Scientific manuring and better
methods of cultivation would raise yields.

In South America where rainfall is less than 40
inches there is much grassland on which many cattle
and sheep are kept for meat, wool and hides. It is
the continuation of the Argentinian Pampas. The
mild winters mean that the animals can be kept
out-of-doors all the time. The extensive natural
pastures provide valuable forage for both cattle and
sheep. The products from these two kinds of
domesticated animals account for over three-quarters
of the annual exports of Uruguay. The remaining

exports come mainly from wheat ane flax. Further
north in southern Brazil, the rainfall increases to
more than 40 inches and forest gradually replaces
grass. Here the important occupations are the
cultivation of yerba mate (Paraguay tea) and the
lumbering of araucaria or Parana pine. Cattle
and sheep are reared, and maize and cane sugar
are grown.

In eastern Australia the moist Trade Winds bring
heavy rainfall to the coastal districts and these
are thickly wooded. Giant eucalyptus trees rise
one above the other right up the Eastern Highlands.
But with the influx of European immigrants, much
of the forest has been cleared for settlement and
dairying. The eastern margin of New South Wales
was. in fact, the earliest part of the continent to be
colonised, beginning with Port Jackson, the present
site of Sydney. The region is now the chief source
of Australia’s milk, butter and cheese, besides cotton,
cane sugar and maize which are increasingly grown
in the north.

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

1. What do you understand by the China type
of climate? Locate on a world map the regions
which experience this type of climate, and
describe the broad pattern of their agricultural

activities.

2. Describe the main factors which affect the
climate and vegetation of any three of the

161



--- PAGE 085 ---
following regions.
(a) the Gulf states of U.S.A.
(b) the Iberian peninsula
(c) Borneo
(d) Tasmania
(ec) Ceylon

3. Give a reasoned account of any two of the
following.
(a) Cotton cultivation in the United States
of America.
(b) Padi growing in monsoon China.
(c) Dairying in eastern Australia.
(d) Lumbering in Canada.

4. Analyse, in relation to latitude and other geographical factors, the following climatic figures.

Station Location Altitude
Singapore I°N., 104°E. 33 feet
Santiago 25°05 71° W. 1,700 feet
Shanghai BIN; 121°R, 23 feet

5. Give an explanatory account of any three
of the following.
(a) Local storms (e.g. typhoon, hurricane,
pampero) are often associated with the
Warm Temperate Eastern Margin
Climate.
(b) The predominant forest trees of eastern
Australia are eucalypts.

Mean Mean Annual

January July Temp. Annual
Temp. Temp. Range Rainfall]
78.8°F, 82.0°F. aah 95.1 ins
67°F. 46,0°F. 21° 14.2 ins,
38°F, 81.0°F. 43°F. Joya

(c) U.S.A. accounts for more than 50 per
cent of world production of corn (i.e.
maize) but only 3 per cent of world
exports.

(d) Farming in monsoon China is usually
ona subsistence basis, and the peasa nts
are permanently ‘land-hungry’.

Chapter 22 The Cool Temperate Western Margin

(British Type) Climate

Distribution

The cool temperate western margins are under
the permanent influence of the Westerlies all round
the year. They are also regions of much cyclonic
activity, typical of Britain, and are thus said to
experience the British type of climate. From Britain,
the climatic belt stretches far inland into the lowlands
of North-West Europe, including such regions as
northern and western France, Belgium, the Nether-
lands, Denmark, western Norway and also north-
western Iberia. There is so much oceanic influence
on both the temperature and the precipitation that
the climate is also referred to as the North-West
European Maritime Climate. In North America,
the high Rockies prevent the on-shore Westerlies
from penetrating far inland and the British type of
climate is confined mainly to the coastlands of
British Columbia.

In the southern hemisphere, the climate is ex-
perienced in southern Chile, Tasmania and most
parts of New Zealand, particularly in South Island.
The surrounding large expanses of water have
increased the maritime nature of the climate here
(Fig. 147).

Climate

Temperature. The mean annual temperatures are
usually between 40°F. and 60°F The warmest
month in London as illustrated in the temperature
graph of London Fig. 148(a) is 63°F. and the coldest
month is just around 40°F, thus giving an annual
temperature range of only 24°F, which is com-
paratively small for its latitude (51°N.) Summers
are, in fact, never very warm. Monthly temperatures
of over 65°F. even in mid-summer are rare. “Heat
waves’, as they are popularly called (that is a short
spell of warm summer days) are a welcome feature
in such cool temperate latitudes, where people do
not often see enough of the sun. The climate is
ideal for maximum comfort and mental alertness.
People can work for long hours without feeling
drowsy and lethargic as they do in the tropics.
There appears to be some direct relationship between
climate and Man’s output of work. It is no wonder
that the cool temperate regions are some of the most
advanced parts of the world. Winters are abnormally
mild, and no stations actually record mean January
temperatures below freezing-point in north-western
Europe. This is attributable to the warming effect

Fig. 147 Regions with Cool Temperate Western Margin Climate (British type).



--- PAGE 086 ---
Place: London, British Isles (51°N., 0°W.)
Altitude: 18 feet
Annual precipitation: 24 inches
Annual temperature range: 24°F. (63°-39°F)
Fig. 148 (a) British type of climate in the northern
hemisphere.

 (62°-46°F)
‘southern hemisphere.

unusual cold spells, caused by the invasion of cold
polar continental air from the interiors, may hit the
western margins for a number of weeks. The climate
of the maritime regions as a whole may be described
as equable with moderately warm summers and
fairly mild winters.

It is quite apparent from Fig. 148(b) of Hobart.
Tasmania that the British type of climate in the
southern hemisphere is even more equable. Lack of
continental land masses in Tasmania, New Zealand
and southern Chile means that extremes of temp-
erature are not likely at all. Hobart has mid-summer
temperatures of not more than 62°F. while its coldest
month in July (winter in the southern hemisphere)
is barely below 46°F. The annual temperature range
is reduced to only 16°F, which is unusual for the
middle latitudes. This is in fact, the average figure
for all the maritime stations in the southern con-
tinents where insularity overrides all other factors.
The annual ranges of other southerly stations are
Dunedin 15°F, Christchurch 18°F, Valdivia 14°F.
and Punta Arenas 17°F (the last two stations are
in southern Chile), The oceanic influences not only

keep the winters very mild but also keep the summers

cool. Some geographers have described these
southerly islands as ‘the favoured isles’ which has
much truth in it.

Precipitation. The British type of climate has ade-
quate rainfall throughout the year with a tendency
towards a slight winter or autumn maximum from
cyclonic sources. Since the rain-bearing winds come
from the west, the western margins have the heaviest
rainfall, The amount decreases eastwards with in-
creasing distance from the sea. Though both the
quoted stations London and Hobart have 24 inches
of precipitation a year, the actual amount varies
quite considerably from place to place. Relief can
make great differences in the annual amount. For
example the western slopes of the Southern Alps of
South Island, New Zealand have as much as 200
inches of rainfall (mainly orographic rain) while the
Canterbury Plain, in the rain-shadow area has as
little as 25 inches. Similarly, the Lake District
of Britain has well over 100 inches in contrast to
only 24 inches in East Anglia. It is therefore difficult
to say how much annual rainfall is typical of the
British type of climate. Perhaps, a useful guide
would be to confine ourselves to lowland regions
Which normally have 20 to 40 inches a year e.g. 23
inches in Paris, 28 inches in Dublin, 33 inches in

Seattle and 37 inches in Dunedin, Generally, western
Coastal stations are wetter, Vancouver has 60 inches

of rain, Bergen 84 inches and Valdivia 105 inches.
They are exceeded in the annual amount only by
the highland stations as mentioned earlier, a
The seasons. \s in other temperate regions there
are four distinct seasons in the British climate type.
Light snowfalls can be expected in the winter months
normally only of short duration because of the
comparatively mild weather. But over the highlands
such as the Scandinavian Mountains and the Ameri-
can Rockies, snowfall is heavy and feeds the mountain
glaciers that move down the valleys. Winter is
the season of cloudy skies, foggy and misty mornings,
and many rainy days from the passing depressions.
Out at sea, gales are frequent and can be dangerous
to shipping. Spring is the driest and the most
refreshing season when people emerge from the
depressing winter to see everything becoming green
again. This is followed by the long, sunny summer.

Sun-bathers, picnickers and sightseers are out in
the open to enjoy themselves. With the roar of

gusty winds and the fall of ‘golden’ leaves, autumn
is ushered in, and the cycle repeats itself. This type
of climate with its four distinct seasons is something
that is conspicuously absent in the tropics.

Natural Vegetation

The natural vegetation of this climatic type is
deciduous forest. The trees shed their leaves jn the
cold season. This is an adaptation for protecting
themselves against the winter snow and frost.
Shedding begins in autumn, the ‘fall’ season, during
which the leaves fall and are scattered by the winds.
The golden-brown leaves and the ‘naked’ branches
present a very interesting scene. When they are in
leaf the deciduous trees have typical rounded out-
lines with thick trunks and out-spreading branches
that yield valuable temperate hardwood (Fig. 149).
Some of the more common species include oak,
elm, ash, birch, beech, poplar, and hornbeam. In
the wetter areas grow willows, alder and aspen.
Elsewhere are found other species, e.g. chestnut,

POPLAR

RE, oe 9 NI OO aN eres

Fig. 149 Some deciduous trees

sycamore, maple, and lime.

Unlike the equatorial forests, the deciduous trees
occur in pure stands and have greater lumbering
value from the commercial point of view. The open
nature of the forests with sparse undergrowth is
useful in logging operations. Easy penetration means
much cost can be saved in the movement of the logs.
The deciduous hardwoods are excellent for both
fuel and industrial purposes. In Tasmania, the
temperate eucalypts are also extensively felled for
the lumbering industry. Higher up the mountains
in the Scandinavian highlands, the Rockies, southern
Andes and the Southern Alps of New Zealand, the
deciduous trees are generally replaced by the conifers
which can survive a higher altitude, a lower
temperature and poorer soils.

Economic Development
A very large part of the deciduous woodlands have
been cleared for fuel, timber or agriculture. The
dense population necessitates the removal of the
lowland forests, particularly for the plough. In
Britain there is only 4 per cent of the original forest
left. A large range of cereals, fruits and root crops
are raised, mainly for home consumption rather than
for export. North-West Europe, which includes some
of the most crowded parts of the globe, has little sur-
plus for export. It is, in fact, a net importer of food-
crops, especially wheat from almost all parts of the
wheatlands for bread-making and other food items.
The region differs from many others in its unprece-
dented industrial advancement. The countries are
concerned in the production of machinery, chemicals,
textiles and other manufactured articles rather than
agriculture, fishing or lumbering, though these
activities are well represented in some of the countries.
Fishing is particularly important in Britain, Norway
and British Columbia. Since the manufacturing
aspect of industrial geography will be dealt with in
much greater detail in Chapter 27, we shall deal here
with the agricultural development of the region.
1. Market gardening. Though market gardening is
practised throughout the world wherever there is a
large urban population, nowhere else is it so highly
specialized as in North-West Europe. Several factors
account for this, All the north-western European
countries (Britain, France, West Germany, Benelux:
and Denmark) are highly industrialized and have
high population densities. There are more towns |
and cities than in other continents despite tts small
size. It is understandable that the demand for fresh
vegetables, green salads, eggs, meat, milk and fruits:



--- PAGE 087 ---
will be tremendous. The city dwellers, the factory
workers and the civil servants who make up the bulk
of the urban population consume large quantities
of fresh provisions daily and these must be provided
by local farmers if freshness of the produce is to be
ensured.

In north-western Europe intensive market gar-
dening is carried out in many specialized areas e.g.
the Vales of York and Evesham in the United King-
dom where climatic, soil and other factors best suit
this form of agriculture. Farms are normally small.
located near large cities or industrial areas. Soils,
whether silty, loamy or podzolic, are carefully main-
tained at a high degree of fertility. Very selective
fertilizers are applied depending on the type of crops
in cultivation. Farming is carried out intensively,
aiming at high yield and maximum cash returns.
As the crops are perishable. a good network of trans-
port is indispensable. The produce such as lettuces,
cabbages, cauliflowers, tomatoes, onions, peas and
fruits are seldom shipped but conveyed by high-
speed conveyances such as trucks or vans. Perhaps
a more appropriate term to use is truck farming,
which is commonly used in the United States.

In a few instances warmer weather or better soils.
as in south-west England (Devon and Cornwall),
can also induce farmers to take to market gardening
despite their remoteness from the more populated
districts. Early vegetables, early potatoes and toma-
toes reach London from the Canary Islands, the
Channel Islands, and from Brittany, in north-
west France. Similarly, bulbs and flowers from the
polderlands of the Netherlands and eggs, bacon and
other dairy products from Denmark are sent to most
of the major industrial centres of Europe in almost
perfect condition for household consumption. The
horticultural industry in the Netherlands is so highly
specialized that Dutch tulips and bulbs are flown by
the K.L.M. (Dutch Airlines) to Rome, Paris, Zurich,
and London. In Australia, high-speed boats ply
across the Bass Strait daily from Tasmania to rush
Vegetal ‘omatoes, apples and beans to most of the

€ cities in mainland Australia. It is no wonder
is nicknamed Tasmania the ‘garden

‘Throughout Britain and north-
rmers practise both arable farming
d land) and pastoral

type of soil, the price of the, cereals and the demand
for animals and animal products. The farmers also
plant a few fruit trees (apples, pears, plums). rear
pigs, keep poultry, mainly for eggs, and even have bees
for honey. There is such a great variety in the farms
that the term mixed farming is most aptly applied.

Amongst the cereals, wheat is the most extensively
grown, almost entirely for home consumption because
of the very dense population in north-western Europe.
At one time, some of the European countries (France,
Denmark and the Netherlands) used to be wheat
exporters, but the keen competition from the new
wheat-lands of the New World forced most of the
farmers to divert their interest to other more profi-
table uses of their land such as market gardening,
dairying or an intensive form of mixed farming,
With the rise of industry, more arable farms are being
devoured by factories and wheat is now a net import
item in Europe.

The next most important cereal raised in the
mixed farm is barley. The better quality barley is
sold to the breweries for beer-making or whisky
distilling and is raised preferably in the drier areas,
Malting barley is thus grown in south-eastern
Britain near the hop-growing area (hops are also
used for beer) where rainfall is less than 30 inches.
On heavy soils or wetter regions, barley is grown
mainly as an animal fodder, sometimes mixed with
oats as “dredge corn’. Both are raised in crop
rotations with a leguminous crop (beans or clover)
and a root crop (turnips or beet sugar).

The most important animals kept in the mixed
farm are cattle. North-western Europe was origi-
nally the home of many world renowned cattle
breeds, e.g. Guernsey, Ayrshire and Friesian, which
are first class dairy cattle for milk production. The
countries bordering the North Sea (Britain, Denmark,
the Netherlands) are some of the most advanced
dairying countries where cattle are kept on a scien-
tific and intensive basis. Europeans drink more
milk than anybody else except the New Zealanders.
In the United Kingdom, a person drinks almost a
pint of milk a day! From milk, other important
dairy products are derived. These are butter, cheese,
cream, and skimmed milk or casein, a raw material
for making plastics, paper and drugs. The temperate
western margin type of climate is almost ideal for
intensive dairying, Cheese is a specialized product
of the Netherlands, from Edam and Gouda. From
Denmark comes high-quality butter, of which she
ranks with New Zealand as one of the world’s
greatest exporters. In Devon and Cornwall clotted

An English farm. Notice the well-wooded countryside Centra/ Office of Information London

cream is made, which is less perishable than fresh
milk. It can be sent over longer journeys without
being contaminated. The Swiss have also made
excellent use of their alpine pastures for keeping dairy
cattle. Fresh milk is converted into various forms
of condensed or evaporated milk, and exported
around the world for baby-feeding, confectionery,
ice-cream and chocolate making.

Besides dairying, some cattle are kept as beef
cattle, e.g. the Hereford and Aberdeen Angus, but
their numbers are very small in comparison with those
of Argentina or Australia, where meat production
is the primary concern. The high rate of beef
consumption in Europe (about 40 Ib. a year per head
of population in the United Kingdom) necessitates
large imports of frozen and chilled beef. In the mixed
farms in Europe, farmers keep cattle also with a view

of enriching their fields with the animal dung. The pigs
and poultry act as scavengers that feed on the left-
overs from root-crops and dairy processes. In this
way, Denmark is able to export large quantities of
bacon from pigs that are fed on the skimmed milk, a
by-product of butter-making. Fresh chickens’ eggs
from the farms and more recently, from large poultry
yards also form part of the export products of
Denmark. Sheep are kept both for wool and mutton.
In British Columbia, mixed farming is restricted only
to the most favoured parts of the Western lowlands,
the region being so mountainous and thickly forested.
3. Sheep rearing. This is well developed in some
parts of the British type of climate. Britain is the
home of some of the best known sheep breeds, eg.
Leicesters, Lincolns and Southdowns which are dual
purpose, noted for mutton as well as wool. With the



--- PAGE 088 ---
A sheep station near Hawkes Bay,

greater Pressure exerted on land by increased urbani-
zation, industrialization and agriculture, sheep rearing
is being pushed further and further into the less
favoured areas. The principal sheep areas are on
foothills, well-drained uplands, chalk and limestone
scarplands, and the light, sandy coasts, In Britain
the major sheep areas are the Pennines, (Swaledale
breeds) Scottish Highlands (the Blackface), the
Southern Uplands (Cheviot), the Welsh Mountains
k Welsh) and the scarplands of south-eastern
d (Romney Marsh). Britain was once an
Pennine wool, but today with a

n and @ more intensive use of her
land, she has neither surplus

. She has become instead
Id. This is equally

New Zealand N.Z. High Commission Malaysia

true of other north-western European sheep areas,
in which industrialization has effectively altered the
pattern of land use.

Tn the southern hemisphere, sheep rearing is the
chief occupation of New Zealand, with its greatest
concentration in the Canterbury Plain. It has been
estimated that for every New Zealander there are 20
sheep. Many factors have led to this unprecedented
growth during the past century including extensive
meadows, a mild temperate climate, well-drained level
ground, scientific animal breeding, and last, but most
vital, the development of refrigeration, which enables
frozen or chilled Canterbury lamb and Corriedale
mutton to reach every corner of the globe. Though
New Zealand has only 4 per cent of the world’s
sheep population, it accounts for two-thirds of the
world’s mutton exports, and one sixth of world wool
exports. In Tasmania and southern Chile, sheep

rearing has always been a predominant occupation
with surplus sheep products for the international
trade.

4, Other agricultural activities. Apart from market
gardening and mixed farming which have been singled
out for greater individual treatment, the British type
of climate also supports a number of other important
crops. Amongst the food crops, potatoes feature
prominently in the domestic economy of the cool
temperate regions. It is the staple food in supple-
menting wheat or bread for millions of people. In
terms of starch, it yields far more food than any
cereals and can be cultivated over a wide range of
climatic and soil types. But normally a cooler and
more northerly latitude is preferred because the crop
will be less prone to the attack of ‘blight’, a virus
disease that is particularly infectious in warm and
humid countries. Since the introduction of the crop
by the Spanish conquerors from the Andean states of
Peru and Bolivia in the sixteenth century, potato-
growing has spread far and wide in Europe. Today
almost two-thirds of the world’s annual production
of potatoes comes from Europe, of which Poland,
Germany, France and United Kingdom are the
major producers. Besides its principal use as a
substitute for bread, large quantities of potatoes
are also consumed as animal fodder and as a source
of industrial alcohol.

Another interesting crop that is found almost
exclusively in north-western Europe (including Euro-
pean U.S.S.R.) and parts of U.S.A. is beet sugar.
The need for such a crop was greatly felt during the
Napoleonic Wars around 1800 when military block-
ades caused a scarcity of sugar. High prices of
imported tropical sugar (from cane sugar) drove many
governments of the temperate lands to think seriously
about the vital importance of securing a certain
amount of self-sufficiency in their sugar requirements.
The first beet sugar factory in Europe was established
in 1801. Farmers were given subsidies (aids or allow-
ances) to induce them to devote at least part of their
farm to the crop. Since then beet-sugar has become
an integral part of many European farms. It is
grown either on special beet farms for cash sales or
in conjunction with cereals in crop rotation. The
beet is crushed for sugar and the green tops are used
as animal fodder. The crop thrives best in the
warmer and drier east of Britain and in mainland
Europe. The highest sugar yield is obtained when
the autumn is both dry and sunny. Attempts to
grow the crop in the colder north or the wetter west
have so far been rather unsuccessful, except in some

sheltered localities. In Britain most of

factories are located in the Fens and Eas

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

|. The following statements attempt to des-

cribe a type of climate.
“evade Westerlies come all the year round
ere there is a tendency towards an autumn
Or winter maximum of rainfall..... light
snow falls in winter...... ports are never
frozen...... but frosts do occur on cold
nights....... the seasons are very distinct......
and the climate is very favourable for
maximum human output......

(a) Name the type of climate that it
describes.

(b) Locate with the aid of a sketch map a
region where such a type of climate is
best represented.

(c) Explain why such a type of climate is
ideal for human habitation.

2. Describe and explain with the aid of sketch

maps the essential differences between the

various climatic types found within the cool

temperate zone.

3. (a) What are the characteristic features
of temperate deciduous forests?

(b) Name the various species of deciduous
forests and account for some of their
industrial uses.

(c) Explain why there is comparatively
little of the original forest left.

4, Write a geographical account of any three
of the following economic activities.

(a) mixed farming

(b) beet sugar cultivation

(c) cool temperate orchard farming

(d) sheep rearing

(e) woollen textile industry

5. Give an explanatory account of any fwo of
the following.

(a) The Netherlands is a major exporter
of butter and cheese.

(b) Sheep outnumber the population of
New Zealand by 20:1.

(c) No country produces and exports
more wool than Australia.

(d) Market-gardening is a product of
urbanization.

169

ty on sow eee


--- PAGE 089 ---
Chapter 23 The Cool Temperate Continental

(Siberian) Climate

Distribution
The Cool Temperate Continental (Siberian) Cli-
mate is experienced only in the northern hemisphere
where the continents within the high latitudes have a
broad east-west spread (Fig. 150). On its poleward
Side, it merges into the Arctic tundra of Canada and
Eurasia at around the Arctic Circle. Southwards,
the climate becomes less severe and fades into the
temperate Steppe climate dealt with in Chapter 19.
The predominant vegetation of this Siberian or
“sub-Arctic” type of climate is evergreen coniferous
forest. It stretches in a great, continuous belt across
North America, Europe and Asia. The greatest
single band of the coniferous forest is the taiga (a
Russian word for coniferous forest) in Siberia. In
Europe the countries that have a similar type of
climate and forest are mainly in northern Europe,
Sweden and Finland. There are small amounts of
natural coniferous forest, due to high altitude, in
Germany, Poland, Switzerland, Austria and other
parts of Europe. In North America, this sub-Arctic
belt stretches from Alaska across Canada into
Labrador, and is found on the high Rocky Mountains
farther south.

The Siberian Climate is conspicuously absent in
the southern hemisphere because of the narrowness
of the southern continents in the high latitudes, The
strong oceanic influence reduces the severity of the
winter and coniferous forests are found only on the
mountainous uplands of southern Chile. New Zea-
land, Tasmania and south-east Australia.

Climate

Temperature. The climate of the Siberian type is
characterized by a bitterly cold winter of long
duration, and a cool brief summer. Spring and
autumn are merely brief transitional periods, The
isotherm of 50°F. for the warmest month forms the
poleward boundary of the Siberian climate and
the winter months are always below freezing. The
stations chosen to illustrate this type of climate are
Moscow, in continental Europe and Churchill, in
northern Canada, bordering Hudson Bay. The col-
dest month in Moscow is January with 12°F (20°
below freezing point). The warmest month (July)
Is as high as 66°F; thus there is an annual range of
54°F., which is common in the Siberian type of

SSIES SC crs

climate. In comparision, the annual temperature
range for Churchill is even higher.

reaching 73°F
(-19°F. in January and 54°F, jn July). This is due to
northerly

position of Churchill. The

extremes of temperature are so great in Siberia that

the more

it is often referred to as the ‘cold pole of the earth’.
Some of the lowest temperatures in the world are
recorded in Verkhoyansk (68°N. 113°. and onh
330 feet in altitude) where -90°F. was once recorded.
This is, in fact, 170°F. colder than Kuala Lumpur!
It is almost unimaginable. In North America. the
extremes are less severe, because of the continent’s
lesser stretch. The mid-winter
means in the cold Mackenzie Valley are not lower
than —70°F.

With such low temperatures in the cold season.
heavy snowfall can be expected. Frosts occur as
early as August and by September lakes and ponds
are already ice-bound. All over Russia, nearly
all the rivers are frozen. The number of days in
which the rivers are frozen increases from south to
north. In normal years, the Volga is ice-covered
for about 150 days, while those further north (e.g.
the lower courses of the Ob, Lena and Yenisey) are
ice-covered for more than 210 days or 7 months!
Occasionally cold, northerly polar winds such as the
blizzards of Canada and buran of Eurasia blow
violently at 50 m.p.h. or more and at a temperature
of 50°F. below freezing-point. The powdery snow-
flakes are blown around in the lower atmosphere and
visibility is greatly reduced. Conditions are so
unbearable that Siberia is very sparsely populated but
it is gradually being developed.

Precipitation. The interiors of the Eurasian con-
tinent are so remote from maritime influence that
annual precipitation cannot be high. Generally
speaking, a total of 15 to 25 inches is typical of the
annual precipitation of this sub-Arctic type of
climate. It is quite well distributed throughout
the year, with a summer maximum from convectional
rain when the continental interiors are greatly heated
(mid-summer temperatures of 60° to 75°F. are quite
usual and the maximum recorded in Siberia is a real
surprise—102°F.!) In winter the precipitation is in
the form of snow, as mean temperatures are well
below freezing all the time.

The precipitation rhythm can best be grasped from
the two representative stations chosen, in Fig. 151 (a)
and 151 (b). Moscow with an annual precipitation of
21 inches has most of the rainfall concentrated in the
warmer months (June—September). There is no
month without some form of moisture. In a region

east-west lowest

TT =
BE | wu
Pied BREE»
are BREE Yi
BBUMEREET ED <<
aia 10

al | | ‘

sl [|

oes

nh

oa

JFMAM $Y TAS OND
months

MoscowJ F MAM JJAS ON
Temp. 12 15 24 38 53 62 66 63 52 40 28
Precip. 110912151920282922141

6
Place: Moscow, U.S.S.R. (56°N., 37°E.)
Altitude: 480 feet
Annual precipitation: 21 inches
Annual temperature range: 54°F (66°-12°F)

Fig. 151 (a) Siberian Climate in Eurasia

0
J, FM, AM, J, J, A S,O,N, D
months

Churchii J F MAM J J A S ON OD fange/total
Temp. -19-17 -6 14 SO 43 54 52 42 27 6 -11 TSE
Precip. 0.5 06090909 192227231410 07 16

Place: Churchill, Manitoba, Canada (58°N., 94°W.)

Altitude: 44 feet
Annual precipitation: 16 inches
Annual temperature range: 73°F, (64°-19°F)

Fig. 151 (b) Siberian Climate in Canada.

where overall temperature is low, evaporation is not
rapid and the relative humidity is high, this small
amount of precipitation is adequate for tree growth.
The conifers, which require little moisture, and
transpire an equally small amount, are best suited
to this type of sub-Arctic climate.

In Churchill, Fig. 151 (b), the annual precipitation
is just 16 inches with a distinct summer maximum.

171


--- PAGE 090 ---
The total Precipitation of the Siberian climate
is determined by such factors as altitude. latitude,
proximity to the poles, amount of exposure to in-
fluences by Westerlies. (on western parts of con-
tinents), temperate monsoons (on the eastern parts
of continents) and the penetration of the cyclones,
European U.S.S.R. usually has more than 20 inches
of annual precipitation because of some on-coming
Westerlies and the periodic penetration of cyclones.
Eastern Siberia also has over 20 inches, being moist-
ened by the S.E. Monsoon from the Pacific Ocean.
Central Siberia and Canada have about 15 inches,
due to their continentality and lack of sea influence.
Polewards and southwards, the amount again de-
creases to only 12 inches or less. The cold, dry air
of the north is incapable of holding moisture, and
in the south are the semi-arid steppes.

Snow falls nearly everywhere in U.S.S.R. in the
long, cold winter. The amount varies from place
to place. It is heaviest in the northern tundra and
in the Siberian taiga, where a thickness of several
feet is common. Permanent snowfields like those
of the Alps or the Himalayas are absent, because

_ any accumulation of snow is melted with the return
_ of spring and the warm summer, Frozen rivers are
~ thawed, causing a rise in the water level and exten-
sive floods occur. The lower courses of the Ob, Lena
and Yenisey are marshy and ill-drained. On the
_ other hand, the presence of a thick mantle of snow
is not without its blessings. Snow is a poor conductor
of heat and protects the ground from the severe
cold above, which may be as much as 30°-50°F.
colder! It also provides moisture for the vegetation
when the snow melts in spring. When the ground
is ploughed and the leached, acidic podzolic soil
is improved, the continental interiors of the conifer-
ous forest belt are capable of supporting some
agriculture.

i rch

Natural Vegetation
No other trees are so Well adapted as the
to withstand such an inhospitable environment as
the Siberian type of climate. The coniferous forest
belts of Eurasia and North America are the richest
sources of softwood for use in building construction.
furniture, matches. paper and pulp, rayon and
other branches of the chemical industry. The world’s
greatest softwood producers are USSR, LESIAG.
Canada and the Fenoscandian countries (Finland.
Norway and Sweden). In the Production of wood
pulp (by both chemical and mechanical methods),
the U.S.A. is the leader. But in the field of newsprint,
Canada has outstripped all other producers, account-
ing for almost half of the world’s total annual pro-
duction. The more accessible coniferous forests
have reached the limit of production but the relat-
ively inaccessible taiga of Siberia will remain the
richest reserve of temperate softwood.
There are four major species in the coniferous
forests,

1. Pine, e.g. white pine, red pine, Scots pine, Jack

pine, lodgepole pine.

2. Fir, e.g. Douglas fir and balsam fir.

3. Spruce.

4. Larch.
Their presence in pure stands and the existence of only
a few species are a great advantage in commercial
forest exploitation,

Coniferous forests

1. Coniferous forests are of moderate density. Un-
like the equatorial rain forests which are luxuriant
and contain trees of various heights, the coniferous
forests are more uniform and grow straight and tall,
up to a height of about 100 feet. Where the poleward
limit of tree growth is approached the trees are widely
spaced, and give way to tundra vegetation (Fig. 152).

Fig. 152 Diagram to show changes in vegetation in journey Polewards from the Taiga Zone

TAIGA
_,, Dense coniferous forest

ad Sole eee tam inte @& sis il

mF : oy we

Y dk

1? #4 Trees more scattered and smaller,
BE te Te sea Hee see Bae dwarf willows, birches appear

TUNDRA

ay

Marsh plants and sedges

Oft

6
2
8

ONE OF PERMAFROST: :
MMU, YY 1
yy a

SS SS eee

Coniferous forests on the eastern Rockies, Alberta, Canada National Film Board of Canada

2. Almost all conifers are evergreen. The low
annual temperature with more than half the vent
below the growing-point temperature of 43°F,
means that evergreens are at an advantage. Growth
can begin as soon as growing-point is reached in
spring. The conifer has a two-year fructification
cycle. The seeds are pollinated in one year 4
dispersed in the following year. There is no annua
replacement of new leaves as in deciduous trees.
The same leaf remains on the tree for as long as five
years. Food is stored in the trunks, and the bark is
thick to protect the trunk from excessive cold.
3. Conifers are conical in shape. This is ee
adaption to survive the sub-Arctic climate. om
sloping branches prevent snow a cere Ww i
may snap the branches. It also offers little grip
S.
A ee are small, thick, leathery and needle-
Shaped. This is to check excessive Heel ean
The leaf surface is reduced to the minimum, :
transpiration can be quite rapid in the warm summe
due to intense continental heating.

| 5. There is little undergrowth. The podzolized soils

of the coniferous forests are poor. They are exces-
sively leached and very acidic. The evergreen leaves
provide little leaf-fall for humus formation, and the
rate of decomposition of the leathery ‘needles’ in a
region of such low temperature is slow. All these
factors are deterrents to the growth of much under-
growth. Absence of direct sunlight and the short
duration of summer are other contributary factors
to a sparse undergrowth, but where trees are widely
spaced near the tree-line, heath and tundra plants
cover the intervening ground.
Besides the continental interiors of the higher
latitudes, coniferous forests are also found in other
climatic regions wherever altitude reduces the tem-
perature. The conifers are, in fact, the dominant
trees of the mountainous districts in both the tem-
perate and tropical countries. But on very steep
slopes where soils are immature or non-existent, even

the conifer cannot survive.

Economic Development

The coniferous forest regions - of the northern

hemisphere are comparatively little developed. In
173


--- PAGE 091 ---
Canada, eastern Europe and Asiatic Russia, large
tracts of coniferous forests are still untouched. Only
in the more accessible areas are the forests cleared
for lumbering. The various species of pine, fir,
larch and spruce are felled and transported to the
Saw-mills for the extraction of temperate soft-woods.
There is little agriculture, as few crops can survive in
the sub-Arctic climate of these northerly lands. The
long, cold winter, the frozen soils and the low mean
annual temperature throughout the year exclude all
but the hardiest crops. Only in the more sheltered
valleys and the lands bordering the steppes are some
cereals (barley, oats, rye) and root crops (potatoes)
raised for local needs. Many of the Samoyeds and
Yakuts of Siberia, and some Canadians are engaged
in hunting, trapping and fishing. We shall deal
with two of the major activities in greater detail.

1. Trapping. Many fur-bearing animals inhabit
the northerly lands of Canada and Eurasia. Wherever
the cold is keenest, the quality and thickness of the
fur also increases. Consequently, the most severe

Winters produce the finest furs which fetch the

highest prices. In Canada trappers and hunters.

armed with modern automatic rifles, reside in log

cabins in the midst of the coniferous forests to track

: down these animals. Their lives are hard and
_ Precarious at times, but the rewards are great if the

‘harvests’ are good. Muskrat, ermine, mink, and
silver fox are the most important fur-bearing animals
sought after in Canada. The Hudson Bay Company
has many stations scattered in the northern regions
to trade in furs with the Canadian trappers and
hunters. To ensure a more regular supply of furs
many fur farms have been established in Canada.
Animals such as the silver fox and ermine are kept
in captivity, and skinned when the furs reach a
marketable stage. They fetch high prices in sophis-
ticated cities like New York, London, Paris, Rome
and Zurich, where the pelts are processed as attrac-
tive fur coats and women’s handbags. In Siberia

_ other fur-bearing animals are trapped. These are

uirrels, otters, bears, sables, lynxes, martens, and
A in Canada, fur-farming has now replaced
aga many parts of Siberia as

This is probably the most important
the Siberian type of climate. The
rous forests provide the
industry. The trees are

constructional woods.

(b) Paper and pulp industry. Timber js pulped
by both chemical and mechanical means to make
wood pulp the raw material for paper-makino and
newsprint. The development of the printing industry
has made paper and pulp indispensable. Canada
and U.S.A. are leading producers of the world’s
supplies of newsprint and wood pulp respectively,

ay * yy
9
4g

, 4
x a
a!

_

a, }
; ves :
- oa
‘ *

3 *

#*s
.
me

A lumberjack uses a power-saw to cut up a fallen tree,
Quebec, Canada National Film Board of Canada

(c) As a fuel, Less than a quarter of the world’s
softwood is burnt as fuel, because its industrial
uses are far more significant. In contrast, almost
three-quarters of the world’s hardwoods are burnt
as fuel, particularly tropical hardwoods where the
trees occur in mixed stands.

(d) As an industrial raw material. Timber has
a wide range of uses. In Sweden, matches form
a major export item. From other temperate coun-
tries, timber is used for making furniture, wood-
carvings, toys, crates and packing cases, From the
by-products of the timber, many chemically processed
articles are derived such as rayon turpentine, var-
nishes, paints, dyes, liquid resins, wood-alcohols, dis-
infectants and cosmetics.

rans RARE

tee a ae > ~ a

Logs are poled into a factory from the Ottawa river, Quebec, Canada Wational Film Board of Canada

of the coniferous forests
is characterized by the following features.

1. The conifers are limited in species. Pine, spruce
and fir are the most important in the northern forests,
while larch is more predominant in the warmer south.
They occur in homogeneous groups and not mixed as
in the tropical forests. This not only saves time
and costs, but also enchances the commercial value
of the felled timber.

2. In these northerly latitudes, agriculture is almost
impossible and lumbering replaces farming in the
continental interiors. Even where crops are culti-
vated, farmers are idle in the winter months and can
supplement their income by doing part-time lumber-
ing in the forests, as they do in most parts of Europe.
3. Lumbering is normally carried out in the winter
when the sap ceases to flow. This makes felling
much simpler. The snow-covered ground also makes
logging and haulage a relatively easy job. The
logs are dragged to the rivers and float to the saw-
mills downstream when the rivers thaw in spring.
This has greatly assisted the development of the
lumbering industry in eastern Canada and Sweden.
Unfortunately, over the greater part of Siberia,
all the rivers drain polewards into the Arctic Ocean
which is frozen for three-quarters of the year, and
there are few saw-mills there. With the use of
the Northern Sea Route, which links Murmansk and
Vladivostok via the Arctic Ocean, development is
increasing. Cheap hydro-electricity for driving the
saw-mills is harnessed in the mountainous uplands
of North America and Europe and has greatly assisted

the lumbering industry.

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

1. Compare and contrast deciduous forests and
coniferous forests in respect of the following.

(a) distribution

(b) vegetational characteristics

(c) climatic influence

(d) economic development
2. Distinguish between hardwoods and soft-
woods. What industrial uses are made of them?
Account for their large scale production for
export in any one country.

3. Give a reasoned account of any three of the
following.

(a) The annual temperature
Moscow is 54°F.

(b) The annual precipitation of Leningrad
is not more than 19 inches.

(c) The lower courses of the Siberian
rivers are frozen for as long as seven
months.

(d) One of the coldest spots on the globe is
Verkhoyansk with a record lowest
temperature of-90°F.

range of

4. What is meant by

(a) the taiga

(b) the veld

(c) the selvas
Account for the distribution and characteristics of any
two of them.
5, Describe the role played by forest products in the
economy of either Canada or Sweden,


--- PAGE 092 ---
Chapter 24 The Cool Temperate Eastern Margin (Laurentian)

80°F American region is its it recy
v0 (about 3 to 4 inches monthly) with a late summer
maximum. New York in Fig. 154(a) has an annual

precipitation of 41 inches with the wettest months

Ba ORE BE

Distribution

The Cool Temperate Eastern Margin (Laurentian)
Climate is an intermediate type of climate between
the British and the Siberian type of climate. It has
features of both the maritime and the continental
climates. It is apparent from Fig. 153 that the
Laurentian type of climate is found only in two
regions. One is north-eastern North America, in-

aridity rather than continentality. Its annual preci-
pitation is not more than 10 inches, so that it is g
rain-shadow desert. Elsewhere in the Southern
hemisphere, the climate is so equable and the oceanic
influence is so profound that neither the continental
nor the eastern margin type of climate exists.

ae

o- © © & wo inches

in July and August (4.2 inches each). No month is
really dry, and the driest month, November, has 2.5
inches of rain. This uniformity of precipitation
is largely due to the Atlantic influence and that of
the Great Lakes. The warm Gulf Stream imereases
the moisture content of easterly winds from the open
Atlantic. The prevailing Westerlies which penetrate
across the Rockies carry depressions over the Great

cluding eastern Canada, north-east U.S.A., (ie. Climate Lakes to the New Enelant sises 95 sues iia
Maritime Provinces and the New England states), The Laurentian type of climate has cold, dry prombts wet conditions especially in winter. white
and Newfoundland. This may be referred to as the _— winters and warm. wet summers. Winter temper- ee gees ae are vital for the agricultural anthdtec of. north-
North American region. The other region is the atures may be well blow freezing-point and Ren a eo e MeletS Oe Deere 296 ; ne Sages
tern coastlands of Asia. includi dircee = & Snow Temp S131 39 49 60 69 74 72 67 56 44 34 43°F eastern North America. The meeting of the warm
eastern coastlands 0 Asia, including eastern Siberia, falls to quite a depth. Summers are aS Warm as the Fc. SS SARS SSSSE te et Caen Gulf Stream and the cold Labrador Current on
North China, Manchuria, Korea and northern Japan. _ tropics (70° — 80°F) and if it were not for the cooling é . coastal waters off Newfoundland produces dense
It may be referred to as the Asiatic region. effects of the off-shore cold currents f; Le Place: New York, U.S.A (41°N., 74°W.) coastal waters off Newfoundland pr es de
: In the southern hemisphere, this climatic type is th ‘s ee GN aie SSE Altitude: 314 feet mist and fog and gives rise to much precipitation.
sant hors o a 7 oe» Cimatic type is the summer might be even hotter. Though rain Annual precipitation: 41 inches St. John’s, its capital has as much as 54 inches of
ee ause a a small section of the southern _ falls throughout the year, there is a distinct summer Annual temperature range: 43°F. (74° - 31°F) annual precipitation. It is said that Newfoundland
7 ° os A : s < : 3
2a bs vais ae of the latitude of 40°S. maximum from the easterly winds from the oceans. Fig. 154 (a) Laurentian type of Climate in North experiences more drizzles than any other part of
nly possible location is in eastern Patagonia, Of the annual precipitation of 30 to 60 inches. two- America the world.

south of Bahia Blanca (lat. 39°S.) to Tierra del FE uego
(lat. 54°S.). But the climatic barrier of the southern
Andes is so complete, that the Westerlies hardly

thirds come in the summer. Winter is dry and cold,
because the winds are dry Westerlies that blow out
from the continental interiors. We shall now examine

In summer the Westerlies bring less depressions
and extend their continental influence to the coast.
Temperatures are normally high in summer for the
latitude. New York has a mean July temperature of

ever reach Patagonia. The region is subjected to in closer detail the variations of the Laurentian type

74°F. and sometimes even as high as 90°F. Once, on
7 August 1918, the absolute maximum of 104°F.
was reached. Such high temperatures in a cool
temperate maritime region, where the relative
humidity is high, can be very trying. Prolonged heat
waves cause discomfort and frustration in crowded
cities. In winter, the temperature drops and snow
falls. New York has two months below freezing-
point, and an annual temperature range of 43°F.
Away from the maritime infiuence, the cold increases.
The mean January temperatures for Quebec, Ottawa
and Montreal are 10°F, 12°F. and 14°F. respectively.
The temperature ranges widen accordingly.

The Asiatic region. In contrast, the rainfall distri-
bution of the Asiatic region is far less uniform.

pe md web eh

face Fenne Aoee Ching (40°N,, 116%) Winters are cold and very dry while summers are
even Annual precipitation: 25 inches very warm and exceptionally wet. Peking, a typical
See cies Annual temperature range: 55°F. (79° — 24°F) station of the Laurentian Climate in northern China

will bring out these facts very clearly. It has seven
dry months from October to April with a total

Pa keene rainfall of less than 2.1 inches which is only one-
of climate between the North American region and __ twelfth of the annual total of 25 inches. The re-

Fig. 154 (b) Laurentian type of climate in Asia

the Asiatic region. Sees ss maining five months receive more than an inch a

characteristic of the in fact, similar to that of the tropical



--- PAGE 093 ---
monsoon type in India, where the whole year’s
rainfall is concentrated in the three summer months.
The mountainous interior of China has such pro-
nounced continental effects that the intense heating
in summer creates a region of extreme low pressure,
and moisture-laden winds from the Pacific Ocean
and the Sea of Japan blow in as the South-East
Monsoon. The Laurentian type of climate here
is often described as the Cool Temperate Monsoon
Climate. It has a very long, cold winter, and a
big annual range of temperature. The July mean for
Peking is 79°F. while that of January is only 24°F.
The temperature range is therefore more than 55°F.
The dry, cold wind that blows out from the heart
of Asia in winter carries fine, yellowish dust and
deposits it as a thick mantle of loess in Shansi.
Shensi and other neighbouring provinces at the bend
of the Hwang Ho. Much of the winter precipitation
in northern China, Korea and Hokkaido. Japan, is
in the form of snow. In the mountainous districts.
the snow piles to a depth of 5 to 10 feet,
The climate of Japan is modified by its insularity.
and also by the meeting of warm and cold ocean
currents. It receives adequate rainfall from both
the South-East Monsoon in summer and the North-
West Monsoon in winter. The latter is the dry, cold
wind from mainland Asia, but after crossing the Sea
of Japan it has gathered sufficient moisture to give
heavy relief rain or snow on the western coasts of
Japan. The rainfall is more evenly distributed, as
in Tokyo, with two maxima, one in June, the Plum
Rain (6.5 inches), and the other in September,
the Typhoon Rain (9 inches). On the windward
Slopes of the Japanese Alps on the west, some
Stations, e.g. Kanazawa, have more than 102 inches
of rain, much of it falling as snow. The maritime
influence also effectively moderates the temperature
_ range. Tokyo has a range of 40°F. (79°F, in August
and 39°F, in January) with none of the months
elow freezing-point. The warm Kuroshio has play-
portant part in making the climate of Japan
. In meeting the cold Oyashio from the
roduces fog and mist, making north

| Newfoundland’. Fishing replaces
1 Main Occupation in many of the

rape seeds, tung oil and mulberry. In the.

speaking, the forest tend to be coniferous north of
the 50°N. parallel of latitude. The increase in the
length and severity of the winter excludes forests
that are not adaptable to cold conditions. Ip the
Asiatic region (eastern Siberia and Korea), the
coniferous forests are, in fact, a continuation of the
great coniferous belt of the taiga. Lumbering has
always been a major occupation of this sparsely
populated part of eastern Asia and timber is a leading
export item. Much of the original coniferous forests
of fir, spruce and larch have been cleared as a result
of lumbering rather than agriculture. Eastern
Canada, along the banks of the St. Lawrence River
is the heart of the Canadian timber and wood pulp
industry.

South of latitude 50°N., the coniferous forests
give way to deciduous forests. Oak, beech. maple
and birch are the principal trees. Like their counter-
parts on the western margins, the deciduous forests
are fairly open. A long growing season of over six
months and an adequate Supply of moisture from
maritime sources encourage rapid growth of ferns
and other temperate undergrowth. The occurrence
of trees in almost pure stands, and the predominance
of only a handful of species greatly enhance the
commercial value of these forests. As a result. they
have been extensively felled for the extraction of
temperate hardwood. In many parts of Manchuria,
Korea and Japan, the forests have made way for the
plough. Both food and cash crops are raised. In
Canada, due to the greater reserves of coniferous
softwoods and their overriding importance in indus-
trial uses, the annual production of deciduous
hardwood is much less significant.

Economic Development

Lumbering and its associated timber, paper and pulp
industries are the most important economic under-
taking. (Details of lumbering have already been dealt
with in Chapter 22).

Agriculture is less important in view of the severity
of the winter and its long duration, Fortunately
the maritime influence and the heavy rainfall enable
some hardy crops to be raised for local needs, Pota-
toes thrive over large areas of the podzolized soils,
while hardy cereals like oats and barley can be sown
and successfully harvested before the onset of the
cold winter. A number of other interesting crops
are produced in the Asiatic region such as soya beans

(northern China, Manchuria and Korea are amongst —

the world’s leading producers), groundnuts, sesame,
North

ae ep nce ene nine

ree

American region, arable farming is not carried out
on a sizable scale, except in the more favoured loca-
lities. Farmers are engaged in dairy farming, hay
cultivation and, in mild maritime areas, fruit growing.
The fertile Annapolis valley in Nova Scotia is the
world’s most renowned region for apples. Fishing
is, however, the most outstanding economic activity

of the Laurentian climatic regions.

Fishing e
Fishing off Newfoundland, the Maritime Provinces

and New England

This is Be of the world’s largest fishing grounds
particularly on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland
(Fig. 155). The reasons for its importance are
geographical. Fish feed on minute marine organ-
isms, collectively called plankton, which is present
in abundance only in shallow waters adjacent to
m where sunlight can penetrate through.

Fig. 155 Fishing:
the North American
region

Continental Shelves

Fishing Ports

east of Newfoundland, and off the coasts of the
Maritime Provinces and New England contain a
rich collection of microscopic plankton. Fish of all
types and sizes feed and breed here and support a
thriving fishing industry not only in Canada and
U.S.A., but also in countries like Norway, France,
Britain, Portugal, Denmark, Russia and Japan, who
send fishing fleets to the Grand Banks. ;
As less than | per cent of Newfoundland is culti-
vated, fishing provides employment for almost the
entire population. It is not only the chief source of
wealth to Newfoundland, but also a major export
item of all the Maritime Provinces. Both pelagic
fish which live near the surface and demersal fish
which live near the bottom of shallow seas are caught.
The chief fish caught is cod which is consumed fresh
or dried, salted, smoked, canned or packed in ice
for export to mainland America, Central and South
America and southern Europe. Cod liver oil is
exported too. Other fishes caught are haddock,
halibut, hake, herring, plaice, and mackerel, Various



--- PAGE 094 ---
kinds of fishing craft and techniques are employed
to obtain maximum harvests from the sea. Modern
trawlers, dragging large conical-shaped nets, and
drifters, carrying curtain-like rectangular nets, ope-
rate extensively off the Atlantic coasts. They are
_ equipped with radio and radar devices to navigate
[ through the dense fog, avoid collision with icebergs
_ and also maintain contact with their headquarters
on land. Off-shore fishermen also use traps, lines
and nets to catch crabs, lobsters and shrimps for
: home consumption and increasingly for export.
Further inland, in lakes and rivers, such as the
_ St. Lawrence and the Great Lakes, freshwater fish,
_&g. salmon, trout, eels and sturgeons are caught.
_ In Newfoundland and along the Atlantic coasts
are many fishing ports. St. John’s, chief port of
Newfoundland with a population of nearing 100,000,
is the headquarters of the Grand Banks fishing
3 industries. It also had interests in sealing and
whaling but these have declined. In the fishing ports
of ‘Halifax and Yarmouth in Nova Scotia and
in the New England ports are processing plants that
cut, clean or preserve fish for disposal
‘Te trains or trucks to all parts of
are bases for large fleets of
trawler may well cost anything
ave men stay on board

x
‘

A fishing settlement in Newfoundland. Much of the fish is dried for export National Film Board of Canada

specialized and very efficient. In fact over-fishing
is a growing problem. The United States govern-
ment and international fishing bodies are now con-
templating strict measures in fish conservation if
this major source of protein food is to be sustained
for regular supply in the years to come,

Fishing off Japan. In the north-west Pacific,
surrounding the islands of Japan, is another major
fishing area of the world. Nowhere else in the
world are there so many people engaged in fishing as in
this part of the north-west Pacific. The mountainous
nature of Japan and parts of mainland eastern Asia
have driven many to seek a livelihood from the sea.
The scarcity of meat (there is little pasture in Japan
for livestock farming of any kind) and religious
reasons have popularized fish as the principal item of
diet and the chief protein food of the Japanese
and the Chinese as well. Large quantities of fish and
fish products are either canned or preserved for
export to neighbouring countries. The Japanese
also make use of fish wastes, fish meal and seaweeds
as fertilizers in their farms. Japan is one of the few
countries that has taken to seaweed cultivation.
Coastal farms that are submerged in water grow
weeds for sale as fertilizers, chemical ingredient and
even as food.

Another interesting aspect of Japanese fishing
is pearl culture. The divers of southern Japan dive

down into the coastal waters and bring to the surface

shell-fish called pearl oysters and extract the highly
prized pearls for sale as ornaments. The lining of the
oyster shells, called mother-of-pearl, is used for the
manufacture of pearl buttons, and other decorative
articles. As natural pearls in oysters are difficult
to obtain in large numbers, the Japanese have begun
to breed the young oysters. By injecting tiny ‘seeds’
into them, the oysters are made to secrete the pearl
material, which accumulates to form ‘cultured pearls.
These are collected and exported.

The Japanese interest in fishing is not confined to
their own territorial waters, they venture far and wide
into the Arctic, Antarctic and the Atlantic waters.
Large whaling fleets complete with processing plants
and experienced crews stay out in the open seas and
return only occasionally for refuelling or replen-
ishment of fresh provisions. As a nation, Japan
accounts for a sixth of the world’s total annual fish
caught. She is the world’s greatest fishing nation
today. Her active participation in international
fishing enterprises and her advanced fishing techni-
ques speak well of her relentless drive to make good
from the seas what she lacks on land.

Let us find out why this is possible.

1. Japan is not well endowed with natural resources,
for as much as 80 per cent of her land is classed
‘non-agricultural’. She has to take to the sea if she
wants to survive. This has compelled the people to
develop the seas, and fishing has for centuries been
the traditional occupation of many coastal Japanese.
2. The continental shelves around the islands of
Japan are rich in plankton, due to the meeting of the
warm Kuroshio and the cold Oyashio currents and
provide excellent breeding grounds for all kinds of
fish including herring, cod, mackerel, bonito, salmon,
sardine and tuna, as well as crabs and lobsters.

3. The indented coastline of Japan, provides shel-
tered fishing ports, calm waters and safe landing

A cultured pearl farm in Japan

and the Siberian type of climate in northern

places, ideal for the fishing industry. In Hokkaido,
where the Laurentian type of climate is too cold for
active agriculture, fishing takes first place. Hakodate
and Kushiro are large fishing ports, complete with
refrigeration facilities

4. Lack of lowlands and pastures means that only a
few animals can be kept to supply meat and other
protein food. Fish, in all its varied forms, fresh,
canned, dried, frozen, and in the form of fish pastes,
fish sauce and spiced condiments takes the place of
meat as Japan’s primary source of protein food
There is a great demand for it locally, and for export
to other east Asiatic neighbours which lack the tech-
niques of large scale commercial fishing.

5. The Japanese fishermen began with small fishing
boats, using nets, traps and lines. With the progress
made in industries, fishing has also become more
scientific, aiming at heavy hauls, high returns and
economy of time, effort and money. Though three-
quarters of the fishermen practise off-shore pelagic
fishing either full-time or part-time, in small boats,
most of the commercial deep-sea demersal fishing
is now highly mechanized. Powered trawlers and
modern refrigeration plants backed by sound finan-
cial organizations have greatly increased the annual
fish yield. Japan is now not only a major producer
and exporter of fish and marine products, but also a
centre for marine and fishing research.

QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES

1. (a) Locate on a world map the extent of
the Cool Temperate Eastern Margin (Lauren-
tian) Climate.

(b) Explain why this type of climate is
confined to the northern hemisphere

(c) Describe its climate.

2. Compare and contrast the climate of any
two of the following pairs of areas.

(a) Laurentian Climate in the North Ameri-
can region and the Asiatic region.

(b) Tropical monsoon Climate of India and
the Warm Temperate Eastern Margin (China
type) Climate in S. China.

(c) The Steppe type of climate in Eurasia



--- PAGE 095 ---
3. (a) Name the major fishing areas of the
world.

(b) What types of fishing can normally be
distinguished in such major fishing grounds?

(c) Name a few methods used to catch
the fish.

(d) For any one major fishing area you
have selected, explain the geographical factors
which have contributed to its importance.

4. Write brief notes on any three of the
following.

(a) The economy of the forests of the
Laurentian regions.

Stations July
temp.

81°F,

January
temp.
78°F.
12°F.
56°F.
30°F.

55°F.
91°F.
74°F

Annual

temp. range

3°F
43°F,
35°F.
44°F,

(b) Fishing in Japan.

(c) Soya bean cultivation in Manchuria.

(d) Fruit growing in the Maritime Provinces
of Canada.
5. The following statistics are a guide to four
different types of climate in the
hemisphere.

(a) Name the type of climate that each
of them represents.

(b) Locate a probable station for each.

(c) For any vo of them describe their
climatic characteristics.

northern

Annual
Rainfall
96” April and October
ate June, July, August
3” irregular
41” July, August, September

Month of max. rainfall

Chapter 25 The Arctic or Polar Climate

Distribution

The polar type of climate and vegetation is found
mainly north of the Arctic Circle in the northern
hemisphere. The ice-caps are confined to Greenland
and to the highlands of these high-latitude regions.
where the ground is permanently snow-covered,
The lowlands, with a few months ice-free, have tundra
vegetation. They include the coastal strip of Green-
land, the barren grounds of northern Canada and
Alaska and the Arctic seaboard of Eurasia. (Fig.
156). In the southern hemisphere, the virtually
uninhabited continent of Antarctica is the greatest
single stretch of ice-cap where the layers of permanent
ice are as thick as 10,000 feet.

Climate

Temperature. The polar climate is characterized
by a very low mean annual temperature and its
warmest month in June seldom rises to more than
50°F. In mid-winter (January) temperatures are as
low as —35°F. and much colder in the interior.
Normally not more than four months have tempe-
ratures above freezing-point! Winters are long and

Fig. 156 Ice Cap and Tundra

very severe; summers are cool and brief. Within
the Arctic and Antarctic Circles, there are weeks
of continuous darkness. At the North Pole, there

are SIX months without light in winter. Despite the
long duration of sunshine in summer, when the sun
does not set, temperatures remain low because the
sun is low in the sky and much of the warmth of its
faint rays is either reflected by the ground snow,
or used up in melting the ice. It has littl power
left to raise the air temperature. Water in the soil
is frozen to great depths and the summer heat can
only thaw the upper six inches of the soil. The ground
remains solidly frozen for all but four months,
inaccessible to plants. Frost occurs at any time and
blizzards, reaching a velocity of 130 miles an hour
are not infrequent. They can be very hazardous
for the polar inhabitants. In coastal districts, where
warmer water meets cold land thick fogs may develop.
They last for days, and in many instances it is not
possible to see for more than a few feet.

Precipitation. Precipitation is mainly in the form
of snow, falling in winter and being drifted about

183


--- PAGE 096 ---
rainfall in inches

YFMAMJSJASONOD

Fig. 157 Tundra type

Upemavik Pie AM
2 3 A 8 O ND Range/Totai
Temperature 4-2 -¢ 25 35 41 41 AS At ANF
ASAI SSE Pts 141113 5 vine

Fig. 157 Tundra Climate

Place: Upernavik, Greenland (72°N., 56°W.
Altitude: 65 feet
Total Annual precipitation: 9.1 inches
Annual temperature range: 49°F. (-8° -41°F)

during blizzards. Snowfall varies with locality; it
_ may fall either as ice crystals or large, amalgamated
_ snow flakes. As it takes 10-12 inches of snow to
_ make | inch of rain, precipitation in polar regions
can be expected to be light, not more than 12 inches
_ in a year. Convectional rainfall is generally absent
because of the low rate of evaporation and the lack
= of moisture in the cold polar air. There is normally

the live in compact igloo

Tundra vegetation
In such an adverse environment as the tundra.

pecs te few
plants survive. The greatest inhibiting factor is

the region’s deficiency in heat. With a gTowing
season of less than three months and the warmest
month not exceeding 50°F. (the tree-surviva] line)
there are no trees in the tundra. Such an environ-
ment can support only the lowest form of vegetation
mosses, lichens and sedges. Drainage in the tundra
is usually poor as the sub-soil is permanently frozen.
Ponds and marshes and waterlogged areas are found
in hollows.

In the more sheltered spots, stunted birches
dwarf willows and undersized alders Struggle for ‘
meagre existence. Climatic conditions along the
coastal lowlands are a little more favourable. Here
are found some hardy grasses and the reindeer moss
which provide the only pasturage for the herbivorous
animals like reindeer. In the brief summer, when
the snows melt and the days are warmer and longer.
berry-bearing bushes and Arctic flowers bloom,
Though short-lived, they brighten the monotonous
tundra landscape into ‘Arctic prairies. In the
summer, the tundra is full of activities, Birds migrate
north to prey on the numerous insects which emerge
when the snow thaws. Mammals like the wolves,

foxes, musk-ox, Arctic hare and lemmings also live
in tundra regions.

>

Human Activities

Human activities of the tundra are largely con-
fined to the coast. Where plateaux and mountains
increase the altitude, it is uninhabitable, for these are
permanently snow-covered. The few people who
live in the tundra live a semi-nomadic life and have
to adapt themselves to the harsh environment.

In Greenland, northern Canada and Alaska
live the Eskimos, numbering less than 28,000 today.
They used to live as hunters, fishers and food-
gatherers but in recent years more and more of them
are settling in permanent huts. The Polar Eskimos,

living around Thule in north-west Greenland still

lead an uncertain life, not very much different from

_ their forefathers. The seasonal changes in climate

ecessitate a nomadic way of life. During winter
| P s and in summer when
“ey Move out to hunt they pitch portable tents of
ins by the side of streams. Their food is derived
. ses and polar bears. Other

In the last fifty years through their contact with
the Europeans, the way of life of the Eskimos has
Coastal

complete with
modern facilities; speed-boats are replacing frail
kayaks. Deadly rifles instead of traditional harpoons
are used to track down animals and seals. Fur-
bearing animals are being reared on a commercial

undergone tremendous changes. villages

have permanent wooden houses

scale and fishing, too, is being commercialized. In
some more accessible parts of Canada and Alaska,
schools have been established and the Eskimo
children are being taught the skills which will allow
them to fit into the modern way of life.

In the Eurasian tundra are other nomadic tribes
such as the Lapps of northern Finland and Scandina-
via, the Samoyeds of Siberia (from the Ural Moun-
tains and the Yenisey basin), the Yakuts from the
Lena basin, and the Koryaks and Chuckchi of
north-eastern Asia. They wander with their herds
of reindeer across the Eurasian tundra where there
are pastures. Many of them have taken to a more
settled life. In the U.S.S.R. large farms have been
established for raising reindeer and for breeding
fur-bearing animals.

The Importance and Recent Development
of the Arctic Region

The Arctic region, once regarded as completely
useless, is now of some economic importance. Apart
from the efforts of the various governments in assist-
ing the advancement of the Arctic inhabitants the
Eskimos, Lapps, Samoyeds etc., new settlements
have sprung up because of the discovery of minerals.

The borderlands between the Taiga and the tundra Elizabeth Meyer

Gold is mined in Alaska, nickel near Petsamo.
U.S.S.R., petroleum in the Kenai Peninsula,
and copper at the Rankin Inlet, Canada. Coal has
been mined in Spitsbergen for a long time and also
in Alaska. With the declining reserves of iron ore
around Lake Superior, the Great Lakes industrial

Alaska:

concerns are using more and more iron from large
iron ore deposits in Labrador. New railway "nes
have been constructed to bring the ores to the St.
Lawrence River for subsequent shipment to the
major industrial districts. Rich deposits of iron
ores at Kiruna and Gallivare in Sweden have made
it possible for Sweden to enjoy a prosperous export
trade in iron and steel and other metallurgical
products.

With the establishment of ports on the Arctic
seaboard of Eurasia, it is now possible to ship timber
and fur from Siberia. Though the ports, such as
Igarka at the mouth of the Yenisey, are not ice-
free, modern ice-breakers keep the passage open
most of the time. On the Arctic lowlands where the
growing season is lengthened by warm currents or
higher temperatures, experiments have been carried
out to devise varieties of hardy cereals for local
needs. It may not be long before the tundra is
brought under greater agricultural, especially past-
oral, use. The healthy air and its preservative
qualities (it is practically germ-free) are factors worth
consideration for future colonization. Scientists,
meteorologists and explorers have lived in the Arctic
and Antarctica, making studies of their geology,
weather conditions, plant and animal life, that will
be of great significance in years to come.



--- PAGE 097 ---
- a | g-mgt a OO a a a ee ee
‘QUESTIONS AND EXERCISES any one of them explain how the features .
Spt ae : » are For each of the two you have chose pcorihe the chief fa- . b vegetatian anA
related to the climate of the area. 5 chosen, describe the chief features of the vegetation and

: ec show how they are related to
the geographical characteristics of the region. (1962)

oe 1 ‘Draw Separate sketch maps to show the

; ‘t : uss E 4, With the aid of sketch maps locate ex: . 0 of the fi ing:
_ St€a covered by each of the following: 2. Statistics of rainfall and temperature for (a) An regained ane eee of two of the following:
a tundra in Eurasia three towns are given below. For any two of (b) A deciduous temperate forest. |
25) GD). ) 2s nersemggin a ae (c) A region of tundra.
Sia: desert at Australia f son of maximum rainfa]] For each one you choose, describe the chief fez e ion é how é ated
+ equatori 6 in Africa ee tie tyre of climate amen soa scri ¢ chief features of the vegetation and show how these are related to the climate
_ For any three of them describe their charac- (c) Suggest a possible location of the town

siicanee es of natural vegetation and for (d) Describe their climatic rhythm. 5. (a) Drawa sketch map of one major land area, which extends in latitude from the equator to at least 35° North

Altitude: 207 feet RangeyTot or 35° South. On the sketch map, mark distinctively and name three major areas of different natural vegetation.
Mes F M A M J J A S 0 ‘i 5 (b) Describe the important features of the natural vegetation in the areas marked on the sketch map. (1960)
eee Ot 71:60 760: 76—C70 S62 Sii53 4830 6. Mean Monthly Rainfall in Inches
eee ae: ae Pere tO. OF 10 25 50 44 OM 32,7 Town Lat. Long. J F i VA J j 4 s oO N D te
Geis 3. = ig ce a Darwin 12°S. 131°E. 15.2 12.3 10.0 38 06 OF 00 02 05.205 7 eee
ewe Soe = 5 41 41 34 34 25 14 10 49 Adelaide 35°S. 138°E. 0.8 .07 10° 18 37 @30eoeeeneee BY see 10 21.1
<OD:: 0.7 Cree Ot 09 07 1,1 #11 «1.1 0.5 9,1 Alice 23°S, 133°E. 17°13 11 04° 06 05 903% O38 Stee
Springs
Poe eoe> 55 555 CCC 1.0 For each town:
feo 45.44. 92 26 = 4:0) 3:6, 42.3 (a) Describe briefly the main features of its rainfall.
ve of lants , : ‘ (b) Suggest reasons for the amount and distribution of the rainfall. (1967)
5s: pia} 4. Explain briefly any four of the following 7. Records of temperature and rainfall for three towns are given below. For each:
terms connected with the Arctic climate and the (a) write a description of the temperature and rainfall.
tundra vegetation: (b) name the type of climate, give reasons for your answer.
blizzards, permafrost, midnight sun, ice- (c) locate one area in the world where this type of climate occurs. (1963)
cap, snow-blindness, kayaks, international
deep-freeze. A. (Altitude 9,350 ft.) |
5. Make a comparative study of the Polar J F M A M J J A S is)

Eskimos of Greenland and the Orang Asli

>
(ez Senois) under the following headin _ Temp.(R) 55 5S SS 55 SSR SS
(a) How they obtain their food. Rainfall(in) 32 39 48 70 46 15 Ut 22 26 30 ag oae
(b) How they shelter themselves, ;
eg . (Altitude 30 ft.)
(©) What significant changes have taken ia | eee
place in their ace t a their _ Temp. (°F) Mh Ae SB ee = a. aye
way of life. Rainfall(in) 55 52. 45 31, 32 982. 38 946 Ai 7g ee

C. (Altitude 30 ft.) 2
Temp. (°F.) 78 719 81 84 BRP OO ae
Rainfall (in.) 1.5 06. 06 O08 00 ...00. . 00.08 0.0 =

8. The following are brief descriptions of three different types of climate: a
i. A very large temperature range, with light summer rainfall. e

ii, Mild winters, hot summers, with heavy summer ri nfall.



--- PAGE 098 ---
_ Abrasion, 48, 51, 56, 57, 58, 74

2 Bushes, 144
_ Acid, 12-13 Bushmen, 137-138
_ Adobe, 60 Bush Veld, 148

e 125, 178, tropical-, 125 Buttes, 57

Cacti, 136
cone (or fan), 60 Calcite, 62, 80
Calcium carbonate, 62, 80
), 14 Calderas, 22, 23, 68

Caledonian (orogenic), 14
Caliche (cemented gravels), 139
Cane sugar, 125, 161

: 8:-horn (or Canyons (or gorges), 57
peak), 48 Caribou, 184
als: camouflaged, 130; Cash crops, see under Crops
iv 130; domesticated, Cataracts, 41
_ 132, 159; fur-bearing, 174; Catchment areas, 38
rbivorous, 130; pedigree, 168 Cattle: beef-, 167; dairy-, 166:
15 ae 21 aaa 133; breeding of, 133,

Caves, 63, 74

AEN ag (or solvent action) of water,
_ Chili, 143

Chinook Wind, see under Winds
‘Chocolate-making, 167 4

Climatic zones, 113

Climatology, 93

Clints, 63

Clouds: 100-104, Classification of
100-102; Cirrus-, 98; Funnel- |].
“Ground cloud”, 104; Cumulus
108; Stratus, 108 :

Cloud-cover, 100;—formation.
106;-type, 100

Cloudiness, 70, 116

Coastal landforms, 72-78

Coastal plain, see under Plains

Cocoa, 119

Coffee, 126

Compressed (air), 112

Compressional forces, 17

Condensation, 100, 108

Conduction, 105

Conduit, 22

Cones: ash and cinder, 22: composite-,
22; parasitic—, 22: steepsided—, 22

Confluence, 41

Conglomerate, 13

Conifers, 165

Continental: blocks, 17;—climate,
148:-interiors, 55:—islands,
79;-shelf, 85, 179, 181:-slope, 85

Continentality, 106-107, 126, 139, 162

Convergence 109

Convection, 105

Copper, 139

Coombes, 65

Coral: animals, 80;—islands, 80;—reefs,
80-83

Coriolis Force, 109, 110

Cork oaks, 145

Corn (or maize), 159

Corrasion, 39, 72; lateral-, 41, 42;
vertical-, 40

Corridors, 57

Corrie, 48

Corrosion, 39

Cotton, 126, 160

_ Coves (or bays), see under Inlets
Crater, 23, 68

Crater (or caldera) lakes, see under

dune), 59; (of a wave).

<

Cyclonic activity, 112, 157, 163
Cypresses, 144

Dairy products, 166

Dairying, 161

Damas, 45

Darkness, 5

Date palms, 136, 139

Day, 108; daylight, 5

Deciduous trees, see under Trees,
Forests

Deflation, 19, 56;-hollows, 56, 58-59

Deforestation, 158

Degree of veriability, 93

Deltas: 39, 43, 45; arcuate, 44; bird’s
foot-44; cuspate—44; estuarine—, 44

Deltaic fans, 77

Deltaic plains, see under Plains

Denudation, 14, 15

Deposits: pelagic, 86; terrigenous-—, 86

Deposition, 85

Depositional (features), 48, 43

Depressed (structurally), 18

Depressions, 113, 136, 143, 150, 156

Deserts: 55; desert interiors, 135

Dow-point, 98

Diamonds, 139

Differential heating, 111

Diseases, 120

Disease control, 133

Distributaries, 43

Diurnal (rhythm), 111

Divergence, 109

Divide (or watershed), 38

Doldrums, 109

Doline, 63

Dolomite, 62

Double rainfall peaks, 117

Down-cutting, 44

Drainage: dendritic, 38; internal-, 61;
trellised—, 38

Dredging, 45

Dreikanter, 58

Drift (longshore),75

Drift plain, see under Plains

Drifters, 180

Drought, 131, 132, 135, 150

Drumilin, 52, 68 4

“Dry oa see under Alluvial cone

or

ae 59; marine-, 76; dune belts, 76

Dust storms, see under Simoons

Dykes, 13, 20

Earth, rotation of, 88:-tremors, 6;

Epicentres, 26

Epiphytic (plants), 118
Equator, 6, 7, 8

Equinoxes, 6, 117

Erg (desert), 59, 60

Erosion: 18, 28, 51; marine-, 82
Erosional (features), 48

Eskers, 52, 53

Estuaries, 77

Eucalyptus trees, 158, 165
Evaporation, 106, 171
Evergreen trees, see under Trees
Exfoliation 56

Fallowing, 127

Farms: fur, 174; collective-, 152:
state—, 152

Farming: arable, 166; pastoral-,
153-154, 166; subsistence—, 127,
159; terrace—, 189: truck—, 166

Faults, 16, 26

Ferrel’s law of deflection, 110

Festoons (island ares), 79

Firn 47, 48

Firs, 144

Fish, demersal, 179; freshwater—. 180:
pelagic-, 179;—breeding, 71;
conservation, 180

Fishing: 165, 179-181; over-fishing,
180; commercial deep-sea—, 181;
marine and fishing research, 181;
freshwater fishing, 45, 70-71;
—grounds, 85

Fissures, 26

Flash floods, 60

Flax, 161 :

Flood plains, see under Plains

Fog, 104, 108, 177, 183;—hill, 104; land
—, 104; force ng sea—, 104;
smoky fog (sm

Fohn Wind, see under Winds

Fold, recumbent, 15

Folding, 14-15

Forest: 124; cool temperate—,
178:coniferous-, 170, 172-173;
eucalyptus-, 144; tropical rain-, 118

Glacial control theory, 82

Glacial drifts, 53

Glacial till, 52

Glacial troughs, $0

Glaciation, 48, $2

Glaciers, 47; piedmont—,48

Gloups, 74-75

Gold, 139

Gorge, 39, 40, 44

Gour, see under Rocks—mushroom

Graduated cylinder, 95

Grapes: 146, 147

Grass, long prairie, 150; short steppe
type, 150; tall-, 129

Grasslands (temperate), 148

Gravel, 13, 53

Graben (or rift valley), 16

Graphite, 13

Gravity, 38

Great Lisbon Earthquake, 26

Greenwich Mean Time (G.M.T), see
under Time

Grikes, 63

Gnit, 13

Gullies, 60

Gypsum, 71

Haciendas, 146
Haffs, 68, 76
Hail, 108

Heat, 119, -waves, 177



--- PAGE 099 ---
Hygrogram, 96 Leveche, 143
Hygrometer, 98 Levees, 43
Lianas, 118

Ice, caps, 47, 183: ice-scouring 67; _ Light, diffused (or refracted), 6
47, 51; ice-sheets, 47,53 Lignite, 13

1 Limestone, 62-65, 80; gorge, 63:
Indented coastline, 181 ~pavement, 63
Indigo, 126 Limon, 60
Inlets, 73 Limonite, 209
_ Inselberg, 58 Lines of weakness, 15
- Insolation, 105-106, 136 Livestock, farming, 120; economy,
Insularity, 178
Intermont plateaux, see under Load (of a river), 39; load-coefficient,
- Plateaux 219; traction load, 39
International Date line, 10 Lobsters, 180
Intersection, 7 Local administration, 247
Ionosphere, 105 Loess, 53, 60, 178
Irrigation, 70, 132, 138, 159,-canals, Logging, 175
SAS 3: Longitude, 8-9
_ Iso Lopoliths, 20

Lowlands, 18, 189

Lubricating action (of water), 28
Lucerne, 15]

Lumbering, 174

Macchia, 144

Machines, 18

Magma, 20

Malaspina glacier, 48

Malle scrub, see under Scrub

Mangrove forests, 120

Manila hemp (abaca), 128

‘Mantle (or mesophere), 12

Maauis, 144

+ Maritime influence, 157
Market pine, 165-166

S,

Masai, 131-132
Mass movements (of earth), 38
anders, 39, 41, 44; entrenched

Morainic debris. 67
M ortlake, see under Lakes— Ox-bow
Mountains: residual, 17: of accumu-
lation, 17; of denudation. 17: of
elevation, 15; block (or horsts)
16-17; fold-, 14-15: volcanic. 17
Mud-flats, 77
Mushroom rocks (or £0ur), see under
Rocks

Nappe, 15

National parks, 131

Natural rubber, 119

Natural vegetation, see under
Vegetation

Nebulas, see under Galaxies

Negative movement, 44

Nehrungs, 76

Neve, 47, 48

Ngana (or sleeping sickness), 133

Nomadic (people), 151

Notch, 73

Oases (or swamps), 59, 139
Oats, 166, 178
Ocean: currents, 87-90, 107; deeps,
85-86; navigation, 247; routes, 236;
winds, 107
Oil, 139
Oktas, 100 ,;
Olive, oil, 146; -trees, 146
Orang Asli, see under Senois
Oranges, 144
Orogenies, 14
Outwash plains, see under Plains
Overfold, 15
Overthrust fold, 15
Ox-bow lakes, see under Lakes

“Pacific Ring of Fire”, 24, 26

Padi, 189; dry—, 125; wet—, 159
Palm trees, 118, 158

Pampas, 148

Pampero, 158

Para rubber, see under Natural rubber
Parana pine, 158

Parallel, 7

Parasitic (plants), 118

Pearl culture, 180; pearl oysters, 181
Peles ( oom ), 19, 61
Pediment (or pediplains), 19,
Perched blocks, 52

Pigs, 167

outwash-, 18, 53; till—, 18, 52:
undulating, 85; depositional-, 18;
erosional—, 19; structural—, 18:
of denudation, 19

Plane of the ecliptic, 5

Planet, 1, 2

Plankton, 85, 179

Plantations, 119, 126

Plateaux: 17-18, 134; intermont-, 17:
lava—, 17; shallow—, 85

Platform, wave-cut, 74:
wave-planed, 82

Playas, 61

Plucking, 48, 51

Plunge-pool, 41

Polje, 63, 68

Polyps, 80

Portable tents, 184

Positive movement, 44

Potatoes, 169, 178

Precipitation: 70, 106, 108, 116,
149-150, 164, 171, 183-184,
uniformity of, 177

Pressure, 95-96, 109; high-, 111, 113,
122: low—, 111, 112, 122, 123

Promontories (or capes), see under
Headlands

Pustaz, 148

Pyramidal peak, see under Angular
horn

Pyroclasts, 22

Quartzite, 13
Quebracho, 158

Radar sounding, 84

Radiation, 105, 129, 136

Rainfall: 94-95, 108-109, 128, 184,
concentrated heavy-, 123; cyclonic
(or frontal), 109; convectional, | 08,
117, 124, 136, 156; orographic -
(or relief), 108, 117, 124; plum rain,
178; typhoon rain, 178; blood
rains”, 59; regime, 150; scantry,
134

Rain shadow area, 109, 134, 164, 176

Rapids, 39,

Re lnmedon (of land), 190

Recumbent fold, see under Fold

Reefs: barrier-, 81, 82; coral-, 80-81,
83; aeiahe 81, 82
raction,

Re ehe abba, 169, 181, 191, 235

Reg (rons aoe 19, 56

Reindeer, 16), :

Ravercied head, see under Knick

nt ‘
in, see under Rainfall
hey 60: artific

Revolves, 4

Ria coast, 76

Rice, 125, 146, 158, 159

Ridges, 52, 57

Ridge and furrow landscape, 57

Rift valleys, see under Graben

River of ice, see under Glaciers

Rivers, 18, 120

River: capture, 39, 40; —cliffs, 39, 42:

rejuvenation, 44; -source, 40;
system, 38

Roaring Forties, see under Westerlies

Rock: basins, 50; -flour, 48; —
hummock, 51; —pedestals, 57; -
salts, 13, 68; —step, 51

Rocks: basaltic, 12; basic 13;
carbonaceous, 13; crystalline, 12;
extrusive, 13; granitic, 12; igneous,
20, 208; molten (magma), 12;
plutonic, 13, 20; sedimentary, 62,
209; stratified, 13; volcanic, 13

Roots: long, 130, 136

Rotates, 4

Routeways, 53

Rubber, see under Natural rubber

‘Run-off’, 38

Salinas (or salars), see under Playas

Salinity, 86, 88, 136

Salt (common), 71

Salt-marshes, 77

Sand: 13; sand dunes, 56;
sandstones, 13

Sand-blasting, see under Abrasion

Satellite, 1, 2, 4

Savanna (or thorny scrubland), see
under Vegetation

Schist, 13

Scrub, 144; ye aay 144

Seasons, 4, 5, 6, |

Secondary forests, see under Belukar

Sediment, 13, 44; sedimentation
(slow), 86

Seeds, 136

Seifs, 59, 60

Seismicity, 26

“Selvas”, 118

Semi-nomadic (people), 151

Senois, 118

Serie (stony desert), 56

Settlements, 69

Shade, 144

Shale (or mudstone), 13

Sheep-rearing, 167-168

Sherm es 21

Shield (or dome),

Shield volcanoes, see under Volcanoes

Shifting cultivation, | 18

Short trees, see under

Sills, 13, 20
Simooms, 139
Sirocco, 143
Slate, 13
Sleet, 108, 184
Slip-off slope, 42
Slope, 107
Smog, see under Fog
Snout, see under Moraines
Snow, 108, 143, 171, 183; snowfields,
47; snowline, 47
Sodium chloride, 87
Softwood, 172
Soil, 107, 166; soil-creep, 38
Solar system, 1, 2
Solid, 105
Solstice (summer and winter), 6, 117
Solution, 39
Sounds, 77
Southerly Burster, 158
Southern hemisphere, 6
Spectrum, 105
Spherical (shape), 2
Spine (or plug), 22
Spits, 75-76
Spring, 143, 150, 151, 164, 165
Spurs: interlocking, 39, 41, 50;
truncated, 50
Stack, 74
Stalactites, 63, 64
Stalagmites, 63, 64
Stars, 1, 4
Steepening, 48
Steppes, 148
Storms, 72
Stratosphere, 105
Strato-volcanoes, see wider Volcanoes
Streams: braided-, 42; consequent-,
38; insequent-, 38; exotic, 60
Stresses, 14, 56
Striation, 48, 51
Stumps, 74
Sub-tropical (zones), 80
Subsidence theory, 82
Subsistence (farming), see under

farmin
Summer, 5 108, 111, 122, 128, 149,
150, 156, 156, 164, 170, 177
Sun, 105, sun-dial, 99; sunlight, 80, 85,
118, 143; sunrise, 5; sunset, 3;
Senuaneans
nsion,
Swallow-holes, 63, 65
S

Synclines, 15
Synoptic charts, 93-94



--- PAGE 100 ---
Teak, 124, 127
Temp > 96-98, 106-107,
aCe eee 36, 183; annual
Tange 0} . 156: earth-, 96; grass
~, 97; low-, 123, 124; mean annual,
87, 135, 136, 149, 163; mean daily,

_ Of, 98, 136; range of, 87: shade
(air) -, 97; uniformity of-, 116; -
Inversion, 107

rs: wet-and-dry-bulb, 98:

and maximum, 97-98;

Trapping, 174
Trawlers, 180
Trees, 150, 151; deciduous—,129, 158,
165; evergreen 118; short—, 129:
umbrella-shaped-, 129
Trenches, 86
Tropic of Cancer, 6, 7, 111, 122, 141
Tropic of Capricorn, 6, 7, 122, 128, 157
Tropical raw materials, 191
Tropical (zones), 80
Troposphere, 105
Trough (of a wave), 72
Tsetse flies, 120, 133
as (tidal waves), 26
1

andes, 1 ae 183
Typhoons, 113, 156

Under-cutting, 57
Uranium, 139
Uvala, 63

Valley, U-shaped, 50
Vegetables, 146

"Vegetation (natural), 107, 113, 136,

144, 165; desert-, 136; equatorial-.
118; Savanna, 130-131; tropical
monsoon, 124; Meditterranean-,

3 144-145; Steppe-, 150-151

locity, 39

Wadis, 56, 60
Water, 105, 137; depth of 80: head of.
70; —supply, 70; —temperature. 80;
~vapour, 106; water-storing
devices, 129; waterways, 53
Waterfalls, 39, 41
Wattle trees, 158
Waves, 72
Weather, 38, 93-94, 105, 106: —charts,
83-84; forecast, 84
Weathering, 18, 56, 57
“Whale-back” hummocks, 52
Wheat, 136, 151, 152, 153. 166
Winds: Berg-, 98-99, 129, 158:
Chinook-, 107, 111-112, 150, 158;
Fohn-, 111; Harmattan, 129;
ocean-, 107; planetary-—, 87,
109-111; rain-bearing—, 141:
seasonal-, seasonal-, 122:Trade-,
55, 87-88, 110, 141-142: variable,
110; Westerlies, 110, 142, 150
Wind gap, 30, 35
Wind vane (or weather cock), 99
Windward slope, 108
Wine, 146
Winter, 5, 111, 122, 142, 144, 158, 164,
165, 170

Wood pulp, 174
Woodlands, 144
Woollen textiles industry, 168

Xerophytic (or drought-resistant),
136, 144

Yardangs, 57

Zebu (cattle), 131
Zeugen, 57

 aeneien ne

eemreernnecting

