--- PAGE 1 ---
SOCIAL SCIENCE
OUR PASTS – III
Textbook in History
for Class VIII
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 1 6/14/2022 2:36:56 PM

--- PAGE 2 ---
0864 – Our Pasts – III
ISBN 978-93-5292-113-3
Textbook in History for Class VIII
First Edition
March 2008 Chaitra 1929 ALL RIGHTS RESERvED
Reprinted  No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
January 2009, 2010, November 2010,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
January 2012, 2013, 2014, December 2014
 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be
January 2016, December 2016 and 2017 lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent,
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
Revised Edition
January 2019 Pausha 1940  The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is
incorrect and should be unacceptable.
Reprinted
October 2019, March 2021, October 2021,
November 2021
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
Second Revised Edition
DIvISION, NCERT
July 2022 Ashada 1944
NCERT Campus
Reprinted Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
PD 370T BS Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
© National Council of Educational Research
CWC Campus
and Training, 2008, 2019, 2022 Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
` 65.00
Publication Team
Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production : Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business : Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor (In charge) : Bijnan Sutar
Assistant Production : Deepak Jaiswal
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
Officer
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational Cover and Layout
Arrt Creations
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Cartography
Print Pack India, D-12, Sector B-3, Tronica Cartographic Designs Agency
City (Industrial Area) Loni, Ghaziabad -
201 102 (U.P.)
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 2 11/11/2022 4:49:29 PM

--- PAGE 3 ---
foreword
The National Curriculum Framework, 2005, recommends that children’s life
at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks
a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape
our system and causes a gap between the school, home and community.
The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt
to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning
and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas.
We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction
of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning
and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise
that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by
engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the
prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons
why other resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity
and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants
in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching
and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for
making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of
stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavor by giving
higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering,
discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
NCERT appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development
committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson
of the Advisory Committee for Textbook in Social Science, Professor
Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor Neeladri
Bhattacharya for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their
principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions
and organisations, which have generously permitted us to draw upon their
resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 3 6/14/2022 2:36:56 PM

--- PAGE 4 ---
Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development
under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G. P.
Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality
of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
30 November 2007 Research and Training
iv
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 4 6/14/2022 2:36:56 PM

--- PAGE 5 ---
R C
ationalisation of ontent
t
in the extbooks
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to
reduce content load on students. The National Education
Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content load and
providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken
the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes.
Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT across
classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view
of the following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject
areas in the same class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the
same subject
• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without
much interventions from teachers and can be learned by
children through self-learning or peer-learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying
out the changes given above.
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 5 6/15/2022 3:12:57 PM

--- PAGE 6 ---
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 6 6/14/2022 2:36:56 PM

--- PAGE 7 ---
textbook development Committee
ChaIrPersOn, advIsOry COmmIttee fOr textbOOks In sOCIal sCIenCe
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
ChIef advIsOr
Neeladri Bhattacharya, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
members
Anil Sethi, Professor, Department of Education in Social Sciences,
NCERT, New Delhi
Anjali Khullar, PGT, History, Cambridge School, New Delhi
Archana Prasad, Associate Professor, Centre for Jawaharlal Nehru Studies,
Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
Janaki Nair, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata
Prabhu Mohapatra, Associate Professor, University of Delhi, Delhi
Ramachandra Guha, Freelance Writer, Anthropologist and Historian,
Bangalore
Rashmi Paliwal, Eklavya, Hoshangabad, Madhya Pradesh
Sanjay Sharma, Associate Professor, Zakir Husain College, University of
Delhi, New Delhi
Satwinder Kaur, PGT, History, Kendriya Vidyalaya No. 1, Jalandhar,
Punjab
M. Siraj Anwar, Professor, PPMED, NCERT, New Delhi
Smita Sahay Bhattacharya, PGT, History, Blue Bells School, New Delhi
Tanika Sarkar, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi
Tapati Guha-Thakurta, Professor, Centre for Studies in Social Sciences,
Kolkata
member-COOrdInatOr
Reetu Singh, Assistant Professor, History, Department of Education in Social
Sciences, NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 7 6/14/2022 2:36:56 PM

--- PAGE 8 ---
aCknowledgements
The book is the product of a collective effort of a large number of historians,
educationists and teachers. The chapters were written and revised over
several months. They evolved through discussions in workshops, and
exchange of ideas through emails, with each member contributing their
skill in many different ways. All of us learnt a lot in the process.
Many individuals and institutions helped in the production of the
book. Professor Muzaffar Alam and Dr Kumkum Roy read drafts and offered
suggestions for change. We drew upon the image collections of several
institutions in illustrating the book. A number of photographs of the city
of Delhi and of the events of 1857 are from the Alkazi Foundation for the
Arts. Many of the nineteenth-century illustrated books on the British Raj
are to be found in the valuable India Collection of the India International
Centre. We are particularly glad that Sunil Janah, now 90 years of age, has
given us permission to reproduce his photographs. From the early 1940s,
he has explored the tribal areas and recorded with his camera the daily life
of different communities. Some of these photographs are now published
(The Tribals of India, Oxford University of Press, 2003), and many are at
the Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts.
Shalini Advani and Shyama Warner have done several rounds of
editing with care and understanding, suggesting changes, tracking mistakes
and improving the text in innumerable ways. We thank them both for their
involvement in the project.
The Council acknowledges the valuable inputs for analysing syllabi,
textbooks and the content, proposed to be rationalised for this edition by
Umesh Ashok Kadam, Professor, Centre for Historical Studies, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi; Sunil Kumar Singh, PGT History, Kendriya
Vidyalaya, AFS, Tughlakabad, New Delhi; Krishna Ranjan, PGT History,
Kendriya Vidyalaya, Vikaspuri; Archana Verma, Associate Professor,
Department of History, Hindu College, University of Delhi, Delhi; Shruti
Mishra, PGT History and HoD, History, Delhi Public School, R.K. Puram, New
Delhi; Gouri Srivastava, Professor and Head, Pratyusa K. Mandal, Professor;
Seema S. Ojha, Professor, DESS; Mily Roy Anand, Professor, DGS and Sharad
Kumar Pandey, Associate Professor, DCS&D, NCERT.
We have made every effort to acknowledge credits, but we apologise
in advance for any omission that may have inadvertently taken place.
fOr extended learnIng
You may access the following chapters through QR Code.
 Colonialism and the City
 The Changing World of Visual Arts.
These chapters were printed in the previous textbooks, the
same are being provided in digital mode for extended learning.
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 8 6/14/2022 2:36:56 PM

--- PAGE 9 ---
Credits
Individuals
Sunil Janah (Ch. 4, Figs. 4, 8, 9, 10)
Institutions
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi (Ch. 6, Figs. 4, 5, 7, 13)
Photo Division, Government of India, New Delhi (Ch. 8, Fig. 20)
The Alkazi Foundation for the Arts (Ch. 5, Fig. 11)
Victoria Memorial Museum (Ch. 5, Fig. 1)
Journals
The Illustrated London News (Ch. 6, Fig. 15)
Books
Andreas Volwahsen, Imperial Delhi: The British Capital of the
Indian Empire (Ch. 1, Fig. 4)
C.A. Bayly, ed., An Illustrated History of Modern India,1600-1947
(Ch. 1, Fig.1; Ch. 2, Figs. 5, 12; Ch. 3, Fig. 1, Ch. 7,
Figs. 3, 4, 5, 10)
Colesworthy Grant, Rural Life in Bengal (Ch. 3, Figs. 8, 9, 11, 12, 13)
Colin Campbell, Narrative of the Indian Revolt from its Outbreak to
the Capture of Lucknow (Ch. 5, Figs. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8)
Gautam Bhadra, From an Imperial Product to a National Drink:
The Culture of Tea Consumption in Modern India (Ch. 1, Fig. 2)
Jan Breman, Labour Bondage in Western India (Ch. 6, Fig. 11)
Malavika Karlekar, Re-visioning the Past (Ch. 6, Figs. 6, 8)
Marina Carter, Servants, Sirdars and Settlers (Ch. 6, Fig. 9)
Matthew H. Edney, Mapping an Empire: The Geographical Construction of
British India, 1765-1843 (Ch. 1, Fig. 1)
Peter Ruhe, Gandhi (Ch. 8, Figs. 1, 6, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 21)
R.H. Phillimore, Historical Records of the Survey of India (Ch. 1, Fig. 6)
Robert Montgomery Martin, The Indian Empire (Ch. 1, Fig. 7; Ch. 2,
Fig. 1; Ch. 5, Figs. 7, 9)
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 9 6/14/2022 2:36:56 PM

--- PAGE 10 ---
Rudrangshu Mukherji and Pramod Kapoor, Dateline –1857: Revolt
Against the Raj (Ch. 5, Figs. 2, 7)
Susan S. Bean, Yankee India: American Commercial and Cultural
Encounters with India in the Age of Sail, 1784-1860 (Ch. 2,
Fig. 8; Ch. 3, Fig. 2, Ch. 6, Figs. 3, 7)
Susan Stronge, ed., The Arts of the Sikh Kingdom (Ch. 2, Fig. 11)
Tiziana and Gianni Baldizzone, Hidden Tribes of India
(Ch. 4, Figs. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7)
x
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 10 6/14/2022 2:36:56 PM

--- PAGE 11 ---
Contents
Foreword iii
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks v
1. Introduction: How, When and Where 1
2. From Trade to Territory The Company Establishes Power 9
3. Ruling the Countryside 26
4. Tribals, Dikus and the Vision of a Golden Age 39
5. When People Rebel 1857 and After 51
6. Civilising the “Native”, Educating the Nation 65
7. Women, Caste and Reform 78
8. The Making of the National Movement: 1870s-–1947 93
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 11 6/14/2022 2:36:59 PM

--- PAGE 12 ---
The British Resident at the court of Poona concluding a treaty, 1790
Rationalised 2023-24
Prelims.indd 12 6/14/2022 2:37:01 PM

--- PAGE 13 ---
1
Introduction:
How, When and Where
How Important are Dates?
There was a time when historians were
fascinated with dates. There were heated
debates about the dates on which rulers
were crowned or battles were fought. In
the common-sense notion, history was
synonymous with dates. You may have
heard people say, “I find history boring
because it is all about memorising
dates.” Is such a conception true?
History is certainly about changes
that occur over time. It is about
finding out how things were in the
past and how things have changed.
As soon as we compare the past with
the present, we refer to time, we talk of
“before” and “after”.
Living in the world we do not always
ask historical questions about what
we see around us. We take things for
granted, as if what we see has always
been in the world we inhabit. But most of
us have our moments of wonder, when we are
curious, and we ask questions that actually are historical. Fig. 1 – Brahmans offering the
Watching someone sip a cup of tea at a roadside tea stall, Shastras to Britannia, frontispiece
you may wonder – when did people begin to drink tea or to the first map produced by
James Rennel, 1782
coffee? Looking out of the window of a train you may ask
Rennel was asked by Robert Clive
yourself – when were railways built and how did people
to produce maps of Hindustan.
travel long distances before the age of railways? Reading
An enthusiastic supporter
the newspaper in the morning you may be curious to know of British conquest of India,
how people got to hear about things before newspapers Rennel saw preparation of maps
began to be printed. as essential to the process of
domination. The picture here
tries to suggest that Indians
 Activity willingly gave over their ancient
texts to Britannia – the symbol of
Look carefully at Fig.1 and write a paragraph explaining British power – as if asking her
how this image projects an imperial perception. to become the protector of Indian
culture.
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 1 6/6/2022 12:36:43 PM

--- PAGE 14 ---
All such historical questions refer us back to
notions of time. But time does not have to be always
precisely dated in terms of a particular year or a month.
Sometimes it is actually incorrect to fix precise dates
to processes that happen over a period of time. People
in India did not begin drinking tea one fine day; they
developed a taste for it over time. There can be no
one clear date for a process such as this. Similarly,
we cannot fix one single date on which British rule
was established, or the national movement started, or
changes took place within the economy and society. All
these things happened over a stretch of time. We can
only refer to a span of time, an approximate period over
which particular changes became visible.
Why, then, do we continue to associate history with
a string of dates? This association has a reason. There
was a time when history was an account of battles and big
events. It was about rulers and their policies. Historians
wrote about the year a king was crowned, the year he
married, the year he had a child, the year he fought a
particular war, the year he died, and the year the next
ruler succeeded to the throne. For events such as these,
specific dates can be determined, and in histories such
as these, debates about dates continue to be important.
As you have seen in the history textbooks of the past
two years, historians now write about a host of other
issues, and other questions. They look at how people
earned their livelihood, what they produced and ate, how
cities developed and markets came up, how kingdoms
were formed and new ideas spread, and how cultures
and society changed.
Which dates?
Fig. 2 – Advertisements help
create taste By what criteria do we choose a set of dates as
Old advertisements help us important? The dates we select, the dates around which
understand how markets for new we compose our story of the past, are not important
products were created and new on their own. They become vital because we focus on
tastes were popularised. This
a particular set of events as important. If our focus of
1922 advertisement for Lipton tea
study changes, if we begin to look at new issues, a new
suggests that royalty all over the
world is associated with this tea. set of dates will appear significant.
In the background you see the
Consider an example. In the histories written by
outer wall of an Indian palace,
British historians in India, the rule of each Governor-
while in the foreground, seated
on horseback is the third son of General was important. These histories began with the
Queen Victoria of Britain, Prince rule of the first Governor-General, Warren Hastings,
Arthur, who was given the title and ended with the last Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten. In
Duke of Connaught.
separate chapters, we read about the deeds of others —
Hastings, Wellesley, Bentinck, Dalhousie, Canning,
2 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 2 4/22/2022 2:49:16 PM

--- PAGE 15 ---
Lawrence, Lytton, Ripon, Curzon, Harding, Irwin. It
was a seemingly never-ending succession of Governor-
Generals and Viceroys. All the dates in these history books
were linked to these personalities – to their activities,
policies and achievements. It was as if there was nothing
outside their lives that was important for us to know. The
chronology of their lives marked the different chapters of
the history of British India.
Can we not write about the history of this period in a
different way? How do we focus on the activities of different
groups and classes in Indian society within the format of
this history of Governor-Generals?
When we write history, or a story, we divide it into
chapters. Why do we do this? It is to give each chapter
some coherence. It is to tell a story in a way that makes
some sense and can be followed. In the process we focus
only on those events that help us to give shape to the story
Fig. 3 – Warren Hastings became
we are telling. In the histories that revolve around the life
the first Governor-General in 1773
of British Governor-Generals, the activities of Indians
While history books narrated
simply do not fit, they have no space. What, then, do we the deeds of Governor-Generals,
do? Clearly, we need another format for our history. This biographies glorified them as
persons, and paintings projected
would mean that the old dates will no longer have the
them as powerful figures.
significance they earlier had. A new set of dates will become
more important for us to know.
How do we periodise?
In 1817, James Mill, a Scottish economist and political
philosopher, published a massive three-volume work,
A History of British India. In this, he divided Indian
history into three periods – Hindu, Muslim and British.
This periodisation came to be widely accepted. Can
you think of any problem with this way of looking at
Indian history?
Why do we try and divide history into different periods?  Activity
We do so in an attempt to capture the characteristics of
Interview your mother
a time, its central features as they appear to us. So the
or another member of
terms through which we periodise – that is, demarcate
your family to find out
the difference between periods – become important. They
about their life. Now
reflect our ideas about the past. They show how we see
divide their life into
the significance of the change from one period to the next.
different periods and
Mill thought that all Asian societies were at a lower list out the significant
level of civilisation than Europe. According to his telling events in each period.
of history, before the British came to India, Hindu and Explain the basis of your
Muslim despots ruled the country. Religious intolerance, periodisation.
caste taboos and superstitious practices dominated
social life. British rule, Mill felt, could civilise India. To do
INTRODUCTION: HOW, WHEN AND WHERE 3
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 3 6/14/2022 2:38:32 PM

--- PAGE 16 ---
this, it was necessary to introduce European manners, arts,
institutions and laws in India. Mill, in fact, suggested that the
British should conquer all the territories in India to ensure
the enlightenment and happiness of the Indian people. For
India was not capable of progress without British help.
In this idea of history, British rule represented all the forces
of progress and civilisation. The period before British rule was
one of darkness. Can such a conception be accepted today?
In any case, can we refer to any period of history as “Hindu”
or “Muslim”? Did not a variety of faiths exist simultaneously
in these periods? Why should we characterise an age only
through the religion of the rulers of the time? To do so is to
suggest that the lives and practices of the others do not really
matter. We should also remember that even rulers in ancient
India did not all share the same faith.
Moving away from British classification, historians
have usually divided Indian history into ‘ancient’, ‘medieval’
and ‘modern’. This division too has its problems. It is a
periodisation that is borrowed from the West where the
modern period was associated with the growth of all the
forces of modernity – science, reason, democracy, liberty
and equality. Medieval was a term used to describe a society
where these features of modern society did not exist. Can
we uncritically accept this characterisation of the modern
period to describe the period of our study? As you will see in
this book, under British rule people did not have equality,
freedom or liberty. Nor was the period one of economic
growth and progress.
Many historians therefore refer to this period as ‘colonial’.
What is colonial?
In this book, you will read about the way the British came
to conquer the country and establish their rule, subjugating
local nawabs and rajas. You will see how they established
control over the economy and society, collected revenue to
meet all their expenses, bought the goods they wanted at low
prices, produced crops they needed for export, and you will
understand the changes that came about as a consequence.
You will also come to know about the changes British rule
brought about in values and tastes, customs and practices.
When the subjugation of one country by another leads to these
kinds of political, economic, social and cultural changes, we
refer to the process as colonisation.
You will, however, find that all classes and groups did not
experience these changes in the same way. That is why, the
book is called Our Pasts in the plural.
4 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 4 4/22/2022 2:49:18 PM

--- PAGE 17 ---
Source 1
How do We Know?
What sources do historians use in writing about the last Reports to the
250 years of Indian history?
Home Department
Administration produces records
In 1946 the colonial
One important source is the official records of the British government in India was
administration. The British believed that the act of writing trying to put down a mutiny
was important. Every instruction, plan, policy decision, that broke out on the ships
agreement, investigation had to be clearly written up. Once of the Royal Indian Navy.
this was done, things could be properly studied and debated. Here is a sample of the
This conviction produced an administrative culture of kind of reports the Home
memos, notings and reports. Department got from the
The British also felt that all important documents different dockyards:
and letters needed to be carefully preserved. So they
Bombay: Arrangements
set up record rooms attached to all administrative
have been made for the
institutions. The village tahsildar’s office, the collectorate,
Army to take over ships
the commissioner’s office, the provincial secretariats, and establishment. Royal
the lawcourts – all had their record rooms. Specialised Navy ships are remaining
institutions like archives and museums were also outside the harbour.
established to preserve important records.
Karachi: 301 mutineers
Letters and memos that moved from one branch are under arrest and a few
of the administration to another in the early years more strongly suspected
of the nineteenth century can still be read in the are to be arrested … All
archives. You can also study the notes and reports establishments … are
that district officials prepared, or the instructions under military guard.
and directives that were sent by officials at the top to
Vizagapatnam: The
provincial administrators.
positionis completely
In the early years of the nineteenth century, these under control and no
documents were carefully copied out and beautifully violence has occurred.
written by calligraphists – that is, by those who specialised Military guards have
in the art of beautiful writing. By the middle of the been placed on ships
nineteenth century, with the spread of printing, multiple and establishments.
copies of these records were printed as proceedings of each No further trouble is
government department. expected except that
a few men may refuse
to work.
Director of Intelligence, HQ. India
Command, Situation Report No. 7.
File No. 5/21/46 Home (Political),
Government of India
Fig. 4 – The National Archives of India came up in the 1920s
When New Delhi was built, the National Museum and the National
Archives were both located close to the Viceregal Palace. This location
reflects the importance these institutions had in British imagination.
INTRODUCTION: HOW, WHEN AND WHERE 5
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 5 6/3/2022 5:07:10 PM

--- PAGE 18 ---
Surveys become important
The practice of surveying also became common under
the colonial administration. The British believed that
a country had to be properly known before it could be
effectively administered.
By the early nineteenth century, detailed surveys
were being carried out to map the entire country. In
the villages, revenue surveys were conducted. The
effort was to know the topography, the soil quality,
the flora, the fauna, the local histories, and the
cropping pattern – all the facts seen as necessary
to know about to administer the region. From the
Fig. 5 – A
end of the nineteenth century, Census operations
custard-apple
were held every ten years. These prepared detailed
plant, 1770s
records of the number of people in all the provinces
Botanical gardens
and natural history of India, noting information on castes, religions and
museums established by the occupation. There were many other surveys – botanical
British collected plant specimens
surveys, zoological surveys, archaeological surveys,
and information about their
anthropological surveys, forest surveys.
uses. Local artists were asked to
draw pictures of these specimens.
What official records do not tell
Historians are now looking
at the way such information From this vast corpus of records we can get to know
was gathered and what this
a lot, but we must remember that these are official
information reveals about the
records. They tell us what the officials thought, what
nature of colonialism.
Fig. 6 – Mapping and survey operations in progress in Bengal, a drawing by James Prinsep, 1832
Note how all the instruments that were used in surveys are placed in the foreground to
emphasise the scientific nature of the project.
6 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 6 4/22/2022 2:49:21 PM

--- PAGE 19 ---
Source 2
“Not fit for human
consumption”
Newspapers provide
accounts of the movements
in different parts of the
country. Here is a report
of a police strike in 1946.
More than 2000
policemen in Delhi
refused to take their
food on Thursday
morning as a protest
against their low
salaries and the
bad quality of food
Fig. 7 – The rebels of 1857 supplied to them
Images need to be carefully studied for they project the viewpoint from the Police Lines
of those who create them. This image can be found in several
kitchen.
illustrated books produced by the British after the 1857 rebellion.
The caption at the bottom says: “Mutinous sepoys share the loot”. As the news spread
In British representations, the rebels appear as greedy, vicious and to the other police
brutal. You will read about the rebellion in Chapter 5.
stations, the men
there also refused to
they were interested in, and what they wished to preserve take food … One of
for posterity. These records do not always help us the strikers said: “The
understand what other people in the country felt, and what food supplied to us
lay behind their actions. from the Police Lines
kitchen is not fit for
For that we need to look elsewhere. When we begin to
human consumption.
search for these other sources, we find them in plenty,
Even cattle would
though they are more difficult to get than official records.
not eat the chappattis
We have diaries of people, accounts of pilgrims and
and dal which we
travellers, autobiographies of important personalities, and
have to eat.”
popular booklets that were sold in the local bazaars. As
Hindustan Times,
printing spread, newspapers were published and issues 22 March, 1946
were debated in public. Leaders and reformers wrote to
spread their ideas, poets and novelists wrote to express
their feelings.
All these sources, however, were produced by those who
were literate. From these, we will not be able to understand
how history was experienced and lived by the tribals and  Activity
the peasants, the workers in the mines or the poor on the
Look at Sources 1 and 2.
streets. Getting to know their lives is a more difficult task.
Do you find any
Yet this can be done, if we make a little bit of effort.
differences in the nature
When you read this book, you will see how this can
of reporting? Explain
be done.
what you observed.
INTRODUCTION: HOW, WHEN AND WHERE 7
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 7 4/22/2022 2:49:22 PM

--- PAGE 20 ---
Let’s recall
Let’s imagine
1. State whether true or false:
Imagine that you are a
historian wanting to (a) James Mill divided Indian history into three
find out about how periods – Hindu, Muslim, Christian.
agriculture changed
in a remote tribal area (b) Official documents help us understand what
after independence. the people of the country think.
List the different ways
(c) The British thought surveys were important
in which you would
for effective administration.
find information on
this.
Let’s discuss
2. What is the problem with the periodisation of Indian
history that James Mill offers?
3. Why did the British preserve official documents?
4. How will the information historians get from old
newspapers be different from that found in police
reports?
Let’s do
5. Can you think of examples of surveys in your
world today? Think about how toy companies get
information about what young people enjoy playing
with or how the government finds out about the
number of young people in school. What can a
historian derive from such surveys?
8 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 8 4/22/2022 2:49:24 PM

--- PAGE 21 ---
2 From Trade to Territory
The Company Establishes Power
Aurangzeb was the last of the powerful Mughal rulers. He
established control over a very large part of the territory
that is now known as India. After his death in 1707,
many Mughal governors (subadars) and big zamindars
began asserting their authority and establishing regional
kingdoms. As powerful regional kingdoms emerged in
various parts of India, Delhi could no longer function as
an effective centre.
By the second half of the eighteenth century,
however, a new power was emerging on the political
horizon – the British. Did you know that the British
originally came as a small trading company and were
reluctant to acquire territories? How then did they come
to be masters of a vast empire? In this chapter you will
see how this came about.
Fig. 1 – Bahadur Shah Zafar
and his sons being arrested by
Captain Hodson
After Aurangzeb there was no
powerful Mughal ruler, but
Mughal emperors continued to
be symbolically important. In
fact, when a massive rebellion
against British rule broke out in
1857, Bahadur Shah Zafar, the
Mughal emperor at the time, was
seen as the natural leader. Once
the revolt was put down by the
company, Bahadur Shah Zafar
was forced to leave the kingdom,
and his sons were shot in
cold blood.
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 9 4/22/2022 2:49:25 PM

--- PAGE 22 ---
East India Company
Comes East
In 1600, the East India
Company acquired a charter
from the ruler of England,
Queen Elizabeth I, granting
it the sole right to trade with
the East. This meant that
no other trading group in
England could compete with
the East India Company. With
this charter, the Company
could venture across the
oceans, looking for new lands
from which it could buy goods
Fig. 2 – Routes to India in the
at a cheap price, and carry them back to Europe to
eighteenth century
sell at higher prices. The Company did not have to fear
competition from other English trading companies.
Mercantile trading companies in those days made profit
primarily by excluding competition, so that they could
buy cheap and sell dear.
The royal charter, however, could not prevent other
European powers from entering the Eastern markets.
Mercantile – A business
By the time the first English ships sailed down the
enterprise that makes
west coast of Africa, round the Cape of Good Hope, and
profit primarily through
crossed the Indian Ocean, the Portuguese had already
trade, buying goods
established their presence in the western coast of India,
cheap and selling them at
and had their base in Goa. In fact, it was Vasco da
higher prices
Gama, a Portuguese explorer, who had discovered this
sea route to India in 1498. By the early seventeenth
century, the Dutch too were exploring the possibilities
of trade in the Indian Ocean. Soon the French traders
arrived on the scene.
The problem was that all the companies were
interested in buying the same things. The fine qualities
of cotton and silk produced in India had a big market
in Europe. Pepper, cloves, cardamom and cinnamon
too were in great demand. Competition amongst the
European companies inevitably pushed up the prices
at which these goods could be purchased, and this
reduced the profits that could be earned. The only way
the trading companies could flourish was by eliminating
rival competitors. The urge to secure markets, therefore,
led to fierce battles between the trading companies.
Through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries they
regularly sank each other’s ships, blockaded routes,
and prevented rival ships from moving with supplies of
10 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 10 4/22/2022 2:49:26 PM

--- PAGE 23 ---
goods. Trade was carried on with arms and trading posts
were protected through fortification.
This effort to fortify settlements and carry on profitable
trade also led to intense conflict with local rulers. The
company therefore found it difficult to separate trade from
politics. Let us see how this happened.
East India Company begins trade in Bengal
The first English factory was set up on the banks of
the river Hugli in 1651. This was the base from which
the Company’s traders, known at that time as “factors”,
operated. The factory had a warehouse where goods for
export were stored, and it had offices where Company
officials sat. As trade expanded, the Company persuaded
merchants and traders to come and settle near the factory.
By 1696, it began building a fort around the settlement.
Two years later, it bribed Mughal officials into giving the
Company zamindari rights over three villages. One of these
was Kalikata, which later grew into the city of Calcutta
or Kolkata as it is known today. It also persuaded the
Mughal emperor Aurangzeb to issue a farman granting
the Company the right to trade duty free. Farman – A royal edict,
a royal order
The Company tried continuously to press for
more concessions and manipulate existing privileges.
Aurangzeb’s farman, for instance, had granted only the
Company the right to trade duty free. But officials of
the Company, who were carrying on private trade on
the side, were expected to pay duty. This they refused
to pay, causing an enormous loss of revenue for Bengal.
How could the Nawab of Bengal, Murshid Quli Khan,
not protest?
Fig. 3 – Local boats bring goods
from ships in Madras, painted by
William Simpson, 1867
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 11
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 11 4/22/2022 2:49:27 PM

--- PAGE 24 ---
How trade led to battles
Through the early eighteenth century, the conflict between
the Company and the nawabs of Bengal intensified.
After the death of Aurangzeb, the Bengal nawabs
asserted their power and autonomy, as other regional
powers were doing at that time. Murshid Quli Khan
was followed by Alivardi Khan and then Sirajuddaulah
as the Nawab of Bengal. Each one of them was a strong
ruler. They refused to grant the Company concessions,
demanded large tributes for the Company’s right to
trade, denied it any right to mint coins, and stopped it
from extending its fortifications. Accusing the Company
of deceit, they claimed that the Company was depriving
the Bengal government of huge amounts of revenue and
Fig. 4 – Robert Clive undermining the authority of the nawab. It was refusing
to pay taxes, writing disrespectful letters, and trying to
humiliate the nawab and his officials.
The Company on its part declared that the unjust
demands of the local officials were ruining the trade of
the Company, and trade could flourish only if the duties
were removed. It was also convinced that to expand trade,
it had to enlarge its settlements, buy up villages, and
rebuild its forts.
The conflicts led to confrontations and finally culminated
in the famous Battle of Plassey.
Puppet – Literally, a toy
that you can move with The Battle of Plassey
strings. The term is used When Alivardi Khan died in 1756, Sirajuddaulah became
disapprovingly to refer to the nawab of Bengal. The Company was worried about his
a person who is controlled power and keen on a puppet ruler who would willingly
by someone else. give trade concessions and other privileges. So it tried,
though without success, to help one of Sirajuddaulah’s
rivals become the nawab. An infuriated Sirajuddaulah
asked the Company to stop meddling in the political
affairs of his dominion, stop fortification, and pay the
revenues. After negotiations failed, the Nawab marched
Did you know?
with 30,000 soldiers to the English factory at Kassimbazar,
Did you know how Plassey captured the Company officials, locked the warehouse,
got its name? Plassey is an disarmed all Englishmen, and blockaded English ships.
anglicised pronunciation Then he marched to Calcutta to establish control over the
of Palashi and the place Company’s fort there.
derived its name from the On hearing the news of the fall of Calcutta,
palash tree known for its Company officials in Madras sent forces under the
beautiful red flowers that command of Robert Clive, reinforced by naval fleets.
yield gulal, the powder Prolonged negotiations with the Nawab followed. Finally,
used in the festival of Holi. in 1757, Robert Clive led the Company’s army against
Sirajuddaulah at Plassey. One of the main reasons for
12 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 12 4/22/2022 2:49:28 PM

--- PAGE 25 ---
Fig. 5 – The General
Court Room, East
India House,
Leadenhall Street
The Court of
Proprietors of the
East India Company
had their meetings
in the East India
House on Leadenhall
Street in London.
This is a picture of
one of their meetings
in progress.
the defeat of the Nawab was that the forces led by Mir Jafar, one
of Sirajuddaulah’s commanders, never fought the battle. Clive had
managed to secure his support by promising to make him nawab after
crushing Sirajuddaulah.
The Battle of Plassey became famous because it was the first major
victory the Company won in India.
Source 1
Fig. 6 – Sirajuddaulah
The promise of riches
The territorial ambitions of the mercantile East India
Company were viewed with distrust and doubt in England.
After the Battle of Plassey, Robert Clive wrote to William
Pitt, one of the Principal Secretaries of State to the English
monarch, on 7 January 1759 from Calcutta:
But so large a sovereignty may possibly be an object too
extensive for a mercantile Company … I flatter myself
… that there will be little or no difficulty in obtaining
the absolute possession of these rich kingdoms: ... Now
I leave you to judge, whether an income yearly of two
million sterling with the possession of three provinces
… be an object deserving the public attention ...
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 13
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 13 4/22/2022 2:49:30 PM

--- PAGE 26 ---
Source 2
After the defeat at Plassey, Sirajuddaulah was
The Nawab
assassinated and Mir Jafar made the nawab. The Company
complains was still unwilling to take over the responsibility of
administration. Its prime objective was the expansion of
In 1733 the Nawab of trade. If this could be done without conquest, through the
Bengal said this about help of local rulers who were willing to grant privileges,
the English traders: then territories need not be taken over directly.
When they first came Soon the Company discovered that this was rather
into the country they difficult. For even the puppet nawabs were not always
petitioned the then as helpful as the Company wanted them to be. After all,
government in a they had to maintain a basic appearance of dignity and
humble manner for sovereignty if they wanted respect from their subjects.
liberty to purchase
What could the Company do? When Mir Jafar
a spot of ground to
protested, the Company deposed him and installed Mir
build a factory house
Qasim in his place. When Mir Qasim complained, he in
upon, which was no
turn was defeated in a battle fought at Buxar (1764),
sooner granted but
driven out of Bengal, and Mir Jafar was reinstalled.
they built a strong
The Nawab had to pay Rs. 500,000 every month but
fort, surrounded it
the Company wanted more money to finance its wars,
with a ditch which
and meet the demands of trade and its other expenses.
has communication
It wanted more territories and more revenue. By the
with the river and
time Mir Jafar died in 1765, the mood of the Company
mounted a great
had changed. Having failed to work with puppet
number of guns
upon the walls. nawabs, Clive declared: “We must indeed become
They have enticed nawabs ourselves”.
several merchants Finally, in 1765 the Mughal emperor appointed the
and others to go Company as the Diwan of the provinces of Bengal. The
and take protection Diwani allowed the Company to use the vast revenue
under them and they
resources of Bengal. This solved a major problem that
collect a revenue
the Company had earlier faced. From the early eighteenth
which amounts to
century, its trade with India had expanded. But it had
Rs. 100,000… they
to buy most of the goods in India with gold and silver
rob and plunder and
imported from Britain. This was because at this time
carry great number
Britain had no goods to sell in India. The outflow of
of the king’s subjects
gold from Britain slowed after the Battle of Plassey, and
of both sexes into
entirely stopped after the assumption of Diwani. Now
slavery into their
revenues from India could finance Company expenses.
own country …
These revenues could be used to purchase cotton and
silk textiles in India, maintain Company troops, and
meet the cost of building the Company fort and offices
at Calcutta.
Company officials become “nabobs”
What did it mean to be nawabs? It meant of course that
the Company acquired more power and authority. But it
also meant something else. Each company servant began
to have visions of living like nawabs.
14 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 14 4/22/2022 2:49:30 PM

--- PAGE 27 ---
Source 3
After the Battle of Plassey, the actual nawabs of
Bengal were forced to give land and vast sums of
How did Clive
money as personal gifts to Company officials. Robert
Clive himself amassed a fortune in India. He had come see himself?
to Madras (now Chennai) from England in 1743 at
the age of 18. When in 1767 he left India, his Indian At his hearing in front of
fortune was worth £401,102. Interestingly, when he was a Committee in Parliament,
appointed Governor of Bengal in 1764, he was asked Clive declared that he had
to remove corruption in Company administration but shown admirable restraint
he was himself cross-examined in 1772 by the British after the Battle of Plassey.
Parliament which was suspicious of his vast wealth. This is what he said:
Although he was acquitted, he committed suicide Consider the situation
in 1774. in which the victory
However, not all Company officials succeeded in at Plassey had placed
making money like Clive. Many died an early death me! A great prince
in India due to disease and war, and it would not be was dependent on my
pleasure; an opulent
right to regard all of them as corrupt and dishonest.
city lay at my mercy;
Many of them came from humble backgrounds
its richest bankers bid
and their uppermost desire was to earn enough in
against each other for
India, return to Britain and lead a comfortable life.
my smiles; I walked
Those who managed to return with wealth led flashy
through vaults which
lives and flaunted their riches. They were called
were thrown open to me
“nabobs” – an anglicised version of the Indian word
alone, piled on either
nawab. They were often seen as upstarts and social
hand with gold and
climbers in British society and were ridiculed or made
jewels! Mr Chairman,
fun of in plays and cartoons.
at this moment I stand
astonished at my
Company Rule Expands moderation.
If we analyse the process of annexation of Indian states
by the East India Company from 1757 to 1857, certain
key aspects emerge. The Company rarely launched a
direct military attack on an unknown territory. Instead
it used a variety of political, economic and diplomatic
methods to extend its influence before annexing an
Indian kingdom.
After the Battle of Buxar (1764), the Company

appointed Residents in Indian states. They were Activity
political or commercial agents and their job was to serve
Imagine that you are a
and further the interests of the Company. Through the
young Company official
Residents, the Company officials began interfering in
who has been in India
the internal affairs of Indian states. They tried to decide
for a few months. Write
who was to be the successor to the throne, and who was
a letter home to your
to be appointed in administrative posts. Sometimes, the
mother telling her about
Company forced the states into a “subsidiary alliance”.
your luxurious life and
According to the terms of this alliance, Indian rulers
contrasting it with your
were not allowed to have their independent armed
earlier life in Britain.
forces. They were to be protected by the Company, but
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 15
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 15 4/22/2022 2:49:30 PM

--- PAGE 28 ---
had to pay for the “subsidiary forces” that the Company
was supposed to maintain for the purpose of this
protection. If the Indian rulers failed to make the payment,
then part of their territory was taken away as penalty.
For example, when Richard Wellesley was Governor-
General (1798–1805), the Nawab of Awadh was forced
to give over half of his territory to the Company in 1801,
as he failed to pay for the “subsidiary forces”. Hyderabad
was also forced to cede territories on similar grounds.
Source 4
What power did the Resident have?
Fig. 7 – Nawab Shujauddaulah
of Awadh, with his sons and the
This is what James Mill, the famous economist and
British Resident, painted by Tilly
Kettle (oil, 1772) political philosopher from Scotland, wrote about the
residents appointed by the Company.
The treaties that followed the
Battle of Buxar forced Nawab
We place a resident, who really is king of the
Shujauddaulah to give up much
country, whatever injunctions of non-interference
of his authority. Here, however,
he poses in regal splendour, he may act under. As long as the prince acts in
towering over the Resident. perfect subservience, and does what is agreeable
to the residents, that is, to the British Government,
things go on quietly; they are managed without the
resident appearing much in the administration of
affairs … but when anything of a different nature
happens, the moment the prince takes a course
Injunction – Instruction
which the British Government think wrong, then
Subservience – comes clashing and disturbance.
Submissiveness James Mill (1832)
Tipu Sultan – The “Tiger of Mysore”
The Company resorted to direct military confrontation when
it saw a threat to its political or economic interests. This
can be illustrated with the case of the southern Indian state
of Mysore.
Mysore had grown in strength under the leadership
of powerful rulers like Haidar Ali (ruled from 1761 to
1782) and his famous son Tipu Sultan (ruled from 1782
to 1799). Mysore controlled the profitable trade of the
Malabar coast where the Company purchased pepper
and cardamom. In 1785, Tipu Sultan stopped the export
of sandalwood, pepper and cardamom through the ports
of his kingdom, and disallowed local merchants from
trading with the Company. He also established a close
Fig. 8 – Tipu Sultan
16 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 16 4/22/2022 2:49:32 PM

--- PAGE 29 ---
Fig. 9 – Cornwallis receiving the
sons of Tipu Sultan as hostages,
painted by Daniel Orme, 1793
The Company forces were
defeated by Haidar Ali and Tipu
Sultan in several battles. But in
1792, attacked by the combined
forces of the Marathas, the Nizam
of Hyderabad and the Company,
Tipu was forced to sign a treaty
with the British by which two
of his sons were taken away
as hostages. British painters
always liked painting scenes that
showed the triumph of
British power.
relationship with the French in India, and modernised
his army with their help.
The British were furious. They saw Haidar and Tipu
as ambitious, arrogant and dangerous – rulers who had
to be controlled and crushed. Four wars were fought with
Mysore (1767–69, 1780–84, 1790–92 and 1799). Only in
The legend of Tipu
the last – the Battle of Seringapatam – did the Company
ultimately win a victory. Tipu Sultan was killed defending
Kings are often surrounded
his capital Seringapatam, Mysore was placed under the
by legend and their powers
former ruling dynasty of the Wodeyars and a subsidiary
glorified through folklore.
alliance was imposed on the state.
Here is a legend about Tipu
Sultan who became the
ruler of Mysore in 1782. It
is said that once he went
hunting in the forest with
a French friend. There he
came face to face with a
tiger. His gun did not work
and his dagger fell to the
ground. He battled with
the tiger unarmed until he
managed to reach down
and pick up the dagger.
Fig. 10 – Tipu’s toy tiger Finally, he was able to kill
This is the picture of a big mechanical toy that Tipu possessed. the tiger in the battle. After
You can see a tiger mauling a European soldier. When its handle
this, he came to be known
was turned, the toy tiger roared and the soldier shrieked. This
as the “Tiger of Mysore”. He
toy-tiger is now kept in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
had the image of the tiger
The British took it away when Tipu Sultan died defending his
capital Seringapatam on 4 May 1799. on his flag.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 17
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 17 4/22/2022 2:49:34 PM

--- PAGE 30 ---
. War with the Marathas
Activity
From the late eighteenth century, the Company also
Imagine that you
sought to curb and eventually destroy Maratha power.
have come across
With their defeat in the Third Battle of Panipat in 1761,
two old newspapers
the Marathas’ dream of ruling from Delhi was shattered.
reporting on the Battle
They were divided into many states under different chiefs
of Seringapatam and the
(sardars) belonging to dynasties such as Sindhia, Holkar,
death of Tipu Sultan.
Gaikwad and Bhonsle. These chiefs were held together
One is a British paper
in a confederacy under a Peshwa (Principal Minister)
and the other is from
who became its effective military and administrative head
Mysore. Write the
based in Pune. Mahadji Sindhia and Nana Phadnis were
headline for each of the
two famous Maratha soldiers and statesmen of the late
two newspapers.
eighteenth century.
The Marathas were subdued in a series of wars.
Confederacy – Alliance
In the first war that ended in 1782 with the Treaty of
Salbai, there was no clear victor. The Second Anglo-
Maratha War (1803–05) was fought on different
fronts, resulting in the British gaining Orissa and the
territories north of the Yamuna river including Agra and
Delhi. Finally, the Third Anglo-Maratha War of 1817–19
crushed Maratha power. The Peshwa was removed and
sent away to Bithur near Kanpur with a pension. The
Company now had complete control over the territories
south of the Vindhyas.
The claim to paramountcy
It is clear from the above that from the early
nineteenth century, the Company pursued an aggressive
policy of territorial expansion. Under Lord Hastings
(Governor-General from 1813 to 1823), a new policy of
“paramountcy” was initiated. Now the Company claimed
Fig. 11 – Lord Hastings
that its authority was paramount or supreme, hence its
power was greater than that of Indian states. In order
to protect its interests, it was justified in annexing or
threatening to annex any Indian kingdom. This view
continued to guide later British policies as well.
This process, however, did not go unchallenged. For
example, when the British tried to annex the small state
of Kitoor (in Karnataka today), Rani Channamma took
to arms and led an anti-British resistance movement.
She was arrested in 1824 and died in prison in 1829.
Fig. 12 – A Statue of the Queen of But Rayanna, a poor chowkidar of Sangoli in Kitoor,
Kitoor (Karnataka) carried on the resistance. With popular support, he
destroyed many British camps and records. He was
caught and hanged by the British in 1830. You will
read more about several cases of resistance later in
the book.
18 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 18 4/22/2022 2:49:36 PM

--- PAGE 31 ---
In the late 1830s, the East India
Company became worried about Russia.
It imagined that Russia might expand
across Asia and enter India from the
north-west. Driven by this fear, the British
now wanted to secure their control over
the north-west. They fought a prolonged
war with Afghanistan between 1838 and
1842, and established indirect Company
rule there. Sind was taken over in 1843.
Next in line was Punjab. But the presence
of Maharaja Ranjit Singh held back the
Company. After his death in 1839, two
prolonged wars were fought with the Sikh
kingdom. Ultimately, in 1849, Punjab
was annexed.
The Doctrine of Lapse
The final wave of annexations occurred
under Lord Dalhousie who was the
Governor-General from 1848 to 1856.
He devised a policy that came to be
known as the Doctrine of Lapse. The
doctrine declared that if an Indian ruler
died without a male heir his kingdom
would “lapse”, that is, become a part
of Company territory. One kingdom
after another was annexed simply by
applying this doctrine: Satara (1848), Fig. 13 – Maharaja Ranjit Singh
Sambalpur (1850), Udaipur (1852), Nagpur (1853) and holding court
Jhansi (1854).
Finally, in 1856, the Company also took over Awadh.
This time the British had an added argument – they said
they were “obliged by duty” to take over Awadh in order to
free the people from the “misgovernment” of the Nawab!
Enraged by the humiliating way in which the Nawab was
deposed, the people of Awadh joined the great revolt that
broke out in 1857.

Activity
Imagine that you are a nawab’s nephew and have been
brought up thinking that you will one day be king. Now
you find that this will not be allowed by the British
Fig. 14 – A portrait of Veer
because of the new Doctrine of Lapse. What will be
Surendra Sai
your feelings? What will you plan to do so that you can
inherit the crown?
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 19
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 19 4/22/2022 2:49:39 PM

--- PAGE 32 ---
Fig. 14 a – India, 1797 Fig. 14 b – India, 1840
Fig. 14 a, b, c – Expansion of British
territorial power in India
Look at these maps along with a present-day
political map of India. In each of these maps,
try and identify the different parts of India
that were not under British rule.
Fig. 14 c – India, 1857
20 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 20 4/22/2022 2:49:40 PM

--- PAGE 33 ---
Setting up a New Administration
Warren Hastings (Governor-General from 1773 to 1785)
was one of the many important figures who played a
significant role in the expansion of Company power.
By his time the Company had acquired power not only Qazi – A judge
in Bengal, but also in Bombay and Madras. British
Mufti – A jurist of the
territories were broadly divided into administrative units
Muslim community
called Presidencies. There were three Presidencies: Bengal,
responsible for
Madras and Bombay. Each was ruled by a Governor. The
expounding the law
supreme head of the administration was the Governor-
that the qazi would
General. Warren Hastings, the first Governor-General,
administer
introduced several administrative reforms, notably in the
sphere of justice. Impeachment – A trial
by the House of Lords
From 1772 a new system of justice was established.
in England for charges
Each district was to have two courts – a criminal court
of misconduct brought
(faujdari adalat) and a civil court (diwani adalat). Maulvis
against a person in the
and Hindu pandits interpreted Indian laws for the
House of Commons
European district collectors who presided over civil courts.
The criminal courts were still under a qazi and a mufti
but under the supervision of the collectors.
Fig. 15 – The trial of Warren Hastings, painted by R.G. Pollard, 1789
When Warren Hastings went back to England in 1785, Edmund Burke accused him
of being personally responsible for the misgovernment of Bengal. This led to an
impeachment proceeding in the British Parliament that lasted seven years.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 21
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 21 4/22/2022 2:49:42 PM

--- PAGE 34 ---
Source 5
A major problem was that the Brahman pandits gave
“I impeach the different interpretations of local laws based on different
schools of the dharmashastra. To bring about uniformity,
common enemy and
in 1775 eleven pandits were asked to compile a digest
oppressor of all.” of Hindu laws. N.B. Halhed translated this digest into
English. By 1778, a code of Muslim laws was also compiled
for the benefit of European judges. Under the Regulating
Here is a passage from
Act of 1773, a new Supreme Court was established, while
Edmund Burke’s eloquent
a court of appeal – the Sadar Nizamat Adalat – was also
opening speech during
set up at Calcutta.
the impeachment of
Warren Hastings: The principal figure in an Indian district was the
Collector. As the title suggests, his main job was to collect
I impeach him in the
revenue and taxes and maintain law and order in his
name of the people
district with the help of judges, police officers and darogas.
of India, whose rights
His office – the Collectorate – became the new centre of
he has trodden under
power and patronage that steadily replaced previous
his foot and whose
country he has turned holders of authority.
into a desert. Lastly in
The Company army
the name of human
nature itself, in the Colonial rule in India brought in some new ideas of
name of both the administration and reform but its power rested on its
sexes, in the name military strength. The Mughal army was mainly composed
of every age, in the of cavalry (sawars: trained soldiers on horseback) and
name of every rank, I infantry, that is, paidal (foot) soldiers. They were given
impeach the common training in archery (teer-andazi) and the use of the sword.
enemy and oppressor The cavalry dominated the army and the Mughal state
of all. did not feel the need to have a large professionally trained
infantry. The rural areas had a large number of armed
peasants and the local zamindars often supplied the
Mughals with paidal soldiers.
A change occurred in the eighteenth century when
Mughal successor states like Awadh and Benaras started
recruiting peasants into their armies and training them
as professional soldiers. The East India Company adopted
Dharmashastras –
the same method when it began recruitment for its own
Sanskrit texts prescribing
army, which came to be known as the sepoy army (from
social rules and codes
the Indian word sipahi, meaning soldier).
of behaviour, composed
from c. 500 BCE onwards As warfare technology changed from the 1820s, the
cavalry requirements of the Company’s army declined.
Sawar – Men on horses
This is because the British empire was fighting in
Musket – A heavy gun Burma, Afghanistan and Egypt where soldiers were
used by infantry soldiers armed with muskets and matchlocks. The soldiers of
the Company’s army had to keep pace with changing
Matchlock – An early
military requirements and its infantry regiments now
type of gun in which the
became more important.
powder was ignited by a
match In the early nineteenth century, the British began
to develop a uniform military culture. Soldiers were
22 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 22 4/22/2022 2:49:42 PM

--- PAGE 35 ---
Fig. 16 – A sawar of Bengal in the
service of the Company, painted
by an unknown Indian artist, 1780
After the battles with the
Marathas and the Mysore
rulers, the Company realised the
importance of strengthening its
cavalry force.
increasingly subjected to European-style training, drill
and discipline that regulated their life far more than
before. Often this created problems since caste and
community feelings were ignored in building a force
of professional soldiers. Could individuals so easily
give up their caste and religious feelings? Could they
see themselves only as soldiers and not as members
of communities?
What did the sepoys feel? How did they react to the
changes in their lives and their identity – that is, their
sense of who they were? The Revolt of 1857 gives us a
glimpse into the world of the sepoys. You will read about
this revolt in Chapter 5.
Conclusion
Thus the East India Company was transformed from a
trading company to a territorial colonial power. The arrival
of new steam technology in the early nineteenth century
also aided this process. Till then it would take anywhere
between six and eight months to travel to India by sea.
Steamships reduced the journey time to three weeks
enabling more Britishers and their families to come to a
far-off country like India.
By 1857, the Company came to exercise direct rule
over about 63 per cent of the territory and 78 per cent
of the population of the Indian subcontinent. Combined
with its indirect influence on the remaining territory and
population of the country, the East India Company had
virtually the whole of India under its control.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 23
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 23 4/22/2022 2:49:43 PM

--- PAGE 36 ---
Let’s recall
Let’s imagine
1. Match the following:
You are living in
England in the late
Diwani Tipu Sultan
eighteenth or early
“Tiger of Mysore” right to collect land revenue
nineteenth century.
How would you have faujdari adalat Sepoy
reacted to the stories
Rani Channamma criminal court
of British conquests?
Remember that you sipahi led an anti-British
would have read
movement in Kitoor
about the immense
fortunes that many
2. Fill in the blanks:
of the officials were
making.
(a) The British conquest of Bengal began with the
Battle of ___________.
(b) Haidar Ali and Tipu Sultan were the rulers of
___________.
(c) Dalhousie implemented the Doctrine of
___________.
(d) Maratha kingdoms were located mainly in the
___________ part of India.
3. State whether true or false:
(a) The Mughal empire became stronger in the
eighteenth century.
(b) The English East India Company was the only
European company that traded with India.
(c) Maharaja Ranjit Singh was the ruler of Punjab.
(d) The British did not introduce administrative
changes in the territories they conquered.
Let’s discuss
4. What attracted European trading companies to
India?
5. What were the areas of conflict between the
Bengal nawabs and the East India Company?
24 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 24 4/22/2022 2:49:46 PM

--- PAGE 37 ---
6. How did the assumption of Diwani benefit the
East India Company?
7. Explain the system of “subsidiary alliance”.
8. In what way was the administration of the
Company different from that of Indian rulers?
9. Describe the changes that occurred in the
composition of the Company’s army.
Let’s do
10. After the British conquest of Bengal, Calcutta
grew from small village to a big city. Find out
about the culture, architecture and the life of
Europeans and Indians of the city during the
colonial period.
11. Collect pictures, stories, poems and information
about any of the following – the Rani of Jhansi,
Mahadji Sindhia, Haidar Ali, Maharaja Ranjit
Singh, Lord Dalhousie or any other contemporary
ruler of your region.
FROM TRADE TO TERRITORY 25
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 25 4/22/2022 2:49:46 PM

--- PAGE 38 ---
3
Ruling the Countryside
Fig. 1 – Robert Clive
accepting the Diwani
of Bengal, Bihar and
Orissa from the Mughal
ruler in 1765
The Company Becomes the Diwan
On 12 August 1765, the Mughal emperor appointed the East
India Company as the Diwan of Bengal. The actual event most
probably took place in Robert Clive’s tent, with a few Englishmen
and Indians as witnesses. But in the painting above, the event
is shown as a majestic occasion, taking place in a grand setting.
The painter was commissioned by Clive to record the memorable
events in Clive’s life. The grant of Diwani clearly was one such
event in British imagination.
As Diwan, the Company became the chief financial
administrator of the territory under its control. Now it had to think
of administering the land and organising its revenue resources.
This had to be done in a way that could yield enough revenue to
meet the growing expenses of the company. A trading company
had also to ensure that it could buy the products it needed and
sell what it wanted.
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 26 4/22/2022 2:49:47 PM

--- PAGE 39 ---
Over the years, the Company also learnt that it had to
move with some caution. Being an alien power, it needed
to pacify those who in the past had ruled the countryside,
and enjoyed authority and prestige. Those who had held
local power had to be controlled but they could not be
entirely eliminated.
How was this to be done? In this chapter we will see how the
Company came to colonise the countryside, organise revenue
resources, redefine the rights of people, and produce the crops
it wanted.
Revenue for the Company
The Company had become the Diwan, but it still saw itself
primarily as a trader. It wanted a large revenue income but
was unwilling to set up any regular system of assessment and
collection. The effort was to increase the revenue as much as it
could and buy fine cotton and silk cloth as cheaply as possible.
Within five years, the value of goods bought by the Company
in Bengal doubled. Before 1765, the Company had purchased
goods in India by importing gold and silver from Britain. Now
the revenue collected in Bengal could finance the purchase of
goods for export.
Fig. 2 – A weekly market
Soon it was clear that the Bengal economy was facing a deep
in Murshidabad in Bengal
crisis. Artisans were deserting villages since they were being
Peasants and artisans
forced to sell their goods to the Company at low prices. Peasants
from rural areas regularly
were unable to pay the dues that were being demanded from them. came to these weekly
Artisanal production was in decline, and agricultural cultivation markets (haats) to sell
their goods and buy what
showed signs of collapse. Then in 1770, a terrible famine killed
they needed. These markets
ten million people in Bengal. About one-third of the population
were badly affected during
was wiped out. times of economic crisis.
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE 27
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 27 4/22/2022 2:49:47 PM

--- PAGE 40 ---
The need to improve agriculture
If the economy was in ruins, could the Company be certain
of its revenue income? Most Company officials began to
feel that investment in land had to be encouraged and
agriculture had to be improved.
How was this to be done? After two decades of debate
on the question, the Company finally introduced the
Permanent Settlement in 1793. By the terms of the
settlement, the rajas and taluqdars were recognised
as zamindars. They were asked to collect rent from the
peasants and pay revenue to the Company. The amount
Fig. 3 – Charles Cornwallis
to be paid was fixed permanently, that is, it was not to be
Cornwallis was the Governor-
increased ever in future. It was felt that this would ensure
General of Bengal when the
Permanent Settlement was a regular flow of revenue into the Company’s coffers and
introduced. at the same time encourage the zamindars to invest in
improving the land. Since the revenue demand of the state
Source 1 would not be increased, the zamindar would benefit from
Colebrook on increased production from the land.
Bengal ryots The problem
The Permanent Settlement, however, created problems.
In many villages of
Company officials soon discovered that the zamindars
Bengal, some of the
were in fact not investing in the improvement of land.
powerful ryots did not
The revenue that had been fixed was so high that the
cultivate, but instead gave
zamindars found it difficult to pay. Anyone who failed
out their lands to others (the
to pay the revenue lost his zamindari. Numerous
under-tenants), taking
zamindaris were sold off at auctions organised by
from them very high
the Company.
rents. In 1806, H. T.
Colebrook described By the first decade of the nineteenth century, the
the conditions of these situation changed. The prices in the market rose and
under-tenants in Bengal: cultivation slowly expanded. This meant an increase in
the income of the zamindars but no gain for the Company
The under-tenants,
since it could not increase a revenue demand that had
depressed by an
been fixed permanently.
excessive rent in
Even then the zamindars did not have an interest
kind, and by usurious
returns for the cattle, in improving the land. Some had lost their lands in
seed, and subsistence, the earlier years of the settlement; others now saw the
advanced to them, possibility of earning without the trouble and risk of
can never extricate investment. As long as the zamindars could give out the
themselves from land to tenants and get rent, they were not interested in
debt. In so abject a improving the land.
state, they cannot
labour in spirit, while

Activity
they earn a scanty
subsistence without Why do you think Colebrook is concerned with the
hope of bettering
conditions of the under-ryots in Bengal? Read the
their situation.
preceding pages and suggest possible reasons.
28 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 28 6/14/2022 2:39:26 PM

--- PAGE 41 ---
On the other hand, in the villages, the cultivator
Mahal – In British
found the system extremely oppressive. The rent he paid
revenue records, mahal
to the zamindar was high and his right on the land was
is a revenue estate which
insecure. To pay the rent he had to often take a loan
may be a village or a
from the moneylender, and when he failed to pay the
group of villages.
rent, he was evicted from the land he had cultivated
for generations.
A new system is devised
By the early nineteenth century, many of the Company
officials were convinced that the system of revenue
had to be changed again. How could revenues be fixed
permanently at a time when the Company needed
more money to meet its expenses of administration
and trade?
In the North Western Provinces of the Bengal
Presidency (most of this area is now in Uttar Pradesh),
an Englishman called Holt Mackenzie devised the
new system which came into effect in 1822. He felt
Fig. 4 – Thomas Munro, Governor
that the village was an important social institution of Madras (1819–26)
in north Indian society and needed to be preserved.
Under his directions, collectors went from village to
village, inspecting the land, measuring the fields,
and recording the customs and rights of different
groups. The estimated revenue of each plot within a
village was added up to calculate the revenue that
each village (mahal) had to pay. This demand was
to be revised periodically, not permanently fixed. The
charge of collecting the revenue and paying it to the
Company was given to the village headman, rather
than the zamindar. This system came to be known as
the mahalwari settlement.
The Munro system
In the British territories in the South, there was a similar
move away from the idea of Permanent Settlement. The
new system that was devised came to be known as the
ryotwar (or ryotwari). It was tried on a small scale by
Captain Alexander Read in some of the areas that were
taken over by the Company after the wars with Tipu Sultan.
Subsequently developed by Thomas Munro, this system
was gradually extended all over south India.
Read and Munro felt that in the south there were
no traditional zamindars. The settlement, they argued,
had to be made directly with the cultivators (ryots) who
had tilled the land for generations. Their fields had to
be carefully and separately surveyed before the revenue
assessment was made. Munro thought that the British
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE 29
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 29 4/22/2022 2:49:49 PM

--- PAGE 42 ---
 should act as paternal father figures protecting the
Activity
ryots under their charge.
Imagine that you are a
Company representative All was not well
sending a report back Within a few years after the new systems were imposed,
to England about the it was clear that all was not well with them. Driven by
conditions in rural areas the desire to increase the income from land, revenue
under Company rule. officials fixed too high a revenue demand. Peasants were
What would you write? unable to pay, ryots fled the countryside, and villages
became deserted in many regions. Optimistic officials
had imagined that the new systems would transform
the peasants into rich enterprising farmers. But this
did not happen.
Crops for Europe
The British also realised that the countryside could
not only yield revenue, it could also grow the crops
that Europe required. By the late eighteenth century,
the Company was trying its best to expand the
cultivation of opium and indigo. In the century and
a half that followed, the British persuaded or forced
cultivators in various parts of India to produce other
crops: jute in Bengal, tea in Assam, sugarcane in
the United Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh), wheat
in Punjab, cotton in Maharashtra and Punjab, rice
in Madras.
How was this done? The British used a variety of methods
to expand the cultivation of crops that they needed. Let us
take a closer look at the story of one such crop, one such
method of production.
Does colour have a
history?
Figs. 5 and 6 are two
images of cotton prints.
The image on the left
(Fig. 5) shows a kalamkari
print created by weavers
of Andhra Pradesh in
India. On the right is
a floral cotton print
designed and produced
by William Morris, a
famous poet and artist
of nineteenth-century
Britain. There is one
Fig. 5 – A kalamkari print, Fig. 6 – A Morris cotton print, late-
thing common in the
twentieth-century India nineteenth-century England
30 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 30 4/22/2022 2:49:53 PM

--- PAGE 43 ---
two prints: both use a rich blue colour – commonly called
indigo. Do you know how this colour was produced?
The blue that you see in these prints was produced
from a plant called indigo. It is likely that the blue dye
used in the Morris prints in nineteenth-century Britain
was manufactured from indigo plants cultivated in India.
For India was the biggest supplier of indigo in the world at
that time.
Why the demand for Indian indigo?
The indigo plant grows primarily in the tropics. By the
thirteenth century, Indian indigo was being used by cloth
manufacturers in Italy, France and Britain to dye cloth.
However, only small amounts of Indian indigo reached
the European market and its price was very high.
European cloth manufacturers therefore had to depend
on another plant called woad to make violet and blue
dyes. Being a plant of the temperate zones, woad was
more easily available in Europe. It was grown in northern
Italy, southern France and in parts of Germany and
Britain. Worried by the competition from indigo, woad Plantation – A large
producers in Europe pressurised their governments to farm operated by a
ban the import of indigo. planter employing
various forms of
Cloth dyers, however, preferred indigo as a dye. Indigo
forced labour.
produced a rich blue colour, whereas the dye from woad
Plantations are
was pale and dull. By the seventeenth century, European
associated with the
cloth producers persuaded their governments to relax the
production of coffee,
ban on indigo import. The French began cultivating indigo
sugarcane, tobacco,
in St Domingue in the Caribbean islands, the Portuguese
tea and cotton.
in Brazil, the English in Jamaica, and the Spanish in
Venezuela. Indigo plantations also came up in many parts
of North America.
By the end of the eighteenth century, the demand for
Indian indigo grew further. Britain began to industrialise,
and its cotton production expanded dramatically, creating
an enormous new demand for cloth dyes. While the demand
for indigo increased, its existing supplies from the West
Indies and America collapsed for a variety of reasons.
Between 1783 and 1789, the production of indigo in the
world fell by half. Cloth dyers in Britain now desperately
looked for new sources of indigo supply.
From where could this indigo be procured?
Britain turns to India
Faced with the rising demand for indigo in Europe, the
Company in India looked for ways to expand the area under
indigo cultivation.
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE 31
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 31 4/22/2022 2:49:53 PM

--- PAGE 44 ---
From the last decades
of the eighteenth century,
indigo cultivation in
Bengal expanded rapidly
and Bengal indigo came to
dominate the world market.
In 1788, only about 30 per
cent of the indigo imported
into Britain was from India.
By 1810, the proportion had
gone up to 95 per cent.
As the indigo trade
grew, commercial agents
and officials of the
Company began investing
in indigo production. Over
the years many Company
officials left their jobs
to look after their indigo
business. Attracted by
Fig. 7 – The Slave Revolt in
the prospect of high profits, numerous Scotsmen and
St Domingue, August 1791,
painting by January Scuhodolski Englishmen came to India and became planters. Those
In the eighteenth century, French who had no money to produce indigo could get loans
planters produced indigo and from the Company and the banks that were coming up
sugar in the French colony of at the time.
St Domingue in the Caribbean
islands. The African slaves who How was indigo cultivated?
worked on the plantations rose
in rebellion in 1791, burning There were two main systems of indigo cultivation – nij
the plantations and killing their and ryoti. Within the system of nij cultivation, the planter
rich planters. In 1792, France produced indigo in lands that he directly controlled.
abolished slavery in the French
He either bought the land or rented it from other
colonies. These events led to the
zamindars and produced indigo by directly employing
collapse of the indigo plantations
on the Caribbean islands. hired labourers.
The problem with nij cultivation
The planters found it difficult to expand the area under
nij cultivation. Indigo could be cultivated only on fertile
lands, and these were all already densely populated. Only
small plots scattered over the landscape could be acquired.
Planters needed large areas in compact blocks to cultivate
indigo in plantations. Where could they get such land
Slave – A person who is from? They attempted to lease in the land around the
owned by someone else – indigo factory, and evict the peasants from the area. But
the slave owner. A slave this always led to conflicts and tension.
has no freedom and is Nor was labour easy to mobilise. A large plantation
compelled to work for the required a vast number of hands to operate. And labour
master. was needed precisely at a time when peasants were usually
busy with their rice cultivation.
32 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 32 4/22/2022 2:49:55 PM

--- PAGE 45 ---
Nij cultivation on a large scale also required many
Bigha – A unit of
ploughs and bullocks. One bigha of indigo cultivation
measurement of land.
required two ploughs. This meant that a planter with
Before British rule, the
1,000 bighas would need 2,000 ploughs. Investing
size of this area varied.
on purchase and maintenance of ploughs was a big
In Bengal the British
problem. Nor could supplies be easily got from the
standardised it to about
peasants since their ploughs and bullocks were busy
one-third of an acre.
on their rice fields, again exactly at the time that the
indigo planters needed them.
Till the late nineteenth century, planters were therefore
reluctant to expand the area under nij cultivation. Less
than 25 per cent of the land producing indigo was under
this system. The rest was under an alternative mode of
cultivation – the ryoti system.
Indigo on the land of ryots
Under the ryoti system, the planters
forced the ryots to sign a contract,
an agreement (satta). At times
they pressurised the village
headmen to sign the contract on
behalf of the ryots. Those who
signed the contract got cash
advances from the planters at
low rates of interest to produce
indigo. But the loan committed
the ryot to cultivating indigo on at
least 25 per cent of the area under
his holding. The planter provided
the seed and the drill, while the
cultivators prepared the soil, sowed
the seed and looked after the crop.
Fig. 8 – Workers harvesting
indigo in early-nineteenth-century
Bengal. From Colesworthy Grant,
Rural Life in Bengal, 1860
In India the indigo plant was cut
mostly by men.
Fig. 9 – The Indigo plant being
brought from the fields to the
factory
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE 33
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 33 4/22/2022 2:49:56 PM

--- PAGE 46 ---
How was indigo produced?
Fermenting
Vat
Beater
Vat
Fig. 10 – An indigo factory located near indigo fields, painting by
William Simpson, 1863
The indigo villages were usually around indigo factories owned by
planters. After harvest, the indigo plant was taken to the vats in
the indigo factory. Three or four vats were needed to manufacture
the dye. Each vat had a separate function. The leaves stripped off
the indigo plant were first soaked in warm water in a vat (known
as the fermenting or steeper vat) for several hours. When the
plants fermented, the liquid began to boil and bubble. Now the
rotten leaves were taken out and the liquid drained into another
vat that was placed just below the first vat.
In the second vat (known as the beater vat), the solution was
continuously stirred and beaten with paddles. When the liquid
Fig. 11 – Women usually gradually turned green and then blue, lime water was added to
carried the indigo plant to the vat. Gradually the indigo separated out in flakes, a muddy
the vats. sediment settled at the bottom of the vat and a clear liquid rose
to the surface. The liquid was drained off and the sediment –
the indigo pulp – transferred to
Fig. 12 – The Vat-Beater
another vat (known as the
The indigo worker settling vat), and then
here is standing pressed and dried for
with the paddle that sale.
was used to stir the
solution in the vat.
These workers had
to remain in waist-
deep water for over
eight hours to beat the
indigo solution. Fig. 13 – The indigo
is ready for sale
Here you can see the last stage of the production –
Vat – A fermenting
workers stamping and cutting the indigo pulp that
or storage vessel has been pressed and moulded. In the background you
can see a worker carrying away the blocks for drying.
34 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 34 4/22/2022 2:49:59 PM

--- PAGE 47 ---
When the crop was delivered to the planter after the
harvest, a new loan was given to the ryot, and the cycle
started all over again. Peasants who were initially tempted
by the loans soon realised how harsh the system was. The
price they got for the indigo they produced was very low
and the cycle of loans never ended.
There were other problems too. The planters usually
insisted that indigo be cultivated on the best soils in
which peasants preferred to cultivate rice. Indigo,
moreover, had deep roots and it exhausted the soil
rapidly. After an indigo harvest the land could not be
sown with rice. Source 2
The “Blue Rebellion” and After A song from an
In March 1859, thousands of ryots in Bengal refused indigo-producing
to grow indigo. As the rebellion spread, ryots refused
village
to pay rents to the planters, and attacked indigo
factories armed with swords and spears, bows and In the moments of
arrows. Women turned up to fight with pots, pans struggle, people often
and kitchen implements. Those who worked for the sing songs to inspire each
planters were socially boycotted, and the gomasthas – other and to build a sense
agents of planters – who came to collect rent were of collective unity. Such
beaten up. Ryots swore they would no longer take songs give us a glimpse
advances to sow indigo nor be bullied by the planters’ of their feelings. During
lathiyals – the lathi-wielding strongmen maintained by the indigo rebellion,
the planters. many such songs could
Why did the indigo peasants decide that they would no be heard in the villages
longer remain silent? What gave them the power to rebel? of lower Bengal. Here is
Clearly, the indigo system was intensely oppressive. But one such song:
those who are oppressed do not always rise up in rebellion.
The long lathis
They do so only at times.
wielded by the
In 1859, the indigo ryots felt that they had the support planter of Mollahati /
of the local zamindars and village headmen in their now lie in a cluster
rebellion against the planters. In many villages, headmen
The babus of Kolkata
who had been forced to sign indigo contracts, mobilised
have sailed down /to
the indigo peasants and fought pitched battles with the see the great fight
lathiyals. In other places even the zamindars went around
This time the raiyats
villages urging the ryots to resist the planters. These
are all ready, / they
zamindars were unhappy with the increasing power of the
will no longer be
planters and angry at being forced by the planters to give
beaten in silence
them land on long leases.
They will no longer
The indigo peasants also imagined that the British
give up their life /
government would support them in their struggle
without fighting the
against the planters. After the Revolt of 1857, the
lathiyals.
British government was particularly worried about the
possibility of another popular rebellion. When the news
spread of a simmering revolt in the indigo districts,
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE 35
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 35 4/22/2022 2:49:59 PM

--- PAGE 48 ---
the Lieutenant Governor toured the region in the winter
of 1859. The ryots saw the tour as a sign of government
sympathy for their plight. When in Barasat, the magistrate
Ashley Eden issued a notice stating that ryots would not
be compelled to accept indigo contracts, word went around
that Queen Victoria had declared that indigo need not be
sown. Eden was trying to placate the peasants and control
an explosive situation, but his action was read as support
for the rebellion.
As the rebellion spread, intellectuals from Calcutta
rushed to the indigo districts. They wrote of the misery of
the ryots, the tyranny of the planters, and the horrors of
the indigo system.
Worried by the rebellion, the government brought in
the military to protect the planters from assault, and set
up the Indigo Commission to enquire into the system of
indigo production. The Commission held the planters
guilty, and criticised them for the coercive methods
they used with indigo cultivators. It declared that indigo
production was not profitable for ryots. The Commission
asked the ryots to fulfil their existing contracts but also told
them that they could refuse to produce indigo in future.
Source 3
“I would rather beg than sow indigo”
Hadji Mulla, an indigo cultivator of Chandpore, Thana
Hardi, was interviewed by the members of the Indigo
Commission on Tuesday, 5 June 1860. This is what he
said in answer to some of the questions:
W.S. Seton Karr, President of the Indigo
Commission: Are you now willing to sow indigo;
and if not on what fresh terms would you be
willing to do it?

Activity Hadji Mulla: I am not willing to sow, and I
don’t know that any fresh terms would satisfy me.
Imagine you are a
witness giving evidence Mr Sale: Would you not be willing to sow at a
before the Indigo rupee a bundle?
Commission. W.S. Seton
Hadji Mulla: No I would not; rather than sow
Karr asks you “On what
indigo I will go to another country; I would rather
condition will ryots grow
beg than sow indigo.
indigo?” What will your
Indigo Commission Report, Vol. II, Minutes of Evidence, p. 67
answer be?
36 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 36 4/22/2022 2:50:00 PM

--- PAGE 49 ---
After the revolt, indigo production collapsed in Bengal.
But the planters now shifted their operation to Bihar.
With the discovery of synthetic dyes in the late nineteenth
century, their business was severely affected, but yet
they managed to expand production. When Mahatma
Gandhi returned from South Africa, a peasant from Bihar
persuaded him to visit Champaran and see the plight of
the indigo cultivators there. Mahatma Gandhi’s visit in
1917 marked the beginning of the Champaran movement
against the indigo planters.
Let’s recall
1. Match the following:
ryot village
mahal peasant
nij cultivation on ryot’s lands
ryoti cultivation on planter’s own land
2. Fill in the blanks:
(a) Growers of woad in Europe saw __________
as a crop which would provide competition
to their earnings.
(b) The demand for indigo increased in late
eighteenth-century Britain because of
__________.
(c) The international demand for indigo was
affected by the discovery of __________.
(d) The Champaran movement was against
__________.
Let’s discuss
3. Describe the main features of the Permanent
Settlement.
4. How was the mahalwari system different from the
Permanent Settlement?
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE 37
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 37 4/22/2022 2:50:01 PM

--- PAGE 50 ---
5. Give two problems which arose with the new Munro
Let’s imagine
system of fixing revenue.
Imagine a conversation
6. Why were ryots reluctant to grow indigo?
between a planter and
a peasant who is being 7. What were the circumstances which led to the
forced to grow indigo. eventual collapse of indigo production in Bengal?
What reasons would
the planter give to
persuade the peasant?
What problems would Let’s do
the peasant point
out? Enact their
8. Find out more about the Champaran movement and
conversation.
Mahatma Gandhi’s role in it.
9. Look into the history of either tea or coffee
plantations in India. See how the life of workers in
these plantations was similar to or different from
that of workers in indigo plantations.
38 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 38 4/22/2022 2:50:03 PM

--- PAGE 51 ---
4 Tribals, Dikus and the
Vision of a Golden Age
In 1895, a man named Birsa was seen roaming the forests and
villages of Chottanagpur in Jharkhand. People said he had
miraculous powers – he could cure all diseases and multiply
grain. Birsa himself declared that God had appointed him
to save his people from trouble, free them from the slavery
of dikus (outsiders). Soon thousands began following Birsa,
believing that he was bhagwan (God) and had come to solve
all their problems.
Birsa was born in a family of Mundas – a tribal group
that lived in Chottanagpur. But his followers included Fig. 1 – Women of the
other tribals of the region – Santhals and Oraons. All of Dongria Kandha tribe
in Orissa wade through
them in different ways were unhappy with the changes
the river on the way to
they were experiencing and the problems they were facing
the market
under British rule. Their familiar ways of life seemed to be
disappearing, their livelihoods were under
threat, and their religion appeared to be
in danger.
What problems did Birsa set out to resolve?
Who were the outsiders being referred to as
dikus, and how did they enslave the people of
the region? What was happening to the tribal
people under the British? How did their lives
change? These are some of the questions you
will read about in this chapter.
You have read about tribal societies last
year. Most tribes had customs and rituals
that were very different from those laid
down by Brahmans. These societies also
did not have the sharp social divisions
that were characteristic of caste societies.
All those who belonged to the same tribe
thought of themselves as sharing common
ties of kinship. However, this did not mean
that there were no social and economic
differences within tribes.
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 39 4/22/2022 2:50:04 PM

--- PAGE 52 ---
How did Tribal Groups Live?
By the nineteenth century, tribal people in different parts
of India were involved in a variety of activities.
Some were jhum cultivators
Some of them practised jhum cultivation, that is, shifting
cultivation. This was done on small patches of land, mostly
in forests. The cultivators cut the treetops to allow sunlight
to reach the ground, and burnt the vegetation on the land
to clear it for cultivation. They spread the ash from the
firing, which contained potash, to fertilise the soil. They
used the axe to cut trees and the hoe to scratch the soil
in order to prepare it for cultivation. They broadcast the
seeds, that is, scattered the seeds on the field instead of
ploughing the land and sowing the seeds. Once the crop
Fallow – A field left
was ready and harvested, they moved to another field.
uncultivated for a while
A field that had been cultivated once was left fallow for
so that the soil recovers
several years,
fertility
Shifting cultivators were found in the hilly and forested
Sal – A tree tracts of north-east and central India. The lives of these
tribal people depended on free movement within forests
Mahua – A flower that
and on being able to use the land and forests for growing
is eaten or used to make
their crops. That is the only way they could practise
alcohol
shifting cultivation.
Some were hunters and gatherers
In many regions, tribal groups lived by hunting
animals and gathering forest produce. They saw forests
Fig. 2 – Dongria Kandha women as essential for survival. The Khonds were such a
in Orissa take home pandanus community living in the forests of Orissa. They regularly
leaves from the forest to make
went out on collective hunts and then divided the meat
plates
amongst themselves.
They ate fruits and roots
collected from the forest
and cooked food with the
oil they extracted from
the seeds of the sal and
mahua. They used many
forest shrubs and herbs
for medicinal purposes,
and sold forest produce
in the local markets. The
local weavers and leather
workers turned to the
Khonds when they needed
supplies of kusum and
palash flowers to colour
their clothes and leather.
40 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 40 4/22/2022 2:50:05 PM

--- PAGE 53 ---
From where did these forest
people get their supplies of rice
and other grains? At times they
exchanged goods – getting what
they needed in return for their
valuable forest produce. At other
times, they bought goods with the
small amount of earnings they
had. Some of them did odd jobs
in the villages, carrying loads
or building roads, while others
laboured in the fields of peasants
and farmers. When supplies of
forest produce shrank, tribal
people had to increasingly wander
around in search of work as
labourers. But many of them – like
the Baigas of central India – were
reluctant to do work for others.
The Baigas saw themselves as
people of the forest, who could
only live on the produce of the
forest. It was below the dignity of
a Baiga to become a labourer.
Tribal groups often needed
to buy and sell in order to be
able to get the goods that were
Fig. 3 – Location of some tribal
not produced within the locality. This led to their groups in India
dependence on traders and moneylenders. Traders came
around with things for sale, and sold the goods at high
prices. Moneylenders gave loans with which the tribals
met their cash needs, adding to what they earned. But
the interest charged on the loans was usually very
high. So for the tribals, market and commerce often
meant debt and poverty. They therefore came to see
the moneylender and trader as evil outsiders and the
cause of their misery.
Some herded animals
Many tribal groups lived by herding and rearing animals.
They were pastoralists who moved with their herds of
cattle or sheep according to the seasons. When the grass
in one place was exhausted, they moved to another area.
The Van Gujjars of the Punjab hills and the Labadis of
Andhra Pradesh were cattle herders, the Gaddis of Kulu
were shepherds, and the Bakarwals of Kashmir reared
goats. You will read more about them in your history
book next year.
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE 41
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 41 4/22/2022 2:50:06 PM

--- PAGE 54 ---
Source 1
A time to hunt, a time to sow, a time to move to a new field
Have you ever noticed that people living in different types of societies do not
share the same notion of work and time? The lives of the shifting cultivators and
hunters in different regions were regulated by a calendar and division of tasks
for men and women.
Verrier Elwin, a British anthropologist who lived among the Baigas and Khonds
of central India for many years in the 1930s and 1940s, gives us a picture of what
this calendar and division of tasks was like. He writes:
In Chait women went to clearings to ... cut stalks that were already reaped;
men cut large trees and go for their ritual hunt. The hunt began at full
moon from the east. Traps of bamboo were used for hunting. The women
gathered fruits like sago, tamarind and mushroom. Baiga women can only
gather roots or kanda and mahua seeds. Of all the adivasis in Central India, the
Baigas were known as the best hunters … In Baisakh the firing of the forest
took place, the women gathered unburnt wood to burn. Men continued
to hunt, but nearer their villages. In Jeth sowing took place and hunting
still went on. From Asadh to Bhadon the men worked in the fields. In Kuar
the first fruits of beans were ripened and in Kartik kutki became ripe. In
Aghan every crop was ready and in Pus winnowing took place. Pus was also
the time for dances and marriages. In
Magh shifts were made to new bewars
and hunting-gathering was the main
subsistence activity.
The cycle described above took
place in the first year. In the second
year there was more time for hunting
as only a few crops had to be sown
and harvested. But since there was
enough food the men lived in the
bewars. It was only in the third year
that the diet had to be supplemented
with the forest products.
Adapted from Verrier Elwin, Baiga (1939) and Elwin’s
unpublished ‘Notes on the Khonds’ (Verrier Elwin
Papers, Nehru Memorial Museum and Library)

Activity
Look carefully at the tasks that Baiga
men and women did. Do you see any
pattern? What were the differences
Fig. 4 – A Santhal girl carrying firewood,
in the types of work that they were
Bihar, 1946
expected to perform?
Children go with their mothers to the forest
to gather forest produce.
42 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 42 4/22/2022 2:50:08 PM

--- PAGE 55 ---
Some took to settled cultivation
Bewar – A term used
Even before the nineteenth century, many from within
in Madhya Pradesh for
the tribal groups had begun settling down, and
shifting cultivation
cultivating their fields in one place year after year,
instead of moving from place to place. They began
to use the plough, and gradually got rights over the
land they lived on. In many cases, like the Mundas of
Chottanagpur, the land belonged to the clan as a whole.
All members of the clan were regarded as descendants
of the original settlers, who had first cleared the land.
Therefore, all of them had rights on the land. Very
often some people within the clan acquired more power
than others, some became chiefs and others followers.
Powerful men often rented out their land instead of
cultivating it themselves.
British officials saw settled tribal groups like the Gonds
and Santhals as more civilised than hunter-gatherers or
shifting cultivators. Those who lived in the forests were
considered to be wild and savage: they needed to be settled
and civilised.
How did Colonial Rule Affect Tribal
Lives?
The lives of tribal groups changed during British rule. Let
us see what these changes were.
What happened to tribal chiefs?
Before the arrival of the British, in many areas the tribal
chiefs were important people. They enjoyed a certain
amount of economic power and had the right to administer
and control their territories. In some places they had
their own police and decided on the local rules of land
and forest management. Under British rule, the functions
and powers of the tribal chiefs changed considerably.
They were allowed to keep their land titles over a cluster
of villages and rent out lands, but they lost much of their
administrative power and were forced to follow laws made
by British officials in India. They also had to pay tribute
to the British, and discipline the tribal groups on behalf
of the British. They lost the authority they had earlier
enjoyed amongst their people, and were unable to fulfil
their traditional functions.
Fig. 5 – A log house being built
in a village of the Nyishi tribes of
What happened to the shifting cultivators?
Arunachal Pradesh.
The British were uncomfortable with groups who moved
The entire village helps when log
about and did not have a fixed home. They wanted tribal huts are built.
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE 43
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 43 4/22/2022 2:50:09 PM

--- PAGE 56 ---
Fig. 6 – Bhil women cultivating in groups to settle down and become peasant cultivators.
a forest in Gujarat Settled peasants were easier to control and administer
Shifting cultivation continues than people who were always on the move. The British
in many forest areas of Gujarat. also wanted a regular revenue source for the state.
You can see that trees have been
So they introduced land settlements – that is, they
cut and land cleared to create
measured the land, defined the rights of each individual
patches for cultivation.
to that land, and fixed the revenue demand for the
state. Some peasants were declared landowners, others
tenants. As you have seen (Chapter 2), the tenants were
to pay rent to the landowner who in turn paid revenue
to the state.
The British effort to settle jhum cultivators was not
very successful. Settled plough cultivation is not easy in
areas where water is scarce and the soil is dry. In fact,
jhum cultivators who took to plough cultivation often
suffered, since their fields did not produce good yields.
So the jhum cultivators in north-east India insisted
on continuing with their traditional practice. Facing
widespread protests, the British had to ultimately allow
them the right to carry on shifting cultivation in some
parts of the forest.
Fig. 7 – Tribal workers in a rice field in Andhra Pradesh
Note the difference between rice cultivation in the flat plains and in
the forests.
44 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 44 4/22/2022 2:50:10 PM

--- PAGE 57 ---
Forest laws and their impact
The life of tribal groups, as you have seen, was directly
connected to the forest. So changes in forest laws had a
considerable effect on tribal lives. The British extended
their control over all forests and declared that forests were
state property. Some forests were classified as Reserved
Forests for they produced timber which the British wanted.
In these forests people were not allowed to move freely,
practise jhum cultivation, collect fruits, or hunt animals.
How were jhum cultivators to survive in such a situation?
Many were therefore forced to move to other areas in search
of work and livelihood.
But once the British stopped the tribal people from
living inside forests, they faced a problem. From where Sleeper – The horizontal
would the Forest Department get its labour to cut trees planks of wood on which
for railway sleepers and to transport logs? railway lines are laid
Colonial officials came up with a solution. They decided
that they would give jhum cultivators small patches of land
in the forests and allow them to cultivate these on the
condition that those who lived in the villages would have
to provide labour to the Forest Department and look after
the forests. So in many regions, the Forest Department
established forest villages to ensure a regular supply of
cheap labour.
Source 2
“In this land of the English how hard it is to live”
In the1930s Verrier Elwin visited the land of the Baigas – a tribal group in
central India. He wanted to know about them – their customs and practices,
their art and folklore. He recorded many songs that lamented the hard time
the Baigas were having under British rule.
In this land of the English how hard it is to live
How hard it is to live
In the village sits the landlord
In the gate sits the Kotwar
In the garden sits the Patwari
In the field sits the government
In this land of the English how hard it is to live
To pay cattle tax we have to sell cow
To pay forest tax we have to sell buffalo
To pay land tax we have to sell bullock
How are we to get our food?
In this land of the English
Quoted in Verrier Elwin and Shamrao Hivale, Songs of the Maikal, p. 316.
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE 45
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 45 4/22/2022 2:50:10 PM

--- PAGE 58 ---
Many tribal groups reacted against the
colonial forest laws. They disobeyed the
new rules, continued with practices that
were declared illegal, and at times rose
in open rebellion. Such was the revolt of
Songram Sangma in 1906 in Assam, and
the forest satyagraha of the 1930s in the
Central Provinces.
The problem with trade
During the nineteenth century, tribal
groups found that traders and money-
lenders were coming into the forests more
often, wanting to buy forest produce,
offering cash loans, and asking them to
work for wages. It took tribal groups some
time to understand the consequences of
what was happening.
Let us consider the case of the silk
growers. In the eighteenth century, Indian
silk was in demand in European markets.
The fine quality of Indian silk was highly
valued and exports from India increased
Fig. 8 – Godara women weaving
rapidly. As the market expanded, East India Company
officials tried to encourage silk production to meet the
growing demand.
Hazaribagh, in present-day Jharkhand, was an area
where the Santhals reared cocoons. The
traders dealing in silk sent in their agents
who gave loans to the tribal people and
collected the cocoons. The growers
were paid ` 3 to ` 4 for a thousand
cocoons. These were then
exported to Burdwan or
Gaya where they were
sold at five times the
price. The middlemen
– so called because
they arranged deals
between the exporters
Fig. 9 – A Hajang and silk growers – made
woman weaving a mat
huge profits. The silk
For women, domestic
growers earned very
work was not confined
little. Understandably,
to the home. They
carried their babies many tribal groups saw
with them to the fields the market and the
and the factories. traders as their main
enemies.
46 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 46 4/22/2022 2:50:13 PM

--- PAGE 59 ---
Fig. 10 – Coal miners of
Bihar, 1948
In the 1920s, about 50 per
cent of the miners in the
Jharia and Raniganj coal
mines of Bihar were tribals.
Work deep down in the dark
and suffocating mines was
not only back-breaking
and dangerous, it was
often literally killing. In the
1920s, over 2,000 workers
died every year in the coal
mines in India.
The search for work
The plight of the tribals who had to go far away from their homes
in search of work was even worse. From the late nineteenth
century, tea plantations started coming up and mining became
an important industry. Tribals were recruited in large numbers
to work at the tea plantations of Assam and the coal mines
of Jharkhand. They were recruited through contractors who
paid them miserably low wages, and prevented them from

returning home. Activity
Find out whether
A Closer Look the conditions of
work in the mines
Through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, tribal groups
have changed
in different parts of the country rebelled against the changes
now. Check how
in laws, the restrictions on their practices, the new taxes they
many people die in
had to pay, and the exploitation by traders and moneylenders.
mines every year,
The Kols rebelled in 1831–32, Santhals rose in revolt in 1855,
and what are the
the Bastar Rebellion in central India broke out in 1910 and the
reasons for their
Warli Revolt in Maharashtra in 1940. The movement that Birsa
death.
led was one such movement.
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE 47
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 47 4/22/2022 2:50:15 PM

--- PAGE 60 ---
Source 3
Birsa Munda
‘Blood trickles Birsa was born in the mid-1870s. The son of a poor father,
he grew up around the forests of Bohonda, grazing sheep,
from my shoulders’
playing the flute, and dancing in the local akhara. Forced
The songs the Mundas by poverty, his father had to move from place to place
sang bemoaned their looking for work. As an adolescent, Birsa heard tales of
misery. the Munda uprisings of the past and saw the sirdars
(leaders) of the community urging the people to revolt.
Alas! under [the
They talked of a golden age when the Mundas had been
drudgery of] forced
free of the oppression of dikus, and said there would be
labour
a time when the ancestral right of the community would
Blood trickles from
be restored. They saw themselves as the descendants of
my shoulders
the original settlers of the region, fighting for their land
Day and night the
(mulk ki larai), reminding people of the need to win back
emissary from the
their kingdom.
zamindars,
Birsa went to the local missionary school, and listened
Annoys and irritates
to the sermons of missionaries. There too he heard it said
me, day and night I
that it was possible for the Mundas to attain the Kingdom
groan
of Heaven, and regain their lost rights. This would be
Alas! This is my
possible if they became good Christians and gave up their
condition
“bad practices”. Later Birsa also spent some time in the
I do not have a
company of a prominent Vaishnav preacher. He wore the
home, where shall I
sacred thread, and began to value the importance of purity
get happiness
and piety.
Alas!
Birsa was deeply influenced by many of the ideas he
K.S. Singh, Birsa Munda and
came in touch with in his growing-up years. His movement
His Movement, p.12.
was aimed at reforming tribal society. He urged the Mundas
to give up drinking liquor, clean their village, and stop
believing in witchcraft and sorcery. But we must remember
that Birsa also turned against missionaries and Hindu
landlords. He saw them as outside forces that were ruining
the Munda way of life.
In 1895, Birsa urged his followers to recover their
glorious past. He talked of a golden age in the past – a
Vaishnav – Worshippers
satyug (the age of truth) – when Mundas lived a good
of Vishnu
life, constructed embankments, tapped natural springs,
planted trees and orchards, practised cultivation to
earn their living. They did not kill their brethren and
relatives. They lived honestly. Birsa also wanted people
to once again work on their land, settle down and
cultivate their fields.
What worried British officials most was the political
aim of the Birsa movement, for it wanted to drive out
missionaries, moneylenders, Hindu landlords, and
the government and set up a Munda Raj with Birsa at
its head. The movement identified all these forces as
the cause of the misery the Mundas were suffering.
48 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 48 4/22/2022 2:50:17 PM

--- PAGE 61 ---
The land policies of the British were destroying their
traditional land system, Hindu landlords and moneylenders
were taking over their land, and missionaries were
criticising their traditional culture.
As the movement spread the British officials decided to
act. They arrested Birsa in 1895, convicted him on charges
of rioting and jailed him for two years.
When Birsa was released in 1897, he began touring
the villages to gather support. He used traditional
symbols and language to rouse people, urging them
to destroy “Ravana” (dikus and the Europeans) and
establish a kingdom under his leadership. Birsa’s
followers began targeting the symbols of diku and
European power. They attacked police stations and
churches, and raided the property of moneylenders
and zamindars. They raised the white flag as a symbol
of Birsa Raj.
In 1900, Birsa died of cholera and the movement
faded out. However, the movement was significant in at
least two ways. First – it forced the colonial government to
introduce laws so that the land of the tribals could not be
easily taken over by dikus. Second – it showed once again
that the tribal people had the capacity to protest against
injustice and express their anger against colonial rule.
They did this in their own specific way, inventing their
own rituals and symbols of struggle.
Let’s recall
1. Fill in the blanks:
(a) The British described the tribal people as
____________.
(b) The method of sowing seeds in jhum cultivation
is known as ____________.
(c) The tribal chiefs got _________ titles in central
India under the British land settlements.
(d) Tribals went to work in the __________ of Assam
and the ____________ in Bihar.
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE 49
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 49 4/22/2022 2:50:17 PM

--- PAGE 62 ---
2. State whether true or false:
Let’s imagine (a) Jhum cultivators plough the land and sow seeds.
Imagine you are a (b) Cocoons were bought from the Santhals and sold
jhum cultivator living by the traders at five times the purchase price.
in a forest village
in the nineteenth (c) Birsa urged his followers to purify themselves,
century. You have give up drinking liquor and stop believing in
just been told that the witchcraft and sorcery.
land you were born
(d) The British wanted to preserve the tribal way of
on no longer belongs
life.
to you. In a meeting
with British officials
you try to explain the
kinds of problems you
face. What would you Let’s discuss
say?
3. What problems did shifting cultivators face under
British rule?
4. How did the powers of tribal chiefs change under
colonial rule?
5. What accounts for the anger of the tribals against
the dikus?
6. What was Birsa’s vision of a golden age? Why do
you think such a vision appealed to the people of
the region?
Let’s do
7. Find out from your parents, friends or teachers,
the names of some heroes of other tribal revolts
in the twentieth century. Write their story in your
own words.
8. Choose any tribal group living in India today. Find
out about their customs and way of life, and how
their lives have changed in the last 50 years.
50 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
chap 1-4.indd 50 4/22/2022 2:50:18 PM

--- PAGE 63 ---
5 When People Rebel
1857 and After
Fig. 1 – Sepoys and peasants
gather forces for the revolt that
spread across the plains of north
India in 1857
Policies and the People
In the previous chapters you looked at the policies of the
East India Company and the effect they had on different
people. Kings, queens, peasants, landlords, tribals, soldiers
were all affected in different ways. You have also seen how
people resist policies and actions that harm their interests
or go against their sentiments.
Nawabs lose their power
Since the mid-eighteenth century, nawabs and rajas had
seen their power erode. They had gradually lost their
authority and honour. Residents had been stationed in
many courts, the freedom of the rulers reduced, their
armed forces disbanded, and their revenues and territories
taken away by stages.
Many ruling families tried to negotiate with the
Company to protect their interests. For example, Rani
Lakshmibai of Jhansi wanted the Company to recognise
her adopted son as the heir to the kingdom after the
death of her husband. Nana Saheb, the adopted son of
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 51 4/22/2022 2:43:01 PM

--- PAGE 64 ---
Peshwa Baji Rao II, pleaded that he be given his father’s
pension when the latter died. However, the Company,
confident of its superiority and military powers, turned
down these pleas.
Awadh was one of the last territories to be annexed.
In 1801, a subsidiary alliance was imposed on Awadh,
and in 1856 it was taken over. Governor-General
Dalhousie declared that the territory was being
misgoverned and British rule was needed to ensure
proper administration.
The Company even began to plan how to bring the
Mughal dynasty to an end. The name of the Mughal king
was removed from the coins minted by the Company. In
1849, Governor-General Dalhousie announced that after
the death of Bahadur Shah Zafar, the family of the king
would be shifted out of the Red Fort and given another
place in Delhi to reside in. In 1856, Governor-General
Canning decided that Bahadur Shah Zafar would be
the last Mughal king and after his death none of his
descendants would be recognised as kings – they would
just be called princes.
The peasants and the sepoys
In the countryside, peasants and zamindars resented
the high taxes and the rigid methods of revenue
collection. Many failed to pay back their loans to the
moneylenders and gradually lost the lands they had
tilled for generations.
The Indian sepoys in the employ of the Company
also had reasons for discontent. They were unhappy
about their pay, allowances and conditions of service.
Some of the new rules, moreover, violated their religious
sensibilities and beliefs. Did you know that in those
days many people in the country believed that if they
crossed the sea they would lose their religion and caste?
So when in 1824, the sepoys were told to go to Burma
by the sea route to fight for the Company, they refused
to follow the order, though they agreed to go by the
land route. They were severely punished, and since the
 issue did not die down, in 1856 the Company passed a
Activity
new law which stated that every new person who took
Imagine you are a sepoy up employment in the Company’s army had to agree to
in the Company army, serve overseas if required.
advising your nephew
Sepoys also reacted to what was happening in the
not to take employment
countryside. Many of them were peasants and had families
in the army. What reasons
living in the villages. So the anger of the peasants quickly
would you give?
spread among the sepoys.
52 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 52 4/22/2022 2:43:01 PM

--- PAGE 65 ---
Responses to reforms
The British believed that Indian society had
to be reformed. Laws were passed to stop the
practice of sati and to encourage the remarriage
of widows. English-language education was
actively promoted. After 1830, the Company
allowed Christian missionaries to function freely
in its domain and even own land and property. In
1850, a new law was passed to make conversion
to Christianity easier. This law allowed an Indian
who had converted to Christianity to inherit the
property of his ancestors. Many Indians began to
feel that the British were destroying their religion,
their social customs and their traditional way
of life.
There were of course other Indians who wanted
to change existing social practices. You will read
about these reformers and reform movements in
Chapter 6.
Through the Eyes of the People
Fig. 2 – Sepoys exchange news
To get a glimpse of what people were thinking those days and rumours in the bazaars of
about British rule, study Sources 1 and 2. north India
Source 1
The list of eighty-four rules
Given here are excerpts from the book Majha Pravaas, written by Vishnubhatt
Godse, a Brahman from a village in Maharashtra. He and his uncle had set out to
attend a yajna being organised in Mathura. Vishnubhatt writes that they met some
sepoys on the way who told them that they should not proceed on the journey
because a massive upheaval was going to break out in three days. The sepoys said:
the English were determined to wipe out the religions of the Hindus and the
Muslims … they had made a list of eighty-four rules and announced these in
a gathering of all big kings and princes in Calcutta. They said that the kings
refused to accept these rules and warned the English of dire consequences
and massive upheaval if these are implemented … that the kings all returned
to their capitals in great anger … all the big people began making plans. A
date was fixed for the war of religion and the secret plan had been circulated
from the cantonment in Meerut by letters sent to different cantonments.
Vishnubhatt Godse, Majha Pravaas, pp. 23-24.
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL 53
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 53 4/22/2022 2:43:04 PM

--- PAGE 66 ---
Source 2
“There was soon excitement in every regiment”
Another account we have from those days are the memoirs of Subedar
Sitaram Pande. Sitaram Pande was recruited in 1812 as a sepoy in the
Bengal Native Army. He served the English for 48 years and retired in
1860. He helped the British to suppress the rebellion though his own
son was a rebel and was killed by the British in front of his eyes. On
retirement he was persuaded by his Commanding Officer, Norgate, to write
his memoirs. He completed the writing in 1861 in Awadhi and Norgate
translated it into English and had it published under the title From Sepoy
to Subedar.
Here is an excerpt from what Sitaram Pande wrote:
It is my humble opinion that this seizing of Oudh filled the minds of the
Sepoys with distrust and led them to plot against the Government. Agents
of the Nawab of Oudh and also of the King of Delhi were sent all over
India to discover the temper of the army. They worked upon the feelings of
sepoys, telling them how treacherously the foreigners had behaved towards
their king. They invented ten thousand lies and promises to persuade the
soldiers to mutiny and turn against their masters, the English, with the
object of restoring the Emperor of Delhi to the throne. They maintained
that this was wholly within the army’s powers if the soldiers would only
act together and do as they were advised.
Fig. 3 – Rebel sepoys at Meerut attack officers, enter their homes and set fire to buildings
Source 2 contd.
54 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 54 4/22/2022 2:43:05 PM

--- PAGE 67 ---
Source 2 contd.

Activity
It chanced that about this time the Sarkar sent
parties of men from each regiment to different 1. What were the
garrisons for instructions in the use of the new rifle. important concerns
These men performed the new drill for some time
in the minds of the
until a report got about by some means or the other,
people according to
that the cartridges used for these new rifles were
Sitaram and according
greased with the fat of cows and pigs. The men from
to Vishnubhatt?
our regiment wrote to others in the regiment telling
them about this, and there was soon excitement in 2. What role did they
every regiment. Some men pointed out that in forty think the rulers were
years’ service nothing had ever been done by the playing? What role did
Sarkar to insult their religion, but as I have already the sepoys seem to
mentioned the sepoys’ minds had been inflamed by play?
the seizure of Oudh. Interested parties were quick
to point out that the great aim of the English was to
turn us all into Christians, and they had therefore
introduced the cartridge in order to bring this about,
since both Mahommedans and Hindus would be
defiled by using it.
The Colonel sahib was of the opinion that the
excitement, which even he could not fail to see, would
pass off, as it had done before, and he recommended
me to go to my home.
Sitaram Pande, From Sepoy to Subedar, pp. 162-63.
A Mutiny Becomes a Popular Rebellion
Though struggles between rulers and the ruled are
not unusual, sometimes such struggles become quite
widespread as a popular resistance so that the power
of the state breaks down. A very large number of
people begin to believe that they have a common enemy Mutiny – When soldiers
and rise up against the enemy at the same time. For as a group disobey their
such a situation to develop, people have to organise, officers in the army
communicate, take initiative and display the confidence
to turn the situation around.
Such a situation developed in the northern parts
of India in 1857. After a hundred years of conquest
and administration, the English East India Company
faced a massive rebellion that started in May 1857 and
threatened the Company’s very presence in India. Sepoys
mutinied in several places beginning from Meerut and a
large number of people from different sections of society
rose up in rebellion. Some regard it as the biggest armed
resistance to colonialism in the nineteenth century
anywhere in the world.
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL 55
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 55 4/22/2022 2:43:05 PM

--- PAGE 68 ---
Fig. 4 – The battle in the
From Meerut to Delhi
cavalry lines
On 8 April 1857, a young soldier, Mangal Pandey, was hanged
On the evening of 3 July
1857, over 3,000 rebels came to death for attacking his officers in Barrackpore. Some days
from Bareilly, crossed the later, some sepoys of the regiment at Meerut refused to do the
river Jamuna, entered Delhi,
army drill using the new cartridges, which were suspected
and attacked the British
of being coated with the fat of cows and pigs. Eighty-five
cavalry posts. The battle
continued all through sepoys were dismissed from service and sentenced to ten
the night. years in jail for disobeying their officers. This happened on
9 May 1857.
The response of the other Indian soldiers in Meerut was
quite extraordinary. On 10 May, the soldiers marched to the
jail in Meerut and released the imprisoned sepoys. They
attacked and killed British officers. They captured guns and
ammunition and set fire to the buildings and properties of the
British and declared war on the firangis. The soldiers were
determined to bring an end to their rule in the country. But
who would rule the land instead? The soldiers had an answer
to this question – the Mughal emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar.
The sepoys of Meerut rode all night of 10 May to reach
Delhi in the early hours next morning. As news of their
Fig. 5 – Postal stamp issued in arrival spread, the regiments stationed in Delhi also rose
commemoration of Mangal Pandey up in rebellion. Again british officers were killed, arms
and ammunition seized, buildings set on fire. Triumphant
soldiers gathered around the walls of the Red Fort where the
Badshah lived, demanding to meet him. The emperor was not
Firangis – Foreigners
quite willing to challenge the mighty British power but the
The term reflects an
soldiers persisted. They forced their way into the palace and
attitude of contempt.
proclaimed Bahadur Shah Zafar as their leader.
56 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 56 4/22/2022 2:43:06 PM

--- PAGE 69 ---
The ageing emperor had to accept this demand. He wrote
letters to all the chiefs and rulers of the country to come
forward and organise a confederacy of Indian states to fight
the British. This single step taken by Bahadur Shah had
great implications.
The Mughal dynasty had ruled over a very large
part of the country. Most smaller rulers and chieftains
controlled different territories on behalf of the Mughal
ruler. Threatened by the expansion of British rule, many
of them felt that if the Mughal emperor could rule again,
they too would be able to rule their own territories once
more, under Mughal authority.
The British had not expected this to happen. They thought
the disturbance caused by the issue of the cartridges would
Fig. 6 – Bahadur Shah Zafar
die down. But Bahadur Shah Zafar’s decision to bless the
rebellion changed the entire situation dramatically. Often
when people see an alternative possibility, they feel inspired
and enthused. It gives them the courage, hope and confidence
to act.
The rebellion spreads
After the British were routed from Delhi, there was no uprising
for almost a week. It took that much time for news to travel.
Then, a spurt of mutinies began.
Regiment after regiment mutinied and took off to join
other troops at nodal points like Delhi, Kanpur and Lucknow.
After them, the people of the towns and villages also rose up
in rebellion and rallied around local leaders, zamindars and
chiefs who were prepared to establish their authority and
Fig. 7 – Rani Laxmibai
fight the British. Nana Saheb, the adopted son of the late
Peshwa Baji Rao who lived near Kanpur, gathered armed
Fig. 8 – As the mutiny spread,
forces and expelled the British garrison from the city. He
British officers were killed in
proclaimed himself Peshwa. He declared that he was a
the cantonments
governor under Emperor
Bahadur Shah Zafar. In
Lucknow, Birjis Qadr,
the son of the deposed
Nawab Wajid Ali Shah, was
proclaimed the new Nawab.
He too acknowledged the
suzerainty of Bahadur
Shah Zafar. His mother
Begum Hazrat Mahal
took an active part in
organising the uprising
against the British. In
Jhansi, Rani Lakshmibai
joined the rebel sepoys and
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL 57
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 57 4/22/2022 2:43:08 PM

--- PAGE 70 ---
 fought the British along with Tantia Tope, the general of
Activity
Nana Saheb. In the Mandla region of Madhya Pradesh,
1. Why did the Mughal Rani Avantibai Lodhi of Ramgarh raised and led an army
emperor agree to of four thousand against the British who had taken over
support the rebels? the administration of her state.
2. Write a paragraph on The British were greatly outnumbered by the rebel forces.
the assessment he They were defeated in a number of battles. This convinced
may have made before the people that the rule of the British had collapsed for good
accepting the offer of and gave them the confidence to take the plunge and join
the sepoys. the rebellion. A situation of widespread popular rebellion
developed in the region of Awadh in particular. On 6 August
1857, we find a telegram sent by Lieutenant Colonel Tytler
to his Commander-in-Chief expressing the fear felt by the
British: “Our men are cowed by the numbers opposed to
them and the endless fighting. Every village is held against
us, the zamindars have risen to oppose us.”
Many new leaders came up. For example, Ahmadullah
Shah, a maulvi from Faizabad, prophesied that the rule
of the British would come to an end soon. He caught
the imagination of the people and raised a huge force of
supporters. He came to Lucknow to fight the British. In Delhi,
a large number of ghazis or religious warriors came together
Fig. 9 – A portrait of Nana Saheb to wipe out the white people. Bakht Khan, a soldier from
Bareilly, took charge of a large force of fighters who came
to Delhi. He became a key military leader of the rebellion.
In Bihar, an old zamindar, Kunwar Singh, joined the rebel
sepoys and battled with the British for many months.
Leaders and fighters from across the land joined the fight.
The Company Fights Back
Unnerved by the scale of the upheaval, the Company
decided to repress the revolt with all its might. It brought
Fig. 10 –
A portrait of Vir Kunwar Singh
Fig. 11 – British forces attack
the rebels who had occupied
the Red Fort (on the right) and
Salimgarh Fort in Delhi (on the
left)
58 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 58 4/22/2022 2:43:11 PM

--- PAGE 71 ---
reinforcements from England, passed new laws so that Fig. 12– The siege train reaches
Delhi
the rebels could be convicted with ease, and then moved
The British forces initially found
into the storm centres of the revolt. Delhi was recaptured
it difficult to break through the
from the rebel forces in September 1857. The last Mughal
heavy fortification in Delhi. On 3
emperor, Bahadur Shah Zafar was tried in court and September 1857, reinforcements
sentenced to life imprisonment. He and his wife Begum arrived – a 7- mile-long siege
train comprising cartloads of
Zinat Mahal were sent to prison in Rangoon in October
canons and ammunition pulled by
1858. Bahadur Shah Zafar died in the Rangoon jail in
elephants.
November 1862.
The recapture of Delhi, however, did not mean that the
rebellion died down after that. People continued to resist and
battle the British. The British had to fight for two years to
suppress the massive forces of popular rebellion.
Lucknow was taken in March 1858. Rani Lakshmibai
was defeated and killed in June 1858. A similar fate
awaited Rani Avantibai, who after initial victory in Kheri,
chose to embrace death when surrounded by the British on
all sides. Tantia Tope escaped to the jungles of central India
and continued to fight a guerrilla war with the support of
many tribal and peasant leaders. He was captured, tried Fig. 13 – Postal stamp issued in
commemoration of Tantia Tope
and killed in April 1859.
Just as victories against the British had earlier
encouraged rebellion, the defeat of rebel forces
encouraged desertions. The British also tried their best  Activity
to win back the loyalty of the people. They announced
Make a list of places
rewards for loyal landholders would be allowed to
where the uprising took
continue to enjoy traditional rights over their lands.
place in May, June and
Those who had rebelled were told that if they submitted
July 1857.
to the British, and if they had not killed any white people,
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL 59
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 59 4/22/2022 2:43:12 PM

--- PAGE 72 ---
Fig. 14 – British troops blow up they would remain safe and their rights and claims to
Kashmere Gate to enter Delhi land would not be denied. Nevertheless, hundreds of
sepoys, rebels, nawabs and rajas were tried and hanged.
Aftermath
The British had regained control
of the country by the end of 1859,
but they could not carry on ruling
the land with the same policies
any more.
Given below are the important
changes that were introduced by
the British.
1. The British Parliament passed
a new Act in 1858 and transferred the
powers of the East India Company to
the British Crown in order to ensure
a more responsible management
of Indian affairs. A member of the
Fig. 15 – British forces capture British Cabinet was appointed Secretary of State for
the rebels near Kanpur India and made responsible for all matters related to the
Notice the way the artist shows governance of India. He was given a council to advise
the British soldiers valiantly him, called the India Council. The Governor-General of
advancing on the rebel forces.
India was given the title of Viceroy, that is, a personal
representative of the Crown. Through these measures,
the British government accepted direct responsibility for
ruling India.
60 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 60 4/22/2022 2:43:15 PM

--- PAGE 73 ---
2. All ruling chiefs of the country were assured that their territory
would never be annexed in future. They were allowed to pass on
their kingdoms to their heirs, including adopted sons. However, they
were made to acknowledge the British Queen as their Sovereign
Paramount. Thus the Indian rulers were to hold their kingdoms as
subordinates of the British Crown.
3. It was decided that the proportion of Indian soldiers in the army
would be reduced and the number of European soldiers would be
increased. It was also decided that instead of recruiting soldiers from
Awadh, Bihar, central India and south India, more soldiers would be
recruited from among the Gurkhas, Sikhs and Pathans.
4. The land and property of Muslims was confiscated on a large
scale and they were treated with suspicion and hostility. The British
believed that they were responsible for the rebellion in a big way.
5. The British decided to respect the customary religious and
social practices of the people in India.
6. Policies were made to protect landlords and zamindars and
give them security of rights over their lands.
Thus a new phase of history began after 1857.
Main centres of the Revolt
Other centres of the Revolt Fig. 16 – Some
important centres of
the Revolt in North
India
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL 61
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 61 4/22/2022 2:43:16 PM

--- PAGE 74 ---
The Khurda Uprising – A Case Study
Much before the event of 1857, there had taken place another event of a similar nature at
a place called Khurda in 1817. Here, it would be instructive for us to study that event and
reflect on how resentment against the colonial policies of the British had been building up
since the beginning of the 19th century in different parts of the country.
Khurda, a small kingdom built up in the late 16th century in the south-eastern part of
Orissa, was a populous and well-cultivated territory consisting of 105 garhs, 60 large and
1109 small villages at the beginning of the 19th century. Its king, Raja Birakishore Dev had
to earlier give up the possession of four parganas, the superintendence of the Jagannath
Temple and the administration of fourteen garjats (Princely States) to the Marathas under
compulsion. His son and successor, Mukunda Dev II was greatly disturbed with this loss of
fortune. Therefore, sensing an opportunity in the Anglo-Maratha conflict, he had entered into
negotiations with the British to get back his lost territories and the rights over the Jagannath
Temple. But after the occupation of Orissa in 1803, the British showed no inclination to
oblige him on either score. Consequently, in alliance with other feudatory chiefs of Orissa
and secret support of the Marathas, he tried to assert his rights by force. This led to his
deposition and annexation of his territories by the British. As a matter of consolation, he
was only given the rights of management of the Jagannath Temple with a grant amounting
to a mere one-tenth of the revenue of his former estate and his residence was fixed at Puri.
This unfair settlement commenced an era of oppressive foreign rule in Orissa, which paved
the way for a serious armed uprising in 1817.
Soon after taking over Khurda, the British followed a policy of resuming service
tenures. It bitterly affected the lives of the ex-militia of the state, the Paiks. The severity of
the measure was compounded on account of an unreasonable increase in the demand of
revenue and also the oppressive ways of its collection. Consequently, there was large scale
desertion of people from Khurda between 1805 and 1817. Yet, the British went for a series of
short-term settlements, each time increasing the demands, not recognising either the
productive capacity of the land or the paying capacity of the ryots. No leniency was shown
even in case of natural calamities, which Orissa was frequently prone to. Rather, lands of
defaulters were sold off to scheming revenue officials or speculators from Bengal.
The hereditary Military Commander of the deposed king, Jagabandhu Bidyadhar
Mahapatra Bhramarabar Rai or Buxi Jagabandhu as he was popularly known, was one among
the dispossessed land-holders. He had in effect become a beggar, and for nearly two years
survived on voluntary contributions from the people of Khurda before deciding to fight for
their grievances as well as his own. Over the years, what had added to these grievances
were (a) the introduction of sicca rupee (silver currency) in the region, (b) the insistence
on payment of revenue in the new currency, (c) an unprecedented rise in the prices of
food-stuff and salt, which had become far-fetched following the introduction of salt monopoly
because of which the traditional salt makers of Orissa were deprived of making salt, and
(d) the auction of local estates in Calcutta, which brought in absentee landlords from Bengal
to Orissa. Besides, the insensitive and corrupt police system also made the situation worse
for the armed uprising to take a sinister shape.
The uprising was set off on 29 March 1817 as the Paiks attacked the police station and
other government establishments at Banpur killing more than a hundred men and took
away a large amount of government money. Soon its ripples spread in different directions
with Khurda becoming its epicenter. The zamindars and ryots alike joined the Paiks with
enthusiasm. Those who did not, were taken to task. A ‘no-rent campaign’ was also started.
The British tried to dislodge the Paiks from their entrenched position but failed. On 14 April
1817, Buxi Jagabandhu, leading five to ten thousand Paiks and men of the Kandh tribe
62 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 62 7/5/2022 12:51:48 PM

--- PAGE 75 ---
seized Puri and declared the hesitant king, Mukunda Dev II as their ruler. The priests of
the Jagannath Temple also extended the Paiks their full support.
Seeing the situation going out of hand, the British clamped Martial Law. The King
was quickly captured and sent to prison in Cuttack with his son. The Buxi with his close
associate, Krushna Chandra Bhramarabar Rai, tried to cut off all communications between
Cuttack and Khurda as the uprising spread to the southern and the north-western parts of
Orissa. Consequently, the British sent Major-General Martindell to clear off the area from
the clutches of the Paiks while at the same time announcing rewards for the arrest of Buxi
Jagabandhu and his associates. In the ensuing operation, hundreds of Paiks were killed,
many fled to deep jungles and some returned home under a scheme of amnesty. Thus by
May 1817, the uprising was mostly contained.
However, outside Khurda it was sustained by Buxi Jagabandhu with the help of
supporters like the Raja of Kujung and the unflinching loyalty of the Paiks until his surrender
in May 1825. On their part, the British henceforth adopted a policy of ‘leniency, indulgence
and forbearance’ towards the people of Khurda. The price of salt was reduced and necessary
reforms were made in the police and the justice systems. Revenue officials found to be
corrupt were dismissed from service and former land-holders were restored to their lands.
The son of the king of Khurda, Ram Chandra Dev III was allowed to move to Puri and take
charge of the affairs of the Jagannath Temple with a grant of rupees twenty-four thousand.
In sum, it was the first such popular anti-British armed uprising in Orissa, which had
far reaching effect on the future of British administration in that part of the country.
To merely call it a ‘Paik Rebellion’ will thus be an understatement.
Let’s recall
Let’s imagine
1. What was the demand of Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi
Imagine you are a
that was refused by the British?
British officer in Awadh
2. What did the British do to protect the interests of
during the rebellion.
those who converted to Christianity?
What would you do
3. What objections did the sepoys have to the new to keep your plans of
cartridges that they were asked to use? fighting the rebels a
4. How did the last Mughal emperor live the last years top secret?
of his life?
WHEN PEOPLE REBEL 63
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 63 7/5/2022 12:51:51 PM

--- PAGE 76 ---
Let’s discuss
5. What could be the reasons for the
confidence of the British rulers
about their position in India before
May 1857?
6. What impact did Bahadur Shah
Zafar’s support to the rebellion
have on the people and the ruling
families?
7. How did the British succeed in
securing the submission of the rebel
landowners of Awadh?
8. In what ways did the British change
their policies as a result of the
rebellion of 1857?
Fig. 17 – Ruins of the Residency
in Lucknow
Let’s do
In June 1857, the rebel forces
began the siege of the Residency.
A large number of British women,
men and children had taken 9. Find out stories and songs remembered by people
shelter in the buildings there. in your area or your family about San Sattavan ki
The rebels surrounded the Ladaai. What memories do people cherish about the
compound and bombarded the
great uprising?
building with shells. Hit by a
shell, Henry Lawrence, the Chief
Commissioner of Awadh, died in 10. Find out more about Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi. In
one of the rooms that you see in what ways would she have been an unusual woman
the picture. Notice how buildings for her times?
carry the marks of past events.
64 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 5.indd 64 4/22/2022 2:43:22 PM

--- PAGE 77 ---
6 Civilising the “Native”,
Educating the Nation
In the earlier chapters, you have seen how British rule affected
rajas and nawabs, peasants and tribals. In this chapter, we
will try and understand what implication it had for the lives of
students. For, the British in India wanted not only territorial
conquest and control over revenues. They also felt that they had
a cultural mission: they had to “civilise the natives”, change their
customs and values.
What changes were to be introduced? How were Indians
Linguist – Someone
to be educated, “civilised”, and made into what the British
who knows and
believed were “good subjects”? The British could find no simple
studies several
answers to these questions. They continued to be debated for
languages
many decades.
How the British saw Education
Let us look at what the British thought and
did, and how some of the ideas of education
that we now take for granted evolved in the
last two hundred years. In the process of this
enquiry, we will also see how Indians reacted
to British ideas, and how they developed
their own views about how Indians were to
be educated.
The tradition of Orientalism
In 1783, a person named William Jones
arrived in Calcutta. He had an appointment
as a junior judge at the Supreme Court that
the Company had set up. In addition to being
an expert in law, Jones was a linguist. He
had studied Greek and Latin at Oxford, knew
French and English, had picked up Arabic
from a friend, and had also learnt Persian.
At Calcutta, he began spending many hours
a day with pandits who taught him the
subtleties of Sanskrit language, grammar and Fig. 1 – William Jones learning Persian
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 65 8/31/2022 5:00:41 PM

--- PAGE 78 ---
poetry. Soon he was studying ancient Indian texts on
law, philosophy, religion, politics, morality, arithmetic,
medicine and the other sciences.
Jones discovered that his interests were shared by many
British officials living in Calcutta at the time. Englishmen
like Henry Thomas Colebrooke and Nathaniel Halhed were
also busy discovering the ancient Indian heritage, mastering
Indian languages and translating Sanskrit and Persian works
into English. Together with them, Jones set up the Asiatic
Society of Bengal, and started a journal called Asiatick
Researches.
Jones and Colebrooke came to represent a particular
attitude towards India. They shared a deep respect for
ancient cultures, both of India and the West. Indian
civilisation, they felt, had attained its glory in the
ancient past, but had subsequently declined. In order to
understand India, it was necessary to discover the sacred
Fig. 2 – Henry Thomas and legal texts that were produced in the ancient period.
Colebrooke
For only those texts could reveal the real ideas and laws
He was a scholar of Sanskrit
of the Hindus and Muslims, and only a new study of
and ancient sacred writings of
these texts could form the basis of future development
Hinduism.
in India.
So Jones and Colebrooke went about discovering ancient
texts, understanding their meaning, translating them, and
making their findings known to others. This project, they
believed, would not only help the British learn from Indian
culture, but it would also help Indians rediscover their own
heritage, and understand the lost glories of their past. In this
process, the British would become the guardians of Indian
culture as well as its masters.
Influenced by such ideas, many Company officials
argued that the British ought to promote Indian rather
than Western learning. They felt that institutions should
be set up to encourage the study of ancient Indian texts
and teach Sanskrit and Persian literature and poetry. The
officials also thought that Hindus and Muslims ought to
be taught what they were already familiar with, and what
they valued and treasured, not subjects that were alien to
them. Only then, they believed, could the British hope to
win a place in the hearts of the “natives”; only then could
the alien rulers expect to be respected by their subjects.
With this object in view, a madrasa was set up in
Calcutta in 1781 to promote the study of Arabic, Persian
Madrasa – An Arabic
and Islamic law; and the Hindu College was established
word for a place of
in Benaras in 1791 to encourage the study of ancient
learning; any type of
Sanskrit texts that would be useful for the administration
school or college
of the country.
66 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 66 4/21/2022 12:18:02 PM

--- PAGE 79 ---
Fig. 3 – Monument to Warren Hastings, by
Richard Westmacott, 1830, now in Victoria
Memorial in Calcutta
This image represents how Orientalists
thought of British power in India. You will
notice that the majestic figure of Hastings, an
enthusiastic supporter of the Orientalists, is
placed between the standing figure of a pandit
on one side and a seated munshi on the
other side. Hastings and other Orientalists
needed Indian scholars to teach them the
“vernacular” languages, tell them about local
customs and laws, and help them translate
and interpret ancient texts. Hastings took
the initiative to set up the Calcutta Madrasa,
and believed that the ancient customs of the
country and Oriental learning ought to be the
basis of British rule in India.
Not all officials shared these views. Many were very
strong in their criticism of the Orientalists.
Orientalists – Those with
“Grave errors of the East” a scholarly knowledge of
the language and culture
From the early nineteenth century, many British officials
of Asia
began to criticise the Orientalist vision of learning. They
said that knowledge of the East was full of errors and
Munshi – A person who
unscientific thought; Eastern literature was non-serious
can read, write and teach
and light-hearted. So they argued that it was wrong
Persian
on the part of the British to spend so much effort in
encouraging the study of Arabic and Sanskrit language
Vernacular – A term
and literature.
generally used to refer to
James Mill was one of those who attacked the
a local language or dialect
Orientalists. The British effort, he declared, should not be
as distinct from what
to teach what the natives wanted, or what they respected,
is seen as the standard
in order to please them and “win a place in their heart”.
language. In colonial
The aim of education ought to be to teach what was useful
countries like India, the
and practical. So Indians should be made familiar with
British used the term
the scientific and technical advances that the West had
to mark the difference
made, rather than with the poetry and sacred literature
between the local
of the Orient.
languages of everyday
By the 1830s, the attack on the Orientalists became
use and English – the
sharper. One of the most outspoken and influential
language of the imperial
of such critics of the time was Thomas Babington
masters.
Macaulay. He saw India as an uncivilised country that
needed to be civilised. No branch of Eastern knowledge,
according to him could be compared to what England
had produced. Who could deny, declared Macaulay, that
CIVILISING THE “NATIVE”, EDUCATING THE NATION 67
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 67 4/21/2022 12:18:04 PM

--- PAGE 80 ---
“a single shelf of a good European
library was worth the whole
native literature of India and
Arabia”. He urged that the British
government in India stop wasting
public money in promoting
Oriental learning, for it was of no
practical use.
With great energy and
passion, Macaulay emphasised
the need to teach the English
language. He felt that knowledge
of English would allow Indians to
read some of the finest literature
the world had produced; it
would make them aware of the
Fig. 4 – Thomas Babington developments in Western science
Macaulay in his study and philosophy. Teaching of English could thus be a
way of civilising people, changing their tastes, values
and culture.
Source 1
Following Macaulay’s minute, the English Education
Act of 1835 was introduced. The decision was to make
Language of
English the medium of instruction for higher education,
the wise? and to stop the promotion of Oriental institutions like the
Calcutta Madrasa and Benaras Sanskrit College. These
Emphasising the need to
institutions were seen as “temples of darkness that were
teach English, Macaulay
falling of themselves into decay”. English textbooks now
declared:
began to be produced for schools.
All parties seem to
Education for commerce
be agreed on one
point, that the dialects In 1854, the Court of Directors of the East India
commonly spoken Company in London sent an educational despatch
among the natives to the Governor-General in India. Issued by Charles
... of India, contain Wood, the President of the Board of Control of the
neither literary nor Company, it has come to be known as Wood’s Despatch.
scientific information, Outlining the educational policy that was to be followed
and are, moreover,
in India, it emphasised once again the practical benefits
so poor and rude
of a system of European learning, as opposed to
that, until they are
Oriental knowledge.
enriched from some
One of the practical uses the Despatch pointed to was
other quarter, it will
economic. European learning, it said, would enable Indians
not be easy to translate
to recognise the advantages that flow from the expansion of
any valuable work into
them ... trade and commerce, and make them see the importance
of developing the resources of the country. Introducing
From Thomas Babington Macaulay,
Minute of 2 February 1835 on them to European ways of life, would change their tastes
Indian Education and desires, and create a demand for British goods, for
Indians would begin to appreciate and buy things that
were produced in Europe.
68 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 68 4/22/2022 11:56:33 AM

--- PAGE 81 ---
Wood’s Despatch also argued that European Source 2
learning would improve the moral character of
Indians. It would make them truthful and honest, An argument
and thus supply the Company with civil servants who
for European
could be trusted and depended upon. The literature of
knowledge
the East was not only full of grave errors, it could also
not instill in people a sense of duty and a commitment
to work, nor could it develop the skills required Wood’s Despatch of 1854
for administration. marked the final triumph of
those who opposed Oriental
Following the 1854 Despatch, several measures
learning. It stated.
were introduced by the British. Education departments
of the government were set up to extend control We must emphatically
over all matters regarding education. Steps were declare that the
taken to establish a system of university education. education which
In 1857, while the sepoys rose in revolt in Meerut we desire to see
and Delhi, universities were being established in extended in India is
Calcutta, Madras and Bombay. Attempts were also that which has for its
made to bring about changes within the system of object the diffusion
school education. of the improved arts,
services, philosophy,
 and literature of
Activity
Europe, in short,
Imagine you are living in the 1850s. You hear of European knowledge.
Wood’s Despatch. Write about your reactions.
Fig. 5 – Bombay University in the nineteenth century
CIVILISING THE “NATIVE”, EDUCATING THE NATION 69
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 69 4/21/2022 12:18:08 PM

--- PAGE 82 ---
The demand for moral education
The argument for practical education was strongly criticised by
the Christian missionaries in India in the nineteenth century.
The missionaries felt that education should attempt to improve
the moral character of the people, and morality could be
improved only through Christian education.
Until 1813, the East India Company was opposed to
missionary activities in India. It feared that missionary activities
would provoke reaction amongst the local population and
make them suspicious of British presence in India. Unable to
establish an institution within British-controlled territories, the
missionaries set up a mission at Serampore in an area under
the control of the Danish East India Company. A printing press
was set up in 1800 and a college established in 1818.
Over the nineteenth century, missionary schools were
set up all over India. After 1857, however, the British
government in India was reluctant to directly support
Fig. 6 – William Carey
missionary education. There was a feeling that any strong
was a Scottish missionary
attack on local customs, practices, beliefs and religious ideas
who helped establish the
might enrage “native” opinion.
Serampore Mission
Fig. 7 – Serampore College on the banks of the river Hooghly near Calcutta
70 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 70 4/21/2022 12:18:12 PM

--- PAGE 83 ---
What Happened to the
Local Schools?
Do you have any idea of how
children were taught in pre-
British times? Have you ever
wondered whether they went
to schools? And if there were
schools, what happened to these
under British rule?
The report of William Adam
In the 1830s, William Adam,
a Scottish missionary, toured
the districts of Bengal and
Bihar. He had been asked by
the Company to report on the
Fig. 8 – A village pathshala
progress of education in vernacular schools. The report Adam
This is a painting by a Dutch
produced is interesting. painter, Francois Solvyn,
who came to India in the late
Adam found that there were over 1 lakh pathshalas
eighteenth century. He tried to
in Bengal and Bihar. These were small institutions with
depict the everyday life of people
no more than 20 students each. But the total number of in his paintings.
children being taught in these pathshalas was considerable
– over 20 lakh. These institutions were set up by wealthy
people, or the local community. At times they were started
by a teacher (guru).
The system of education was flexible. Few things
that you associate with schools today were present in
the pathshalas at the time. There were no fixed fee, no
printed books, no separate school building, no benches
or chairs, no blackboards, no system of separate classes,
no roll-call registers, no annual examinations, and no
regular time-table. In some places, classes were held
under a banyan tree, in other places in the corner of
a village shop or temple, or at the guru’s home. Fee
depended on the income of parents: the rich had to pay
more than the poor. Teaching was oral, and the guru
decided what to teach, in accordance with the needs
of the students. Students were not separated out into
different classes: all of them sat together in one place.
The guru interacted separately with groups of children
with different levels of learning.
Adam discovered that this flexible system was suited
to local needs. For instance, classes were not held during
harvest time when rural children often worked in the fields.
The pathshala started once again when the crops had been
cut and stored. This meant that even children of peasant
families could study.
CIVILISING THE “NATIVE”, EDUCATING THE NATION 71
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 71 4/21/2022 12:18:13 PM

--- PAGE 84 ---
 New routines, new rules
Activity
Up to the mid-nineteenth century, the Company
1. Imagine you were born
was concerned primarily with higher education. So
in a poor family in the
it allowed the local pathshalas to function without
1850s. How would you
much interference. After 1854, the Company decided
have responded to the
to improve the system of vernacular education. It felt
coming of the new
that this could be done by introducing order within the
system of government-
system, imposing routines, establishing rules, ensuring
regulated pathshalas?
regular inspections.
2. Did you know that
How was this to be done? What measures did
about 50 per cent of
the Company undertake? It appointed a number of
the children going to
government pandits, each in charge of looking after
primary school drop out
four to five schools. The task of the pandit was to visit
of school by the time
the pathshalas and try and improve the standard of
they are 13 or 14? Can
teaching. Each guru was asked to submit periodic
you think of the various
reports and take classes according to a regular
possible reasons for
timetable. Teaching was now to be based on textbooks
this fact?
and learning was to be tested through a system of
annual examination. Students were asked to pay a
regular fee, attend regular classes, sit on fixed seats,
and obey the new rules of discipline.
Pathshalas which accepted the new rules were
supported through government grants. Those who were
unwilling to work within the new system received no
government support. Over time, gurus who wanted to
Fig. 9 – Sri Aurobindo Ghose
retain their independence found it difficult to compete
In a speech delivered on
with the government aided and regulated pathshalas.
January 15, 1908 in Bombay,
Aurobindo Ghose stated that The new rules and routines had another consequence.
the goal of national education
In the earlier system, children from poor peasant
was to awaken the spirit
families had been able to go to pathshalas, since the
of nationality among the
students. This required a timetable was flexible. The discipline of the new system
contemplation of the heroic demanded regular attendance, even during harvest
deeds of our ancestors. The time when children of poor families had to work in the
education should be imparted
fields. Inability to attend school came to be seen as
in the vernacular so as to
indiscipline, as evidence of the lack of desire to learn.
reach the largest number of
people. Aurobindo Ghose
emphasised that although The Agenda for a National Education
the students should remain
connected to their own British officials were not the only people thinking
roots, they should also take
about education in India. From the early nineteenth
the fullest advantage of
century, many thinkers from different parts of
modern scientific discoveries
and Western experiments India began to talk of the need for a wider spread of
in popular governments. education. Impressed with the developments in Europe,
Moreover, the students should
some Indians felt that Western education would help
also learn some useful crafts so
modernise India. They urged the British to open more
that they could be able to find
some moderately remunerative schools, colleges and universities, and spend more
employment after leaving their money on education. You will read about some of
schools. these efforts in Chapter 8. There were other Indians,
72 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 72 4/21/2022 12:18:14 PM

--- PAGE 85 ---
however, who reacted against Western education.
Mahatma Gandhi and Rabindranath Tagore were two
such individuals.
Let us look at what they had to say.
“English education has enslaved us”
Mahatma Gandhi argued that colonial education created a
sense of inferiority in the minds of Indians. It made them
see Western civilisation as superior, and destroyed the
pride they had in their own culture. There was poison in
this education, said Mahatma Gandhi, it was sinful, it
enslaved Indians, it cast an evil spell on them. Charmed
by the West, appreciating everything that came from
the West, Indians educated in these institutions began
admiring British rule. Mahatma Gandhi wanted an
education that could help Indians recover their sense of
dignity and self-respect. During the national movement,
he urged students to leave educational institutions in
order to show to the British that Indians were no longer
willing to be enslaved.
Mahatma Gandhi strongly felt that Indian languages
ought to be the medium of teaching. Education in English
crippled Indians, distanced them from their own social
surroundings, and made them “strangers in their own
lands”. Speaking a foreign tongue, despising local culture,
the English educated did not know how to relate to
Fig. 10 – Mahatma Gandhi along
the masses. with Kasturba Gandhi sitting with
Western education, Mahatma Gandhi said, focused Rabindranath Tagore and a group
of girls at Santiniketan, 1940
on reading and writing rather than oral knowledge; it
valued textbooks rather
than lived experience and
practical knowledge. He
argued that education
ought to develop a person’s
mind and soul. Literacy –
or simply learning to read
and write – by itself did
not count as education.
People had to work with
their hands, learn a craft,
and know how different
things operated. This
would develop their mind
and their capacity to
understand.
CIVILISING THE “NATIVE”, EDUCATING THE NATION 73
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 73 4/21/2022 12:18:16 PM

--- PAGE 86 ---
Source 3
“Literacy in itself is not education”
Mahatma Gandhi wrote:
By education I mean an all-round drawing out of
the best in child and man – body, mind and spirit.
Literacy is not the end of education nor even the
beginning. It is only one of the means whereby man
and woman can be educated. Literacy in itself is
not education. I would therefore begin the child’s
education by teaching it a useful handicraft and
enabling it to produce from the moment it begins
its training … I hold that the highest development
of the mind and the soul is possible under such a
system of education. Only every handicraft has to
be taught not merely mechanically as is done today
but scientifically, i.e. the child should know the why
and the wherefore of every process.
The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi, Vol. 72, p. 79
As nationalist sentiments spread, other thinkers
also began thinking of a system of national education
which would be radically different from that set up by
the British.
Tagore’s “abode of peace”
Many of you may have heard of Santiniketan. Do you know
why it was established and by whom?
Fig. 11 – A class in progress in
Rabindranath Tagore started the institution in 1901.
Santiniketan in the 1930s
As a child, Tagore hated going to school. He found it
Notice the surroundings – the
trees and the open spaces. suffocating and oppressive. The school appeared like a
prison, for he could never do what he felt like doing. So
while other children listened to the
teacher, Tagore’s mind would
wander away.
The experience of his
schooldays in Calcutta
shaped Tagore’s ideas
of education. On growing
up, he wanted to set
up a school where
the child was happy,
where she could be free
and creative, where she
was able to explore her own
thoughts and desires. Tagore felt
74 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 74 4/22/2022 11:56:58 AM

--- PAGE 87 ---
that childhood ought to be a time of self-learning, outside the
rigid and restricting discipline of the schooling system set up
by the British. Teachers had to be imaginative, understand
the child, and help the child develop her curiosity. According
to Tagore, the existing schools killed the natural desire of the
child to be creative, her sense of wonder.
Tagore was of the view that creative learning could be
encouraged only within a natural environment. So he chose to
set up his school 100 kilometres away from Calcutta, in a rural
setting. He saw it as an abode of peace (santiniketan), where living
in harmony with nature, children could cultivate their natural
creativity.
In many senses, Tagore and Mahatma Gandhi thought about
education in similar ways. There were, however, differences too.
Gandhiji was highly critical of Western civilisation and its worship
of machines and technology. Tagore wanted to combine elements
of modern Western civilisation with what he saw as the best within
Indian tradition. He emphasised the need to teach science and
technology at Santiniketan, along with art, music and dance.
Many individuals and thinkers were thus thinking about the
way a national educational system could be fashioned. Some
wanted changes within the system set up by the British, and felt
that the system could be extended so as to include wider sections
of people. Others urged that alternative systems be created so
that people were educated into a culture that was truly national.
Who was to define what was truly national? The debate about
what this “national education” ought to be continued till after
independence.
Fig. 12 – Children playing
in a missionary school
in Coimbatore, early
twentieth century
By the mid-nineteenth
century, schools for girls
were being set up by
Christian missionaries
and Indian reform
organisations.
CIVILISING THE “NATIVE”, EDUCATING THE NATION 75
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 75 4/21/2022 12:18:19 PM

--- PAGE 88 ---
Let’s recall
Let’s imagine
Imagine you were
witness to a debate 1. Match the following:
between Mahatma
William Jones promotion of English
Gandhi and Macaulay
education
on English education.
Write a page on the
Rabindranath respect for ancient cultures
dialogue you heard.
Tagore
Thomas Macaulay gurus
Mahatma Gandhi learning in a natural
environment
Pathshalas critical of English education
2. State whether true or false:
(a) James Mill was a severe critic of the Orientalists.
(b) The 1854 Despatch on education was in favour
English being introduced as a medium of higher
education in India.
(c) Mahatma Gandhi thought that promotion of
literacy was the most important aim of education.
(d) Rabindranath Tagore felt that children ought to
be subjected to strict discipline.
Let’s discuss
3. Why did William Jones feel the need to study Indian
history, philosophy and law?
4. Why did James Mill and Thomas Macaulay think that
European education was essential in India?
5. Why did Mahatma Gandhi want to teach children
handicrafts?
6. Why did Mahatma Gandhi think that English
education had enslaved Indians?
76 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 76 4/21/2022 12:18:22 PM

--- PAGE 89 ---
Let’s do
7. Find out from your grandparents about what they
studied in school.
8. Find out about the history of your school or any other
school in the area you live.
CIVILISING THE “NATIVE”, EDUCATING THE NATION 77
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 6.indd 77 4/21/2022 12:18:22 PM

--- PAGE 90 ---
7 Women, Caste and
Reform
Have you ever thought of how children lived about two
hundred years ago? Nowadays most girls from middle-
class families go to school, and often study with boys. On
growing up, many of them go to colleges and universities,
and take up jobs after that. They have to be adults before
they are legally married, and according to law, they can
marry anyone they like, from any caste and community,
and widows can remarry too. All women, like all men,
can vote and stand for
elections. Of course, these
rights are not actually
enjoyed by all. Poor people
have little or no access to
education, and in many
families, women cannot
choose their husbands.
Two hundred years ago
things were very different.
Most children were married
off at an early age. Both
Hindu and Muslim men
could marry more than
one wife. In some parts of
the country, widows were
praised if they chose death
Fig. 1 – Sati, painted by by burning themselves on
Balthazar Solvyn, 1813 the funeral pyre of their husbands. Women who died in this
This was one of the many manner, whether willingly or otherwise, were called “sati”,
pictures of sati painted by the meaning virtuous women. Women’s rights to property were
European artists who came
also restricted. Besides, most women had virtually no access
to India. The practice of sati
to education. In many parts of the country people believed
was seen as evidence of the
barbarism of the East. that if a woman was educated, she would become a widow.
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 78 8/31/2022 5:02:04 PM

--- PAGE 91 ---
Differences between men and women were not the
only ones in society. In most regions, people were divided
along lines of caste. Brahmans and Kshatriyas considered
themselves as “upper castes”. Others, such as traders
and moneylenders (often referred to as Vaishyas) were
placed after them. Then came peasants, and artisans
such as weavers and potters (referred to as Shudras).
At the lowest rung were those who laboured to keep
cities and villages clean or worked at jobs that upper
castes considered “polluting”, that is, it could lead to
the loss of caste status. The upper castes also treated
many of these groups at the bottom as “untouchable”.
They were not allowed to enter temples, draw water
from the wells used by the upper castes, or bathe in
ponds where upper castes bathed. They were seen as
inferior human beings.
Over the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, many of
these norms and perceptions slowly changed. Let us see
how this happened.
Working Towards Change
From the early nineteenth century, we find debates and
discussions about social customs and practices taking on
a new character. One important reason for this was the
development of new forms of communication. For the
first time, books, newspapers, magazines, leaflets and
pamphlets were printed. These were far cheaper and far
more accessible than the manuscripts that you have read
about in Class VII. Therefore ordinary people could read
these, and many of them could also write and express their
ideas in their own languages. All kinds of issues – social,
political, economic and religious – could now be debated
and discussed by men (and sometimes by women as well)
in the new cities. The discussions could reach out to a
wider public, and could become linked to movements for
social change.
These debates were often initiated by Indian reformers
and reform groups. One such reformer was Raja 
Activity
Rammohun Roy (1772–1833). He founded a reform
Can you think of the
association known as the Brahmo Sabha (later known
ways in which social
as the Brahmo Samaj) in Calcutta. People such as
customs and practices
Rammohun Roy are described as reformers because
were discussed in the
they felt that changes were necessary in society, and
pre-printing age when
unjust practices needed to be done away with. They
books, newspapers and
thought that the best way to ensure such changes was
pamphlets were not
by persuading people to give up old practices and adopt
readily available?
a new way of life.
WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM 79
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 79 4/21/2022 12:23:24 PM

--- PAGE 92 ---
Rammohun Roy was keen to spread the knowledge of
Western education in the country and bring about greater
freedom and equality for women. He wrote about the way
women were forced to bear the burden of domestic work,
confined to the home and the kitchen, and not allowed to
move out and become educated.
Changing the lives of widows
Rammohun Roy was particularly moved by the problems
widows faced in their lives. He began a campaign against
the practice of sati.
Rammohun Roy was well versed in Sanskrit, Persian
and several other Indian and Europeon languages. He tried
to show through his writings that the practice of widow
burning had no sanction in ancient texts. By the early
nineteenth century, as you have read in Chapter 6, many
Fig. 2 – Raja Rammohun Roy,
British officials had also begun to criticise Indian traditions
painted by Rembrandt Peale, 1833
and customs. They were therefore, more than willing to
listen to Rammohun who was reputed to be a learned man.
In 1829, sati was banned.
The strategy adopted by Rammohun was used by
later reformers as well. Whenever they wished to
challenge a practice that seemed harmful, they tried
to find a verse or sentence in the ancient sacred texts
that supported their point of view. They then suggested
that the practice as it existed at present was against
early tradition.
Fig. 3 – Hook swinging
festival
In this popular festival,
devotees underwent a
peculiar form of suffering
as part of ritual worship.
With hooks pierced
through their skin they
swung themselves on
a wheel. In the early
nineteenth century, when
European officials began
criticising Indian customs
and rituals as barbaric,
this was one of the rituals
that came under attack.
80 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 80 4/21/2022 12:23:27 PM

--- PAGE 93 ---
Source 1
“We first tie them down to the pile”
Rammohun Roy published many pamphlets to spread his
ideas. Some of these were written as a dialogue between the
advocate and critic of a traditional practice. Here is one such
dialogue on sati:
ADVOCATE OF SATI:
Women are by nature of inferior understanding,
without resolution, unworthy of trust … Many of them,
on the death of their husbands, become desirous of
accompanying them; but to remove every chance of
their trying to escape from the blazing fire, in burning

them we first tie them down to the pile. Activity
This argument was
OPPONENT OF SATI: taking place more
When did you ever afford them a fair opportunity than 175 years ago.
of exhibiting their natural capacity? How then can Write down the
you accuse them of want of understanding? If, after different arguments
instruction in knowledge and wisdom, a person cannot you may have heard
comprehend or retain what has been taught him, we around you on the
may consider him as deficient; but if you do not educate worth of women. In
women how can you see them as inferior. what ways have the
views changed?
For instance, one of the most famous reformers,
Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar, used the ancient texts to
suggest that widows could remarry. His suggestion was
adopted by British officials, and a law was passed in 1856
permitting widow remarriage. Those who were against
the remarriage of widows opposed Vidyasagar, and even
boycotted him.
By the second half of the nineteenth century, the
movement in favour of widow remarriage spread to other
parts of the country. In the Telugu-speaking areas of
the Madras Presidency, Veerasalingam Pantulu formed
an association for widow remarriage. Around the same
time, young intellectuals and reformers in Bombay
pledged themselves to working for the same cause. In
the north, Swami Dayanand Saraswati, who founded the
reform association called Arya Samaj, also supported
widow remarriage.
Yet, the number of widows who actually remarried Fig. 4 – Swami Dayanand
Saraswati
remained low. Those who married were not easily accepted
Dayanand founded the Arya Samaj
in society and conservative groups continued to oppose
in 1875, an organisation that
the new law.
attempted to reform Hinduism.
WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM 81
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 81 4/21/2022 12:23:30 PM

--- PAGE 94 ---
Girls begin going to school
Many of the reformers felt that education for girls was
necessary in order to improve the condition of women.
Vidyasagar in Calcutta and many other reformers in
Bombay set up schools for girls. When the first schools
were opened in the mid-nineteenth century, many
people were afraid of them. They feared that schools
would take girls away from home, prevent them from
doing their domestic duties. Moreover, girls had to travel
through public places in order to reach school. Many
people felt that this would have a corrupting influence
on them. They felt that girls should stay away from
public spaces. Therefore, throughout the nineteenth
century, most educated women were taught at home by
liberal fathers or husbands. Sometimes women taught
themselves. Do you remember what you read about
Fig. 5 Rashsundari Debi in your book Social and Political Life
Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar
last year? She was one of those who secretly learned
to read and write in the flickering light of candles
at night.
In the latter part of the century, schools for girls were
established by the Arya Samaj in Punjab, and Jyotirao
Fig. 6 – Students of Hindu Mahila Phule in Maharashtra.
Vidyalaya, 1875
In aristocratic Muslim households in North India,
When girls’ schools were first set
women learnt to read the Koran in Arabic. They were taught
up in the nineteenth century, it
by women who came home to teach. Some reformers such
was generally believed that the
curriculum for girls ought to be as Mumtaz Ali reinterpreted verses from the Koran to argue
less taxing than that for boys. for women’s education. The first Urdu novels began to be
The Hindu Mahila Vidyalaya
written from the late nineteenth century. Amongst other
was one of the first institutions
things, these were meant to encourage women to read
to provide girls with the kind of
learning that was usual for boys about religion and domestic management in a language
at the time. they could understand.
Women write about
women
From the early twentieth
century, Muslim women
like the Begums of Bhopal
played a notable role in
promoting education among
women. They founded a
primary school for girls at
Aligarh. Another remarkable
woman, Begum Rokeya
Sakhawat Hossain started
schools for Muslim girls in
Patna and Calcutta. She
82 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 82 4/21/2022 12:23:31 PM

--- PAGE 95 ---
was a fearless critic of conservative ideas, arguing that Source 2
religious leaders of every faith accorded an inferior
place to women.
By the 1880s, Indian women began to enter universities. Once a woman’s
Some of them trained to be doctors, some became
husband has died...
teachers. Many women began to write and publish their
critical views on the place of women in society. Tarabai
In her book,
Shinde, a woman educated at home at Poona, published
Stripurushtulna,
a book, Stripurushtulna, (A Comparison between Women
Tarabai Shinde wrote:
and Men), criticising the social differences between men
and women. Isn’t a woman’s life as
Pandita Ramabai, a great dear to her as yours is
to you? It’s as if women
scholar of Sanskrit, felt that
are meant to be made
Hinduism was oppressive towards
of something different
women, and wrote a book about
from men altogether,
the miserable lives of upper-caste
made from dust from
Hindu women. She founded a
earth or rock or rusted
widows’ home at Poona to provide
iron whereas you and
shelter to widows who had been
your lives are made
treated badly by their husbands’
from the purest gold.
relatives. Here women were
… You’re asking
trained so that they could support
me what I mean. I
themselves economically.
mean once a woman’s
Needless to say, all this more than husband has died, …
Fig. 7
alarmed the orthodox. For instance, what’s in store for her?
Pandita Ramabai
many Hindu nationalists felt that The barber comes to
Hindu women were adopting Western ways and that this shave all the curls and
would corrupt Hindu culture and erode family values. hair off her head, just
to cool your eyes. …
Orthodox Muslims were also worried about the impact of
She is shut out from
these changes.
going to weddings,
As you can see, by the end of the nineteenth century,
receptions and other
women themselves were actively working for reform.
auspicious occasions
They wrote books, edited magazines, founded schools
that married women
and training centres, and set up women’s associations.
go to. And why all these
From the early twentieth century, they formed political restrictions? Because
pressure groups to push through laws for female her husband has died.
suffrage (the right to vote) and better health care and She is unlucky: ill
education for women. Some of them joined various fate is written on her
kinds of nationalist and socialist movements from forehead. Her face is
the 1920s. not to be seen, it’s a
bad omen.
In the twentieth century, leaders such as Jawaharlal
Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose lent their support to Tarabai Shinde, Stripurushtulna
demands for greater equality and freedom for women.
Nationalist leaders promised that there would be full
suffrage for all men and women after Independence.
However, till then they asked women to concentrate on
the anti-British struggles.
WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM 83
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 83 4/21/2022 12:23:33 PM

--- PAGE 96 ---
Law against child marriage
With the growth of women’s organisations
and writings on these issues, the
momentum for reform gained strength.
People challenged another established
custom – that of child marriage. There
were a number of Indian legislators in the
Central Legislative Assembly who fought
to make a law preventing child marriage.
In 1929, the Child Marriage Restraint Act
was passed without the kind of bitter
debates and struggles that earlier laws
had seen. According to the Act, no man
below the age of 18 and woman below
the age of 16 could marry. Subsequently
these limits were raised to 21 for men and
18 for women.
Fig. 8 – Bride at the age of eight
This is a picture of a child bride at the beginning of the
twentieth century. Did you know that even today over
20 per cent of girls in India are married below
the age of 18?
Caste and Social Reform
Some of the social reformers we have been discussing
also criticised caste inequalities. Rammohun Roy
translated an old Buddhist text that was critical of
caste. The Prarthana Samaj adhered to the tradition of
Bhakti that believed in spiritual equality of all castes.
In Bombay, the Paramhans Mandali was founded in
1840 to work for the abolition of caste. Many of these
reformers and members of reform associations were
people of upper castes. Often, in secret meetings, these
reformers would violate caste taboos on food and touch,
in an effort to get rid of the hold of caste prejudice in
their lives.
There were also others who questioned the injustices
of the caste social order. During the course of the
nineteenth century, Christian missionaries began
setting up schools for tribal groups and “lower”-caste
children. These children were thus equipped with some
resources to make their way into a changing world.
At the same time, the poor began leaving their villages
to look for jobs that were opening up in the cities. There
was work in the factories that were coming up, and jobs
in municipalities. Think of the new demands of labour
84 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 84 4/21/2022 12:23:34 PM

--- PAGE 97 ---
this created. Drains had to
be dug, roads laid, buildings
constructed, and cities
cleaned. This required coolies,
diggers, carriers, bricklayers,
sewage cleaners, sweepers,
palanquin bearers, rickshaw
pullers. Where did this labour
come from? The poor from
the villages and small towns,
many of them from low
castes, began moving to the
cities where there was a new
demand for labour. Some also
went to work in plantations Fig. 9 – A coolie ship, nineteenth
in Assam, Mauritius, Trinidad and Indonesia. Work in century
the new locations was often very hard. But the poor, This coolie ship – named John
Allen – carried many Indian
the people from low castes, saw this as an opportunity
labourers to Mauritius where
to get away from the oppressive hold that upper-caste
they did a variety of forms of hard
landowners exercised over their lives and the daily labour. Most of these labourers
humiliation they suffered. were from low castes.
Who could produce shoes?
Leatherworkers have been traditionally held in
contempt since they work with dead animals
which are seen as dirty and polluting. During
the First World War, however, there was a
huge demand for shoes for the armies. Caste
prejudice against leather work meant that only
the traditional leather workers and shoemakers
were ready to supply army shoes. So they could
ask for high prices and gain impressive profits.
Fig. 10 – Madigas making shoes, nineteenth-century
Andhra Pradesh
Madigas were an important untouchable caste of
present-day Andhra Pradesh. They were experts at
cleaning hides, tanning them for use, and sewing
sandals.
There were other jobs too. The army, for instance,
offered opportunities. A number of Mahar people, who
were regarded as untouchable, found jobs in the Mahar
Regiment. The father of B.R. Ambedkar, the leader of the
Dalit movement, taught at an army school.
WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM 85
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 85 4/21/2022 12:23:37 PM

--- PAGE 98 ---
No place inside
the classroom
I n t h e B o m b a y
Presidency, as late as
1829, untouchables
were not allowed into
even government schools.
When some of them
pressed hard for that
right, they were allowed
to sit on the veranda
outside the classroom
and listen to the lessons,
without “polluting” the
room where upper-caste
boys were taught. Fig. 11 – Dublas of Gujarat carrying mangoes to the market.
Dublas laboured for upper-caste landowners, cultivating their fields,
 and working at a variety of odd jobs at the landlord’s house.
Activity
1. Imagine that you are
Demands for equality and justice
one of the students
Gradually, by the second half of the nineteenth century,
sitting in the school
people from within the Non-Brahman castes began
veranda and listening
organising movements against caste discrimination, and
to the lessons. What
demanded social equality and justice.
kind of questions
The Satnami movement in Central India was founded
would be rising in
by Ghasidas who worked among the leatherworkers and
your mind?
organised a movement to improve their social status. In
2. Some people thought eastern Bengal, Haridas Thakur’s Matua sect worked
this situation was among Chandala cultivators. Haridas questioned
better than the total Brahmanical texts that supported the caste system.
lack of education for In what is present-day Kerala, a guru from Ezhava
untouchable people. caste, Shri Narayana Guru, proclaimed the ideals of
Would you agree with unity for his people. He argued against treating people
unequally on the basis of caste differences. According
this view?
to him, all humankind belonged to the same caste. One
of his famous statements was:
“oru jati, oru matam, oru daivam
manushyanu” (one caste, one
religion, one god for humankind).
All these sects were founded
by leaders who came from Non-
Brahman castes and worked
amongst them. They tried to change
those habits and practices which
provoked the contempt of dominant
castes. They tried to create a
sense of self-esteem among the
Fig. 12 – Shri Narayana Guru subordinate castes.
86 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 86 4/22/2022 11:58:08 AM

--- PAGE 99 ---
Gulamgiri
One of the most vocal amongst the “low-caste” leaders was
Jyotirao Phule. Born in 1827, he studied in schools set up
by Christian missionaries. On growing up, he developed
his own ideas about the injustices of caste society. He
set out to attack the Brahmans’ claim that they were
superior to others, since they were Aryans. Phule argued
that the Aryans were foreigners, who came from outside
the subcontinent, and defeated and subjugated the true
children of the country – those who had lived here from
before the coming of the Aryans. As the Aryans established
their dominance, they began looking at the defeated
population as inferior, as low-caste people. According to
Phule, the “upper” castes had no right to their land and
power: in reality, the land belonged to indigenous people,
the so-called low castes.
Phule claimed that before Aryan rule, there existed
a golden age when warrior-peasants tilled the land and Fig. 13 – Jyotirao Phule
ruled the Maratha countryside in just and fair ways.
He proposed that Shudras (labouring castes) and Ati
Shudras (untouchables) should unite to challenge caste
discrimination. The Satyashodhak Samaj, an association
Phule founded, propagated caste equality.
Source 3
“Me here and you over there”
Phule was also critical of the anti-colonial nationalism that was
preached by upper-caste leaders. He wrote:
The Brahmans have hidden away the sword of their religion
which has cut the throat of the peoples’ prosperity and now
go about posing as great patriots of their country. They …
give this advice to ... our Shudra, Muslim and Parsi youth 
Activity
that unless we put away all quarrelling amongst ourselves
Carefully read
about the divisions between high and low in our country
and come together, our ... country will never make any Source 3. What do
progress ... It will be unity to serve their purposes, and then you think Jyotirao
it will be me here and you over there again. Phule meant by “me
Jyotiba Phule, The Cultivator’s Whipcord here and you over
there again”?
In 1873, Phule wrote a book named Gulamgiri,
meaning slavery. Some ten years before this, the
American Civil War had been fought, leading to the end
of slavery in America. Phule dedicated his book to all
WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM 87
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 87 4/21/2022 12:23:42 PM

--- PAGE 100 ---
Source 4
those Americans who had fought to free slaves,
thus establishing a link between the conditions
“We are also
of the “lower” castes in India and the black slaves
human beings” in America.
As this example shows, Phule extended his criticism
In 1927, Ambedkar said:
of the caste system to argue against all forms of
We now want to go to inequality. He was concerned about the plight of
the Tank only to prove “upper”-caste women, the miseries of the labourer, and
that like others, we are the humiliation of the “low” castes. This movement for
also human beings … caste reform was continued in the twentieth century
Hindu society should
by other great dalit leaders like Dr B.R. Ambedkar
be reorganised on
in western India and E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker in
two main principles –
the south.
equality and absence
of casteism. Who could enter temples?
Ambedkar was born into a Mahar family. As a child
he experienced what caste prejudice meant in
Fig. 14 – The gateway to the
everyday life. In school he was forced to sit
Madurai temple, drawn by
outside the classroom on the ground, and
Thomas Daniell, 1792
was not allowed to drink water from taps that
“Untouchables” were not
allowed anywhere near such upper-caste children used. After finishing
gateways until the temple school, he got a fellowship to go to the US for
entry movement began.
higher studies. On his return to India in 1919, he
wrote extensively about “upper”-caste power
in contemporary society.
In 1927, Ambedkar started a temple entry
movement, in which his Mahar caste followers
participated. Brahman priests were outraged
when the Dalits used water from the
temple tank.
Ambedkar led three such movements
for temple entry between 1927 and
1935. His aim was to make everyone
see the power of caste prejudices
within society.
88 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 88 4/21/2022 12:23:44 PM

--- PAGE 101 ---
The Non-Brahman movement
In the early twentieth century, the non-Brahman
movement started. The initiative came from those
non-Brahman castes that had acquired access to
education, wealth and influence. They argued that
Brahmans were heirs of Aryan invaders from the north
who had conquered southern lands from the original
inhabitants of the region – the indigenous Dravidian
races. They also challenged Brahmanical claims
to power.
E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker, or Periyar, as he
was called, came from a middle-class family.
Fig. 15 – E.V. Ramaswamy
Interestingly, he had been an ascetic in his early
Naicker (Periyar)
life and had studied Sanskrit scriptures carefully.
Later, he became a member of the Congress, only
Source 5
to leave it in disgust when he found that at a feast
organised by nationalists, seating arrangements Periyar on women
followed caste distinctions – that is, the lower castes
were made to sit at a distance from the upper castes. Periyar wrote:
Convinced that untouchables had to fight for their
Only with the arrival
dignity, Periyar founded the Self Respect Movement. of words such as
He argued that untouchables were the true upholders Thara Mukurtham our
of an original Tamil and Dravidian culture which women had become
had been subjugated by Brahmans. He felt that puppets in the hands
all religious authorities saw social divisions and of their husbands …
inequality as God-given. Untouchables had to free we ended up with such
themselves, therefore, from all religions in order to fathers who advise
achieve social equality. their daughters ... that
they had been gifted
Periyar was an outspoken critic of Hindu scriptures,
away to their husbands
especially the Codes of Manu, the ancient lawgiver, and
and they belong to
the Bhagavad Gita and the Ramayana. He said that
their husband’s place.
these texts had been used to establish the authority
This is the … result of
of Brahmans over lower castes and the domination of
our association with
men over women.
Sanskrit.
These assertions did not go unchallenged. The Periyar, cited in Periyar
forceful speeches, writings and movements of lower- Chintahnaikal
caste leaders did lead to rethinking and some self-
criticism among upper-caste nationalist leaders.
But orthodox Hindu society also reacted by founding

Activity
Sanatan Dharma Sabhas and the Bharat Dharma
Mahamandal in the north, and associations like
Why does caste remain
the Brahman Sabha in Bengal. The object of these
such a controversial issue
associations was to uphold caste distinctions as a
today? What do you think
cornerstone of Hinduism, and show how this was
was the most important
sanctified by scriptures. Debates and struggles over
movement against caste in
caste continued beyond the colonial period and are
colonial times?
still going on in our own times.
WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM 89
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 89 4/21/2022 12:23:45 PM

--- PAGE 102 ---
Organising for reform
The Brahmo Samaj
The Brahmo Samaj, formed in 1830, prohibited all forms of idolatry and
sacrifice, believed in the Upanishads, and forbade its members from
Fig. 16 – Keshub
criticising other religious practices. It critically drew upon the ideals of
Chunder Sen – one
of the main leaders religions – especially of Hinduism and Christianity – looking at their negative
of the Brahmo and positive dimensions.
Samaj
Derozio and Young Bengal
Henry Louis Vivian Derozio, a teacher at Hindu College, Calcutta, in the
1820s, promoted radical ideas and encouraged his pupils to question all
authority. Referred to as the Young Bengal Movement, his students attacked
tradition and custom, demanded education for women and campaigned
Fig. 17
for the freedom of thought and expression. Henry Derozio
The Ramakrishna Mission and Swami Vivekananda
Named after Ramakrishna Paramhansa, Swami Vivekananda’s guru, the
Ramakrishna Mission stressed the ideal of salvation through social service
and selfless action.
Swami Vivekananda (1863-1902), whose original name was Narendra
Nath Dutta, combined the simple teachings of Sri Ramakrishna with his
well founded modern outlook and spread them all over the world. After
hearing him in the World Parliament of Religions at Chicago in 1893, the
New York Herald reported, “We feel how foolish it is to send missionaries
to this learned nation”. Indeed, Swami Vivekananda was the first Indian
in modern times, who re-established the spiritual pre-eminence of the
Fig. 18 Swami
Vedanta philosophy on a global scale. But his mission was not simply to
Vivekananda
talk of religion. He was extremely pained at the poverty and the misery
of his country men. He firmly believed that any reform could become
successful only by uplifting the condition of the masses. Therefore, his clarion call to the people
of India was to rise above the narrow confines of their ‘religion of the kitchen’ and come together
in the service of the nation. By sending out this call, he made a signal contribution to the nascent
nationalism of India. His sense of nationalism was, however, not narrow in its conception. He
was convinced that many of the problems facing the mankind could only be overcome if the
nations of the world come together on an equal footing. Therefore, his exhortation to the youth
was to unite on the basis of a common spiritual heritage. In this exhortation, he became truly
‘the symbol of a new spirit and a source of strength for the future’.
The Prarthana Samaj
Established in 1867 at Bombay, the Prarthana Samaj sought to remove caste restrictions,
abolish child marriage, encourage the education of women, and end the ban on widow
remarriage. Its religious meetings drew upon Hindu, Buddhist and Christian texts.
The Veda Samaj
Established in Madras (Chennai) in 1864, the Veda Samaj was inspired by the Brahmo Samaj.
It worked to abolish caste distinctions and promote widow remarriage and women’s education.
Its members believed in one God. They condemned the superstitions and rituals of orthodox
Hinduism.
90 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 90 4/21/2022 12:23:49 PM

--- PAGE 103 ---
The Aligarh Movement
The Mohammedan Anglo‐Oriental College, founded by Sayyid Ahmed
Khan in 1875 at Aligarh, later became the Aligarh Muslim University.
The institution offered modern education, including Western science, to
Muslims. The Aligarh Movement, as it was known, had an enormous impact
in the area of educational reform.
The Singh Sabha Movement
Reform organisations of the Sikhs, Fig. 19
Sayyid Ahmed Khan
the first Singh Sabhas were formed
at Amritsar in 1873 and at Lahore
in 1879. The Sabhas sought to
rid Sikhism of superstitions, caste
distinctions and practices seen by
them as non‐Sikh. They promoted
education among the Sikhs, often
combining modern instruction with
Sikh teachings. Fig. 20 – Khalsa College, Amritsar, established in 1892 by the
leaders of the Singh Sabha movement
Let’s recall
1. What social ideas did the following people support.
Rammohun Roy
Let’s imagine
Dayanand Saraswati
Imagine you are a
Veerasalingam Pantulu
teacher in the school
Jyotirao Phule
set up by Rokeya
Pandita Ramabai
Hossain. There are 20
Periyar girls in your charge.
Mumtaz Ali Write an account of
the discussions that
Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar
might have taken place
on any one day in the
2. State whether true or false:
school.
(a) When the British captured Bengal, they framed
many new laws to regulate the rules regarding
marriage, adoption, inheritance of property, etc.
(b) Social reformers had to discard the ancient texts
in order to argue for reform in social practices.
(c) Reformers got full support from all sections of
the people of the country.
(d) The Child Marriage Restraint Act was passed
in 1829.
WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM 91
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 91 4/21/2022 12:23:53 PM

--- PAGE 104 ---
Let’s discuss
3. How did the knowledge of ancient texts help the
reformers promote new laws?
4. What were the different reasons people had for not
sending girls to school?
5. Why were Christian missionaries attacked by many
people in the country? Would some people have
supported them too? If so, for what reasons?
6. In the British period, what new opportunities
opened up for people who came from castes that
were regarded as “low”?
7. How did Jyotirao, and other reformer justify their
criticism of caste inequality in society?
8. Why did Phule dedicate his book Gulamgiri to the
American movement to free slaves?
9. What did Ambedkar want to achieve through the
temple entry movement?
10. Why were Jyotirao Phule and Ramaswamy Naicker
critical of the national movement? Did their
criticism help the national struggle in any way?
92 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 7.indd 92 6/3/2022 5:10:52 PM

--- PAGE 105 ---
8 The Making of the National
Movement: 1870s–1947
Fig. 1 – Police teargas
In the previous chapters, we have looked at:
demonstrators during the
The British conquest of territories, and takeover Quit India movement

of kingdoms
Introduction of new laws and administrative

institutions
Changes in the lives of peasants and tribals

Educational changes in the nineteenth century

Debates regarding the condition of women

Challenges to the caste system

Social and religious reform

The revolt of 1857 and its aftermath

The decline of crafts and growth of industries

On the basis of what you have read about these
issues, do you think Indians were discontented with
British rule? If so, how were different groups and classes
dissatisfied?
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 93 8/31/2022 5:03:32 PM

--- PAGE 106 ---
The Emergence of Nationalism
The above-mentioned developments led the people to
ask a crucial question: what is this country of India
and for whom is it meant? The answer that gradually
emerged was: India was the people of India – all the
people irrespective of class, colour, caste, creed,
language, or gender. And the country, its resources and
systems, were meant for all of them. With this answer
came the awareness that the British were exercising
control over the resources of India and the lives of its
people, and until this control was ended, India could
not be for Indians.
This consciousness began to be clearly stated by the
political associations formed after 1850, especially those
that came into being in the 1870s and 1880s. Most of
these were led by English-educated professionals such
as lawyers. The more important ones were the Poona
Sarvajanik Sabha, the Indian Association, the Madras
Mahajan Sabha, the Bombay Presidency Association, and
of course the Indian National Congress.
Note the name, “Poona Sarvajanik Sabha”. The
literal meaning of “sarvajanik” is “of or for all the people”
(sarva = all + janik = of the people). Though many of these
associations functioned in specific parts of the country,
their goals were stated as the goals of all the people of
Sovereign – The capacity India, not those of any one region, community or class.
to act independently They worked with the idea that the people should be
without outside sovereign – a modern consciousness and a key feature of
interference nationalism. In other words, they believed that the Indian
people should be empowered to take decisions regarding
their affairs.
The dissatisfaction with British rule intensified in the
1870s and 1880s. The Arms Act was passed in 1878,
disallowing Indians from possessing arms. In the same
year, the Vernacular Press Act was also enacted in an
effort to silence those who were critical of the government.
The Act allowed the government to confiscate the
assets of newspapers including their printing presses
if the newspapers published anything that was found
“objectionable”. In 1883, there was a furore over the
attempt by the government to introduce the Ilbert Bill. The
bill provided for the trial of British or European persons
by Indians, and sought equality between British and
Indian judges in the country. But when white opposition
forced the government to withdraw the bill, Indians were
enraged. The event highlighted the racial attitudes of the
British in India.
94 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 94 4/21/2022 12:30:30 PM

--- PAGE 107 ---
The need for an all-India organisation of educated
Indians had been felt since 1880, but the Ilbert Bill Publicist – Someone
controversy deepened this desire. The Indian National who publicises an idea by
Congress was established when 72 delegates from all circulating information,
over the country met at Bombay in December 1885. The writing reports, speaking
early leadership – Dadabhai Naoroji, Pherozeshah Mehta, at meetings
Badruddin Tyabji, W.C. Bonnerji, Surendranath Banerji,
Romesh Chandra Dutt, S. Subramania Iyer, among
others – was largely from Bombay and Calcutta. Naoroji,
a businessman and publicist settled in London, and
for a time member of the British Parliament, guided the
younger nationalists. A retired British official, A.O. Hume,
also played a part in bringing Indians from the various
regions together.
Source 1
Who did the Congress
seek to speak for?
A newspaper, The Indian Mirror, wrote in January 1886:
The First National Congress at Bombay … is the nucleus
of a future Parliament for our country, and will lead to
the good of inconceivable magnitude for our countrymen.
Badruddin Tyabji addressed the Congress as President
in 1887 thus:
this Congress is composed of the representatives, not
of any one class or community of India, but of all the
different communities of India.
Fig. 2 – Dadabhai Naoroji
Naoroji’s book Poverty and
A nation in the making Un-British Rule in India offered
a scathing criticism of the
It has often been said that the Congress in the first twenty
economic impact of British rule.
years was “moderate” in its objectives and methods. During
this period, it demanded a greater voice for Indians in
the government and in administration. It wanted the
Legislative Councils to be made more representative,
given more power, and introduced in provinces where 
Activity
none existed. It demanded that Indians be placed in high
From the beginning the
positions in the government. For this purpose, it called for
Congress sought to
civil service examinations to be held in India as well, not
speak for, and in the
just in London.
name of, all the Indian
The demand for Indianisation of the administration
people. Why did it
was part of a movement against racism, since most
choose to do so?
important jobs at the time were monopolised by white
THE MAKING OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT: 1870s –1947 95
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 95 4/21/2022 12:30:33 PM

--- PAGE 108 ---
officials, and the British generally assumed that Indians
Repeal – To undo law; to
could not be given positions of responsibility. Since
officially end the validity
British officers were sending a major part of their large
of something such as a
salaries home, Indianisation, it was hoped, would also
law
reduce the drain of wealth to England. Other demands
included the separation of the judiciary from the
executive, the repeal of the Arms Act and the freedom
of speech and expression.
The early Congress also raised a number of economic
issues. It declared that British rule had led to poverty and
famines: increase in the land revenue had impoverished
peasants and zamindars, and exports of grains to Europe
had created food shortages. The Congress demanded
Source 2 reduction of revenue, cut in military expenditure, and
more funds for irrigation. It passed many resolutions on
In pursuit of gold the salt tax, treatment of Indian labourers abroad, and
the sufferings of forest dwellers – caused by an interfering
This is what a Moderate forest administration. All this shows that despite being
leader, Dinshaw Wacha, a body of the educated elite, the Congress did not
wrote to Naoroji in 1887: talk only on behalf of professional groups, zamindars
or industrialists.
Pherozeshah is
nowadays too busy The Moderate leaders wanted to develop public
with his personal work awareness about the unjust nature of British rule.
… They are already They published newspapers, wrote articles, and showed
rich enough … how British rule was leading to the economic ruin
Mr. Telang too of the country. They criticised British rule in their
remains busy. I speeches and sent representatives to different parts of
wonder how if all the country to mobilise public opinion. They felt that
remain busy in the the British had respect for the ideals of freedom and
pursuit of gold can justice, and so they would accept the just demands of
the progress of the Indians. What was necessary, therefore, was to express
country be advanced?
these demands, and make the government aware of the
feelings of Indians.

Activity “Freedom is our birthright”
By the 1890s, many Indians began to raise questions
What problems regarding
about the political style of the Congress. In Bengal,
the early Congress does
Maharashtra and Punjab, leaders such as Bepin
this comment highlight?
Chandra Pal, Bal Gangadhar Tilak and Lala Lajpat
Rai were beginning to explore more radical objectives
and methods. They criticised the Moderates for their
“politics of prayers”, and emphasised the importance
of self-reliance and constructive work. They argued
that people must rely on their own strength, not on the
“good” intentions of the government; people must fight
for swaraj. Tilak raised the slogan, “Freedom is my
birthright and I shall have it!”
96 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 96 4/21/2022 12:30:34 PM

--- PAGE 109 ---
In 1905, Viceroy Curzon partitioned
Bengal. At that time Bengal was the biggest
province of British India and included
Bihar and parts of Orissa. The British
argued for dividing Bengal for reasons of
administrative convenience. But what did
“administrative convenience” mean? Whose
“convenience” did it represent? Clearly, it
was closely tied to the interests of British
officials and businessmen. Even so, instead
of removing the non-Bengali areas from the
province, the government separated East
Bengal and merged it with Assam. Perhaps
the main British motives were to curtail the
influence of Bengali politicians and to split the
Bengali people.
The partition of Bengal infuriated people
all over India. All sections of the Congress –
the Moderates and the Radicals, as they may
be called – opposed it. Large public meetings
and demonstrations were organised and
novel methods of mass protest developed. The struggle Fig. 3 – Balgangadhar Tilak
that unfolded came to be known as the Swadeshi Notice the name of the newspaper
movement, strongest in Bengal but with echoes elsewhere that lies on the table. Kesari,
a Marathi newspaper edited
too – in deltaic Andhra for instance, it was known as the
by Tilak, became one of the
Vandemataram Movement.
strongest critics of British rule.
Fig. 4 – Thousands joined the demonstrations during the Swadeshi movement
THE MAKING OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT: 1870s –1947 97
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 97 4/21/2022 12:30:38 PM

--- PAGE 110 ---
The Swadeshi movement sought to oppose British
rule and encourage the ideas of self-help, swadeshi
enterprise, national education, and use of Indian
languages. To fight for swaraj, the radicals advocated
mass mobilisation and boycott of British institutions
and goods. Some individuals also began to suggest
that “revolutionary violence” would be necessary to
overthrow British rule.
The opening decades of the twentieth century were
marked by other developments as well. A group of Muslim
landlords and nawabs formed the All India Muslim
League at Dacca in 1906. The League supported the
partition of Bengal. It desired separate electorates for
Muslims, a demand conceded by the government in
1909. Some seats in the councils were now reserved for
Muslims who would be elected by Muslim voters. This
Fig. 5 – Lala Lajpat Rai tempted politicians to gather a following by distributing
A nationalist from Punjab, he was favours to their own religious groups.
one of the leading members of the
Meanwhile, the Congress split in 1907. The Moderates
Radical group which was critical
of the politics of petitions. He was were opposed to the use of boycott. They felt that it
also an active member of the Arya involved the use of force. After the split, the Congress
Samaj.
came to be dominated by the Moderates with Tilak’s
followers functioning from outside. The two groups
reunited in December 1915. Next year, the Congress and
the Muslim League signed the historic Lucknow Pact and
Revolutionary violence decided to work together for representative government
The use of violence to in the country.
make a radical change
within society The Growth of Mass Nationalism
After 1919, the struggle against British rule gradually
Council – An appointed
became a mass movement, involving peasants, tribals,
or elected body of people
with an administrative, students and women in large numbers and occasionally
advisory or representative factory workers as well. Certain business groups too began
function to actively support the Congress in the 1920s. Why was
this so?
The First World War altered the economic and political
situation in India. It led to a huge rise in the defence
expenditure of the Government of India. The government in
turn increased taxes on individual incomes and business
profits. Increased military expenditure and the demands
for war supplies led to a sharp rise in prices which created
great difficulties for the common people. On the other hand,

Activity
business groups reaped fabulous profits from the war.
Find out which countries As you have seen (Chapter 6), the war created a demand
fought the First World for industrial goods (jute bags, cloth, rails) and caused
War. a decline of imports from other countries into India. So
98 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 98 4/21/2022 12:30:42 PM

--- PAGE 111 ---
Indian industries expanded during the war, and Indian
business groups began to demand greater opportunities
for development.
The war also lead the British to expand their army.
Villages were pressurised to supply soldiers for an alien
cause. A large number of soldiers were sent to serve abroad.
Many returned after the war with an understanding of
the ways in which imperialist powers were exploiting the
peoples of Asia and Africa and with a desire to oppose
colonial rule in India.
Furthermore, in 1917, there was a revolution in
Russia. News about peasants’ and workers’ struggles
and ideas of socialism circulated widely, inspiring
Indian nationalists.
The advent of Mahatma Gandhi
It is in these circumstances that Mahatma Gandhi emerged
as a mass leader. As you may know, Gandhiji, aged 46,
arrived in India in 1915 from South Africa. Having led
Indians in that country in non-violent marches against
racist restrictions, he was already a respected leader, Fig. 6 – Founders of the Natal
Congress, Durban, South Africa,
known internationally. His South African campaigns had
1895
brought him in contact with various types of Indians:
In 1895, along with other
Hindus, Muslims, Parsis and Christians; Gujaratis,
Indians, Mahatma Gandhi
Tamils and north Indians; and upper-class merchants, established the Natal Congress
lawyers and workers. to fight against racial
discrimination. Can you identify
Mahatma Gandhi spent his first year in India
Gandhiji? He is standing at the
travelling throughout the country, understanding the centre in the row at the back,
people, their needs and the overall situation. His earliest wearing a coat and tie.
THE MAKING OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT: 1870s –1947 99
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 99 4/21/2022 12:30:47 PM

--- PAGE 112 ---
interventions were in local movements in Champaran,
Kheda and Ahmedabad where he came into contact with
Rajendra Prasad and Vallabhbhai Patel. In Ahmedabad,
he led a successful millworkers’ strike in 1918.
Let us now focus in some detail on the movements
organised between 1919 and 1922.
The Rowlatt Satyagraha
In 1919, Gandhiji gave a call for a satyagraha against the
Rowlatt Act that the British had just passed. The Act curbed

Activity fundamental rights such as the freedom of expression and
strengthened police powers. Mahatma Gandhi, Mohammad
Find out about the
Ali Jinnah and others felt that the government had no right to
Jallianwala Bagh
restrict people’s basic freedoms. They criticised the Act as
massacre. What is
“devilish” and tyrannical. Gandhiji asked the Indian people
Jallianwala Bagh?
to observe 6 April 1919 as a day of non-violent opposition
What atrocities were
to this Act, as a day of “humiliation and prayer” and
committed there? How
hartal (strike). Satyagraha Sabhas were set up to launch
were they committed?
the movement.
Fig. 7 – The walled compound in
The Rowlatt Satyagraha turned out to be the first
which General Dyer opened fire on
a gathering of people all-India struggle against the British government
The people are pointing to the although it was largely restricted to cities. In April 1919,
bullet marks on the wall. there were a number of demonstrations and hartals in
the country and the government used brutal measures
to suppress them. The Jallianwala Bagh atrocities,
Knighthood – An honour
inflicted by General Dyer in Amritsar on Baisakhi day
granted by the British
(13 April), were a part of this repression. On learning
Crown for exceptional
about the massacre, Rabindranath Tagore expressed
personal achievement or
the pain and anger of the country by renouncing
public service
his knighthood.
100 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 100 4/22/2022 11:59:08 AM

--- PAGE 113 ---
During the Rowlatt Satyagraha, the participants tried to Source 3
ensure that Hindus and Muslims were united in the fight
against British rule. This was also the call of Mahatma
Gandhi who always saw India as a land of all the people
The eternal law
who lived in the country – Hindus, Muslims and those of
of suffering
other religions. He was keen that Hindus and Muslims
support each other in any just cause.
What did Mahatma
Khilafat agitation and the Non-Cooperation
Gandhi mean by ahimsa
Movement (non-violence)? How
The Khilafat issue was one such cause. In 1920, the could ahimsa become the
British imposed a harsh treaty on the Turkish Sultan or basis of struggle? This is
Khalifa. People were furious about this as they had been what Gandhiji said:
about the Jallianwala massacre. Also, Indian Muslims
Non-violence comes to
were keen that the Khalifa be allowed to retain control
us through doing good
over Muslim sacred places in the erstwhile Ottoman continually without the
Empire. The leaders of the Khilafat agitation, Mohammad slightest expectation
Ali and Shaukat Ali, now wished to initiate a full-fledged of return. … That
Non-Cooperation Movement. Gandhiji supported their is the indispensable
call and urged the Congress to campaign against “Punjab lesson in non-violence
wrongs” (Jallianwala massacre), the Khilafat wrong and … In South Africa
demand swaraj. … I succeeded in
learning the eternal
The Non-Cooperation Movement gained momentum
law of suffering as
through 1921–22. Thousands of students left government-
the only remedy for
controlled schools and colleges. Many lawyers such
undoing wrong and
as Motilal Nehru, C.R. Das, C. Rajagopalachari and Asaf
injustice. It means
Ali gave up their practices. British titles were surrendered
positively the law of
and legislatures boycotted. People lit public bonfires of
non-violence. You
foreign cloth. The imports of foreign cloth fell drastically
have to be prepared
between 1920 and 1922. But all this was merely the tip of
to suffer cheerfully at
the iceberg. Large parts of the country were on the brink
the hands of all and
of a formidable revolt. sundry and you will
wish ill to no one, not
People’s initiatives
even to those who may
In many cases, people resisted British rule non-violently. have wronged you.
In others, different classes and groups, interpreting Mahatma Gandhi,
Gandhiji’s call in their own manner, protested in ways 12 March 1938
that were not in accordance with his ideas. In either case,
people linked their movements to local grievances. Let us
look at a few examples.
In Kheda, Gujarat, Patidar peasants organised
non-violent campaigns against the high land revenue
demand of the British. In coastal Andhra and interior
Tamil Nadu, liquor shops were picketed. In the Guntur Picket – People protesting
district of Andhra Pradesh, tribals and poor peasants outside a building or shop
staged a number of “forest satyagrahas”, sometimes to prevent others from
sending their cattle into forests without paying grazing entering
fee. They were protesting because the colonial state
THE MAKING OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT: 1870s –1947 101
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 101 4/21/2022 12:30:51 PM

--- PAGE 114 ---
had restricted their use of forest resources in various
Mahants – Religious
ways. They believed that Gandhiji would get their taxes
functionaries of Sikh
reduced and have the forest regulations abolished. In
gurdwaras
many forest villages, peasants proclaimed swaraj and
believed that “Gandhi Raj” was about to be established.
Illegal eviction – Forcible
In Sind (now in Pakistan), Muslim traders and
and unlawful throwing
peasants were very enthusiastic about the Khilafat call.
out of tenants from the
In Bengal too, the Khilafat-Non-Cooperation alliance
land they rent
gave enormous communal unity and strength to the
national movement.
In Punjab, the Akali agitation of the Sikhs sought to
remove corrupt mahants – supported by the British – from
their gurdwaras. This movement got closely identified with
the Non-Cooperation Movement. In Assam, tea garden
labourers, shouting “Gandhi Maharaj ki Jai”, demanded
a big increase in their wages. They left the British-
owned plantations amidst declarations that they were
following Gandhiji’s wish. Interestingly, in the Assamese
Vaishnava songs of the period, the reference to Krishna
was substituted by “Gandhi Raja”.
Fig. 8 – A popular representation
of Mahatma Gandhi
The people’s Mahatma
In popular images too Mahatma
Gandhi is often shown as a divine We can see from the above that sometimes people
being occupying a place within thought of Gandhiji as a kind of messiah, as someone
the pantheon of Indian gods.
who could help them overcome their misery and poverty.
In this image, he is driving
Gandhiji wished to build class unity, not class conflict,
Krishna’s chariot, guiding other
nationalist leaders in the battle yet peasants could imagine that he would help them
against the British. in their fight against zamindars, and agricultural
labourers believed he would provide them land. At times,
ordinary people credited
Gandhiji with their
own achievements. For
instance, at the end of
a powerful movement,
peasants of Pratapgarh
in the United Provinces
(now Uttar Pradesh)
managed to stop illegal
eviction of tenants;
but they felt it was
Gandhiji who had won
this demand for them.
At other times, using
Gandhiji’s name, tribals
and peasants undertook
actions that did not
conform to Gandhian
ideals.
102 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 102 4/21/2022 12:30:52 PM

--- PAGE 115 ---
Source 4
“It was he who got bedakhli
stopped in Pratapgarh”
The following is an extract from a CID report on the
kisan movement in Allahabad district, January 1921:
The currency which Mr. Gandhi’s name has

Activity
acquired even in the remotest villages is astonishing.
No one seems to know quite who or what he is, but Read Source 4.
it is an accepted fact that what he says is so, and
According to this report,
what he orders must be done. He is a Mahatma or
how did people view
sadhu, a Pundit, a Brahmin who lives at Allahabad,
Mahatma Gandhi? Why
even a deota … the real power of his name is to
do you think they felt
be traced back to the idea that it was he who got
that he was opposed to
bedakhli [illegal eviction] stopped in Pratapgarh
zamindars but not to the
… as a general rule, Gandhi is not thought of as
government? Why do
being antagonistic to Government, but only to the
you think they were in
zamindars … We are for Gandhiji and the Sarkar.
favour of Gandhiji?
The happenings of 1922–1929
Mahatma Gandhi, as you know, was against violent
movements. He abruptly called off the Non-Cooperation
Movement when in February 1922, a crowd of peasants
set fire to a police station in Chauri Chaura. Twenty- two
policemen were killed on that day. The peasants were
provoked because the police had fired on their peaceful
demonstration.
Once the Non-Cooperation movement was over,
Gandhiji’s followers stressed that the Congress must
undertake constructive work in the rural areas. Other
leaders such as Chitta Ranjan Das and Motilal Nehru
argued that the party should fight elections to the councils
and enter them in order to influence government policies.
Through sincere social work in villages in the mid-1920s,
the Gandhians were able to extend their support base. This
proved to be very useful in launching the Civil Disobedience
movement in 1930.
Two important developments of the mid-1920s were
the formation of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS),
Fig. 9 – Chitta Ranjan Das
a Hindu organisation, and the Communist Party of India.
A major figure in the freedom
These parties have held very different ideas about the kind
movement, Das was a lawyer
of country India should be. Find out about their ideas with from East Bengal. He was
the help of your teacher. The revolutionary nationalist especially active in the
Bhagat Singh too was active in this period. Non-Cooperation Movement.
THE MAKING OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT: 1870s –1947 103
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 103 4/21/2022 12:30:55 PM

--- PAGE 116 ---
Fig. 10 – Demonstrators oppose the Simon Commission
In 1927, the British government in England decided to send a commission headed by Lord Simon
to decide India’s political future. The Commission had no Indian representative. The decison created
an outrage in India. All political groups decided to boycott the Commission. When the Commission
arrived, it was met with demonstrations with banners saying “Simon Go Back”.
The decade closed with the Congress resolving
to fight for Purna Swaraj (complete independence) in
1929 under the presidentship of Jawaharlal Nehru.
Consequently, “Independence Day” was observed on 26
January 1930 all over the country.
“It takes a loud voice to make the deaf hear.
Inquilab Zindabad!”
Revolutionary nationalists such as Bhagat Singh, Chandra Shekhar
Azad, Sukhdev and others wanted to fight against the colonial rule
and the rich exploiting classes through a revolution of workers and
peasants. For this purpose, they founded the Hindustan Socialist
Republican Association (HSRA) in 1928 at Ferozeshah Kotla in
Delhi. On 17 December, 1928, Bhagat Singh, Azad and Rajguru
assassinated Saunders, a police officer who was involved in the
lathi-charge that had caused the death of Lala Lajpat Rai.
On 8 April, 1929, Bhagat Singh and B.K. Dutt threw a bomb in the
Central Legislative Assembly. The aim, as their leaflet explained,
was not to kill but “to make the deaf hear”, and to remind the
Fig. 11 – Bhagat Singh foreign government of its callous exploitation.
Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev and Rajguru were executed on March 23,
1931. Bhagat Singh’s age at that time was only 23.
104 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 104 4/21/2022 12:30:58 PM

--- PAGE 117 ---
The March to Dandi
Purna Swaraj would never come on its
own. It had to be fought for. In 1930,
Gandhiji declared that he would lead a
march to break the salt law. According to
this law, the state had a monopoly on the
manufacture and sale of salt. Mahatma
Gandhi along with other nationalists
reasoned that it was sinful to tax salt
since it is such an essential item of our
food. The Salt March related the general
desire of freedom to a specific grievance
shared by everybody, and thus did not
divide the rich and the poor.
Gandhiji and his followers marched
for over 240 miles from Sabarmati to
the coastal town of Dandi where they
broke the government law by gathering
natural salt found on the seashore,
and boiling sea water to produce salt.
Fig. 12 – Mahatma Gandhi breaking the
salt law by picking up a lump of natural salt,
Dandi, 6 April 1930
Women in the freedom struggle: Ambabai from Karnataka
Women from diverse backgrounds participated in the national movement.
Young and old, single and married, they came from rural and urban areas, from
both conservative and liberal homes. Their involvement was significant for the
freedom struggle, for the women’s movement, and for themselves personally.
Both British officials and Indian nationalists felt that women’s participation gave
the national struggle an immense force. Participation in the freedom movement
brought women out of their homes. It gave them a place in the professions,
in the governance of India, and it could pave the way for equality with men.
What such participation meant for women is best recounted by them. Ambabai
of Karnataka had been married at age twelve. Widowed at sixteen, she picketed
foreign cloth and liquor shops in Udipi. She was arrested, served a sentence
and was rearrested. Between prison terms she made speeches, taught spinning,
and organised prabhat pheris. Ambabai regarded these as the happiest days
of her life because they gave it a new purpose and commitment.
Women, however, had to fight for their right to participate in the movement.
During the Salt Satyagraha, for instance, even Mahatma Gandhi was initially
opposed to women’s participation. Sarojini Naidu had to persuade him to allow
women to join the movement.
THE MAKING OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT: 1870s –1947 105
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 105 4/21/2022 12:30:59 PM

--- PAGE 118 ---
Peasants, tribals and women participated
in large numbers. A business federation
published a pamphlet on the salt issue.
The government tried to crush the
movement through brutal action against
peaceful satyagrahis. Thousands were
sent to jail.
The combined struggles of the Indian
people bore fruit when the Government of
India Act of 1935 prescribed provincial
autonomy and the government announced
elections to the provincial legislatures in
1937. The Congress formed governments
in 7 out of 11 provinces.
In September 1939, after two years of
Congress rule in the provinces, the Second
World War broke out. Critical of Hitler,
Congress leaders were ready to support
the British war effort. But in return they
Fig. 13 – Sarojini Naidu with wanted that India be granted independence
Mahatma Gandhi, Paris, 1931 after the war. The British refused to concede the demand.
Active in the national movement The Congress ministries resigned in protest.
since the early 1920s, Naidu was
a significant leader of the Dandi
March. She was the first Indian Source 5
woman to become President of the
Indian National Congress (1925).
Veer Lakhan Nayak was hanged
Baji Mohammed, President of the Nabrangpur Congress,
Orissa in the 1930s, reports:
On August 25, 1942 … nineteen people died on the
spot in police firing at Paparandi in Nabarangpur.
Many died thereafter from their wounds. Over 300
were injured. More than a thousand were jailed in
Koraput district. Several were shot or executed.
Veer Lakhan Nayak (a legendary tribal leader who
defied the British) was hanged.
Nayak, Baji tells us, was not worried about being
executed, only sad that he would not live to see
freedom’s dawn.
Baji Mohammad mobilised 20,000 people to join the
Provincial autonomy
national struggle. He offered satyagraha many times over.
Capacity of the provinces
He participated in protests against the Second World
to make relatively
War and in the Quit India movement, and served long
independent decisions
jail terms.
while remaining within a
federation
106 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 106 4/21/2022 12:31:00 PM

--- PAGE 119 ---
Bose and the INA
Fig. 15 – Subhas Chandra Bose
A radical nationalist, with
socialist leanings, Bose did
Fig. 14 – Quit India movement, August 1942
not share Gandhiji’s ideal of
Demonstrators clashed with the police everywhere. Many thousands
were arrested, over a thousand killed, many more were injured. ahimsa, though he respected
him as the “Father of the
Quit India and Later
Nation”. In January 1941, he secretly left his Calcutta home,
Mahatma Gandhi decided went to Singapore, via Germany, and raised the Azad Hind Fauj
to initiate a new phase of or the Indian National Army (INA). To free India from British
movement against the British control, in 1944, the INA tried to enter India through Imphal
in the middle of the Second and Kohima but the campaign failed. The INA members were
World War. The British must imprisoned and tried. People across the country, from all walks
quit India immediately, he told of life, participated in the movement against the INA trials.
them. To the people he said,
“do or die” in your effort to fight the British – but you must
fight non-violently. Gandhiji and other leaders were jailed
at once but the movement spread. It specially attracted
peasants and the youth who gave up their studies to join it.
Communications and symbols of state authority
were attacked all over the country. In many areas
the people set up their own governments.
The first response of the British was severe
repression. By the end of 1943, over 90,000
people were arrested, and around 1,000 killed in
police firing. In many areas, orders were given to
machine-gun crowds from airplanes. The rebellion,
however, ultimately brought the Raj to its knees.
Towards Independence and Partition
Meanwhile, in 1940 the Muslim League had
moved a resolution demanding “Independent Fig. 16 – Jawaharlal Nehru listens to Mahatma
Gandhi before the Bombay session of the
States” for Muslims in the north-western and
Congress, July 1946
eastern areas of the country. The resolution did
Gandhiji’s disciple, a Congress Socialist, and an
not mention partition or Pakistan. Why did the
internationalist, Nehru was a leading architect
League ask for an autonomous arrangement for
of the national movement and of free India’s
the Muslims of the subcontinent? economy and polity.
THE MAKING OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT: 1870s –1947 107
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 107 4/21/2022 12:31:05 PM

--- PAGE 120 ---
Fig. 17 – Maulana Azad with
other members at the Congress
Working Committee, Sevagram,
1942
Azad was born in Mecca to a
Bengali father and an Arab
mother. Well-versed in many
languages, Azad was a scholar
of Islam and an exponent of
the notion of wahadat-i-deen,
the essential oneness of all
religions. An active participant
in Gandhian movements and
a staunch advocate of Hindu-
Muslim unity, he was opposed
to Jinnah’s two-nation theory.
Fig. 18 – Chakravarti Rajagopalachari
speaking to Gandhiji before the Gandhi-
Jinnah talks, 1944
A veteran nationalist and leader of the
Salt Satyagraha in the south,
C. Rajagopalachari, popularly known as
Rajaji, served as member of the Interim
Government of 1946 and as free India’s
first Indian Governor-General.
Fig. 19 – Sardar
Vallabhbhai Patel played
an important role in
the negotiations for
independence during
1945–47
Patel hailed from an
impoverished peasant-
proprietor family of Nadiad,
Fig. 20 – Mohammad Ali
Gujarat. A foremost
Jinnah with Mahatma Gandhi,
organiser of the freedom
Bombay, September 1944
movement from 1918
onwards, Patel served as An ambassador of
President of the Congress Hindu-Muslim unity until
in 1931. 1920, Jinnah played an
important role in the making
of the Lucknow Pact. He
reorganised the Muslim League
after 1934, and became the
major spokesperson for the
demand for Pakistan.
108 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 108 4/21/2022 12:31:11 PM

--- PAGE 121 ---
From the late 1930s, the League began viewing the Muslims “General”constituencies
as a separate “nation” from the Hindus. In developing this Election districts with no
notion, it may have been influenced by the history of tension reservations for any religious
between some Hindu and Muslim groups in the 1920s and or other community
1930s. More importantly, the provincial elections of 1937
seemed to have convinced the League that Muslims were a
minority, and they would always have to play second fiddle
in any democratic structure. It feared that Muslims may even
go unrepresented. The Congress’s rejection of the League’s
desire to form a joint Congress-League government in the
United Provinces in 1937 also annoyed the League.
The Congress’s failure to mobilise the Muslim masses in
the 1930s allowed the League to widen its social support. It
sought to enlarge its support in the early 1940s when most
Congress leaders were in jail. At the end of the war in 1945,
the British opened negotiations between the Congress, the
League and themselves for the independence of India. The talks
failed because the League saw itself as the sole spokesperson
of India’s Muslims. The Congress could not accept this claim
since a large number of Muslims still supported it. Fig. 21 – Khan Abdul Ghaffar
Khan, the Pashtun leader from the
Elections to the provinces were again held in 1946. The North West Frontier Province, with
Congress did well in the “General” constituencies but his colleagues at a peace march
through Bihar, March 1947
the League’s success in the seats reserved for Muslims was
Also known as Badshah Khan,
spectacular. It persisted with its demand for “Pakistan”. In March
he was the founder of the Khudai
1946, the British cabinet sent a three-member mission to Khidmatgars, a powerful non-
Delhi to examine this demand and to suggest a suitable violent movement among the
Pathans of his province. Badshah
political framework for a free India. This mission suggested
Khan was strongly opposed
that India should remain united and constitute itself as a
to the Partition of India. He
loose confederation with some autonomy for Muslim-majority criticised his Congress colleagues
for agreeing to the 1947 division.
areas. But it could not get the Congress and the Muslim
League to agree to specific details of the proposal. Partition
now became more or less inevitable.
After the failure of the Cabinet
Mission, the Muslim League decided
on mass agitation for winning its
Pakistan demand. It announced 16
August 1946 as “Direct Action Day”.
On this day riots broke out in Calcutta,
lasting several days and resulting in
the death of thousands of people.
By March 1947, violence spread to
different parts of northern India.
Many hundred thousand people
were killed and numerous women
Fig. 22 – Refugees from riot-torn Punjab gather in New
had to face untold brutalities during
Delhi, in search of shelter and food
the Partition. Millions of people were
forced to flee their homes. Torn asunder from their
homelands, they were reduced to being refugees in alien
THE MAKING OF THE NATIONAL MOVEMENT: 1870s –1947 109
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 109 4/21/2022 12:31:14 PM

--- PAGE 122 ---
lands. Partition also meant that India changed, many of its
cities changed, and a new country – Pakistan – was born.
So, the joy of our country’s independence from British rule
came mixed with the pain and violence of Partition.
Let’s recall
Let’s imagine
1. Why were people dissatisfied with British rule in
the 1870s and 1880s?
Imagine that you are
involved in the Indian 2. Who did the Indian National Congress wish to
national movement. speak for?
Based on your reading
3. What economic impact did the First World War
of this chapter, briefly
have on India?
discuss your preferred
methods of struggle 4. What did the Muslim League resolution of 1940
and your vision of a ask for?
free India.
Let’s discuss
5. Who were the Moderates? How did they propose
to struggle against British rule?
6. How was the politics of the Radicals within the
Congress different from that of the Moderates?
7. Discuss the various forms that the Non-Cooperation
Movement took in different parts of India. How did
the people understand Gandhiji?
8. Why did Gandhiji choose to break the salt law?
9. Discuss those developments of the 1937–47 period
that led to the creation of Pakistan.
Let’s do
10. Find out how the national movement was organised
in your city, district, area or state. Who participated
in it and who led it? What did the movement in
your area achieve?
11. Find out more about the life and work of any two
participants or leaders of the national movement
and write a short essay about them. You may
choose a person not mentioned in this chapter.
110 OUR PASTS – III
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 110 4/21/2022 12:31:16 PM

--- PAGE 123 ---
Notes
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 111 4/21/2022 12:31:16 PM

--- PAGE 124 ---
Notes
Rationalised 2023-24
Chap 8.indd 112 4/21/2022 12:31:16 PM