--- PAGE 1 ---
INDIA
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
TEXTBOOK IN GEOGRAPHY FOR CLASS XI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 3 ---
INDIA
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
TEXTBOOK IN GEOGRAPHY FOR CLASS XI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 4 ---
First Edition
March 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
November 2006 , December 2007,
December 2008, January 2010,
January  2011, January  2013,
January  2014, December 2014,
February 2016, February 2017,
January 2018, January 2019,
January 2020, January 2021,
July 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
February 2022, Phalguna 1944
PD 150T RSP
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 70.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Sita Fine Arts (P.) Ltd., A-16,
Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-II, New
Delhi - 110 028
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-
sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
:
Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production
:
Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business Manager :
Vipin Dewan
Chief Editor (In charge)
:
Bijnan Sutar
Editor
:
R.N. Bhardwaj
Production Assistant
:
Om Prakash
Cover
Shweta Rao
Illustration
Dilip Kumar
Cartography
Cartographic Design
Agency
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
ISBN  81-7450-538-5
11094 – INDIA: PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Textbook in Geography for Class XI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 5 ---
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks
a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our
system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi
and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement
this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the
maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred
system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as
the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and
sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed
body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual  calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and
space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
committee for textbooks in Social Sciences, at the higher secondary
level, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor M.H. Qureshi for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals
for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 6 ---
which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,
Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and
suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
 National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
     Research and Training
vi
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 7 ---
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on
students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the
content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to
rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed
by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
•
Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same
class
•
Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•
Difficulty level
•
Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-
learning
•
Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the
changes given above.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 9 ---
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES AT THE HIGHER
SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
M. H. Qureshi, Professor, Centre for the Study of Regional Development,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Aparna Pandey, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Ashok Diwakar, Lecturer,  Government P.G College, Sector 9, Gurgaon
B. S. Butola, Professor, Centre for the Study of Regional Development, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi
Beena Srikumar, PGT, CRPF Public School, New Delhi
Noor Mohammad, Professor, Delhi School of Economics, Delhi University, Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Tannu Malik, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 10 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the
contribution of Bhagirathy Jhingran, Teacher, Pathways World School, Gurgaon
in the development of this textbook; the National Bureau of Soil Survey and Landuse
Planning (under ICAR), Government of India, for providing input for the chapter
on Soils. Special thanks are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Social Sciences and Humanties for her valuable support at every
stage of preparation of this textbook.
The Council is thankful to the Survey of India for Certification of Maps given
in the textbook. It also gratefully acknowledges the support of individuals and
organisations as listed below for providing various photographs used in this
textbook — M.H. Qureshi, Professor, CSRD, JNU for Figure 5.4 and 5.5; B.S. Butola,
Professor, CSRD, JNU for Figure 6.1, 6.5, 6.7 and 6.9; M.V. Srinivasan, Lecturer,
DESSH, NCERT for Figure 6.3; ITDC/Ministry of Tourism, Government of India
for Figure 2.1, 2.3, 2.8, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 3.1, 3.3, 4.4, 5.7; Ministry of Environment
and Forest, Government of India for Figure 5.1 and 5.6; Social Science Textbook
for Class VII, Part II (NCERT, 2005), for Figure 5.3 and Social Science Textbook
for Class VIII, Part II (NCERT, 2005), for Figure 2.10.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Anil Sharma
and Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators;  Sameer Khatana and Amar Kumar Prusty,
Copy Editors; Bharat Sanwaria, Shreshtha and Deepti Sharma, Proof Readers;
Dinesh Kumar, Computer Incharge, who have helped in giving a final shape to
this book. The contribution of the Publication Department, NCERT is also duly
acknowledged.
The following are applicable to all the maps of India used in this book
© Government of India, Copyright 2006
1.
The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher.
2.
The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured
from the appropriate base line.
3.
The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh.
4.
The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map
are  as interpreted from the “North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act.1971,” but have yet to be
verified.
5.
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by
Survey of India.
6.
The State boundaries between Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand, and
Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned.
7.
The spellings of names in this map, have been taken from various sources.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 11 ---
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
v
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
vii
UNIT I : INTRODUCTION
1-6
1.
India — Location
2
UNIT II : PHYSIOGRAPHY
7-26
2.
Structure and Physiography
8
3.
Drainage System
17
UNIT III : CLIMATE AND VEGETATION
27-51
4.
Climate
28
5.
Natural Vegetation
42
UNIT IV : NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS: CAUSES,
52-69
     CONSEQUENCES AND MANAGEMENT
6.
Natural Hazards and Disasters
53
GLOSSARY
70-72
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 12 ---
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 13 ---
INTRODUCTION
This unit deals with
• Location — space relations and India’s place in the world
UNIT
I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 14 ---
Y
ou have already seen the map of India
in the previous classes. Now you closely
examine the  map of India (Figure 1.1).
Mark the southernmost and northernmost
latitudes and the easternmost and
westernmost longitudes.
The mainland of India, extends from
Kashmir in the north to Kanniyakumari in the
south and  Arunachal Pradesh in the east to
Gujarat in the west. India’s territorial limit
further extends towards the sea upto 12
nautical miles (about 21.9 km) from the coast.
(See the box for conversion).
Statute mile
=
63,360 inches
Nautical mile
=
72,960 inches
1 Statute mile
=
about 1.6 km (1.584 km)
1 Nautical mile
=
about 1.8 km (1.852 km)
Our southern boundary extends upto
6°45' N latitude in the Bay of Bengal.  Let us
try to analyse the implications of having such
a vast longitudinal and latitudinal extent.
If you work out the latitudinal and
longitudinal extent of India, they are roughly
about 30 degrees, whereas the actual distance
measured from north to south extremity is
3,214 km, and that from east to west is only
2,933 km. What is the reason for this
difference? Consult Chapter 3 on the topic
Latitude, Longitude and Time in the book
Practical Work in Geography – Part I (NCERT,
2006) to find out.
This difference is based on the fact that the
distance between two longitudes decreases
towards the poles whereas the distance
between two latitudes remains the same
everywhere. Find out the distance between two
latitudes?
From the values of latitude, it is understood
that the southern part of the country lies
within the tropics and the northern part lies in
the sub-tropical zone or the warm temperate
zone. This location is responsible for large
variations in land forms, climate, soil types and
natural vegetation in the country.
Now, let us observe the longitudinal extent
and its implications on the Indian people. From
the values of longitude, it is quite discernible
that there is a variation of nearly 30 degrees,
which causes a time difference of nearly two
hours between the easternmost and the
westernmost parts of our country. You are
familiar with the concept of Indian Standard
Time (IST).  What is the use of the standard
meridian? While the sun rises in the
northeastern states about two hours earlier as
compared to Jaisalmer, the watches in
Dibrugarh, Imphal in the east and Jaisalmer,
Bhopal or Chennai in the other parts of India
show the same time.  Why does this happen?
INDIA – LOCATION
C H A P T E R
There is a general understanding among the countries of the world to select the standard
meridian in multiples of 7°30' of longitude. That is why 82°30' E  has been selected as the
‘standard meridian’ of India. Indian Standard Time is ahead of Greenwich Mean Time by
5 hours and 30 minutes.
There are some countries where there are more than one standard meridian due to
their vast east-to-west extent. For example, the USA has seven time zones.
Do you Remember?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 15 ---
3
INDIA – LOCATION
Figure 1.1 : India : Administrative Divisions
Rationalised 2023-24