--- PAGE 1 ---
SOCIAL SCIENCE
The Earth : Our Habitat
TEXTBOOK IN GEOGRAPHY FOR CLASS VI
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 2 ---
First Edition
February 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprint
December 2006, November 2007,
January 2009, December 2009,
November 2010, February 2012,
November 2012, November 2013,
December 2015, December 2016,
December 2017, February 2019,
August 2019, January 2021,
August 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944
PD 650T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 65.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at General
Offset Printing Press (P.) Ltd., 42, Industrial
Colony, Naini, Allahabad - 211 010 (U.P.)
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production
: Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business
: Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor
: Bijnan Sutar
(In charge)
Production Assistant : Om Prakash
Cover
Sarita Verma Mathur
Illustrations and Cartography
Sarita Verma Mathur, Meha Gupta,
Ishwar Singh, Praveen Mishra
and Narendra Tyagi
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
ISBN  81-7450-491-5
0656 – THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Textbook for Class VI
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 3 ---
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life at school
must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure from the
legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between
the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF
signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning
and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of
education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this efforts depends on the steps that school principals and teachers will
take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities
and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate
new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating
the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other
resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if
we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of
stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden
by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration
for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates the
hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book. We wish
to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan
and the Chief Advisor for this book, Vibha Parthasarathi for guiding the work of this
committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful
to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
 National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
     Research and Training
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 4 ---
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 5 ---
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing
the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with
creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into
consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the
following:
•
Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the
same class
•
Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•
Difficulty level
•
Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or
peer-learning
•
Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 6 ---
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 7 ---
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES AT THE UPPER
PRIMARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
Vibha Parthasarathi, Principal (Retd.), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Anjali Swami, TGT, N.C. Jindal Public School, New Delhi
Anshu, Reader, Kirorimal College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Durga Singh, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya No.2, Ahmedabad 
Shahla Mujib, PGT, Govt. Boys Sr. Sec. School,Hari Nagar Ashram,  New Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Aparna Pandey, Lecturer, Department of Education in Social Sciences NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 8 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the valuable
contributions of the following participants in finalising this book : Sudeshna Bhattacharya,
Reader, Miranda House, University of Delhi, Delhi; Poonam Behari, Reader, Miranda House,
University of Delhi, Delhi; Vyasraj T. Ambekar, Incharge Headmaster, SVM High School,
Tilakwadi, Belgaum; Seema Agnihotri, Lecturer, Management Education and Research
Institute, I.P. University, New Delhi; Daulat Patel, Teacher (Retd.), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya,
New Delhi; Samita Dasgupta, PGT (Geography), Anandalaya, Anand, Gujarat.
The Council is thankful to the Survey of India for certification of maps given in the
textbook. It also gratefully acknowledges the support of individuals and organisations as
listed below for providing various photographs, and other materials such as articles and
paintings used in this textbook —
Science Popularisation Association of Communications and Educators (SPACE), New
Delhi (Fig. 1.6); Photo Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India
(Agricultural Field – Cover page);  ITDC/Ministry of Tourism, Govt. of India, (Fig. 5.5 and
Plateau on Contents page); (Tiger– Cover page); (Himalayas – cover page and page 30);
(Deer on Contents page); Prakash Higher Secondary School, Bodakdev, Ahmedabad (Poem
and paintings related to the Tsunami on page 44 and 45); Social Science, Part-II, Class VI,
NCERT, 2005 (Fig. 1.3).
Special thanks are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department of Education
in Social Sciences and Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi for her support.
Special thanks are due to Shveta Uppal, Chief Editor, NCERT and Vandana R. Singh,
Consultant Editor, for going through the manusrcipt and suggesting relevant changes.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Ishwar Singh
DTP Operator; Sameer Khatana and Amar Kumar Prusty, Copy Editors; Bharat Sanwaria
and Dilip Kumar Agasti, Proof Readers; Dinesh Kumar, Incharge, Computer Station for
giving a final shape to this book. The contribution of the Publication Department in bringing
out this book is also duly acknowledged.
The Council acknowledges the contributions of the review commitee members Kulprit
Singh, PGT Geography, Navyug School, Chanakyapuri, Delhi, Pushpendra Singh, PGT
Geography, Prudence School, Delhi; Aparna Pandey, Professor, DESS, NCERT; Tanu Malik,
Professor, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi for the rationalisation of the content of this textbook.
The following are applicable to all the maps of India used in this book
© Government of India, Copyright 2006
1.
The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher.
2.
The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from
the appropriate base line.
3.
The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh.
4.
The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are
as interpreted from the “North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act.1971,” but have yet to be verified.
5.
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by
Survey of India.
6.
The state boundaries between Uttaranchal & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh &
Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned.
7.
The spellings of names in this map, have been taken from various sources.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 9 ---
Foreword
iii
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks
v
1. The Earth in the Solar System.........................
1
2. Globe : Latitudes and Longitudes....................
10
3. Motions of the Earth........................................
18
4. Maps................................................................
23
5. Major Domains of the Earth.............................
30
6. Our Country – India.........................................
39
Appendix I............................................................
48
Appendix II...........................................................
49
CONTENTS
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 10 ---
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24