--- PAGE 11 ---
Contents
Contents
Contents
Contents
Contents
Foreword
iii
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks
v
1.
Resources and Development
1
2.
Forest and Wildlife Resources
13
3.
Water Resources
19
4.
Agriculture
30
5.
Minerals and Energy Resources
42
6.
Manufacturing Industries
58
7.
Lifelines of National Economy
71
Appendix–I
84
Appendix–II
85
Glossary
86
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 12 ---
Constitution of India
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
(f)
to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i)
to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j)
to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 13 ---
Everything available in our environment
which can be used to satisfy our needs,
provided, it is technologically accessible,
economically feasible and culturally
acceptable can be termed as ‘Resource’.
The process of transformation of things
available in our environment involves an
interactive relationship between nature,
technology and institutions. Human beings
interact with nature through technology and
create institutions to accelerate their
economic development.
Do you think that resources are free
gifts of nature as is assumed by many?
They are not. Resources are a function of
human activities. Human beings themselves
are essential components of resources. They
transform material available in our
environment into resources and use them.
These resources can be classified in the
following ways–
(a) On the basis of origin – biotic and abiotic
(b) On the basis of exhaustibility – renewable
and non-renewable
(c) On the basis of ownership – individual,
community, national and international
(d) On the basis of status of development –
potential, developed stock and reserves.
Can you identify and name the various items
used in making life comfortable in our villages
and towns. List the items and name the
material used in their making.
Fig. 1.1:  Interdependent relationship between
nature, technology and institutions
Fig. 1.2:  Classification of resources
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 14 ---
2
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES
Resources are vital for human survival as well
as for maintaining the quality of life. It was
believed that resources are free gifts of nature.
As a result, human beings used them
indiscriminately and this has led to the
following major problems.
• Depletion of resources for satisfying the
greed of a few individuals.
• Accumulation of resources in few hands, which,
in turn, divided the society into two segments
i.e. haves  and have nots or rich and poor.
• Indiscriminate exploitation of resources has
led to global ecological crises such as, global
warming, ozone layer depletion, environmental
pollution and land degradation.
An equitable distribution of resources has
become essential for a sustained quality of life
and global peace. If the present trend of resource
depletion by a few individuals and countries
continues, the future of our planet is in danger.
Therefore, resource planning is essential for
sustainable existence of all forms of life.
Sustainable existence is a component of
sustainable development.
Sustainable development
Sustainable economic development means
‘development should take place without
damaging the environment, and development
in the present should not compromise with the
needs of the future generations.’
Rio de Janeiro Earth Summit, 1992
In June 1992, more than 100 heads of states
met in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, for the first
International Earth Summit. The Summit was
convened for addressing urgent problems of
environmental protection and socio-
economic development at the global level.
The assembled leaders signed the
Declaration on Global Climatic Change and
Biological Diversity. The Rio Convention
endorsed the global Forest Principles and
adopted Agenda 21 for achieving
Sustainable Development in the 21st century.
Agenda 21
It is the declaration signed by world leaders
in 1992 at the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development (UNCED),
which took place at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It
aims at achieving global sustainable
development. It is an agenda to combat
environmental damage, poverty, disease
through global co-operation on common
interests, mutual needs and shared
responsibilities. One major objective of the
Agenda 21 is that every local government
should draw its own local Agenda 21.
Prepare a list of stock and reserve, resources
that you are familiar with from your local area.
1. Imagine, if the oil supply gets exhausted
one day, how would this affect our life style?
2. Plan a survey in your colony/village to
investigate people’s attitude towards
recycling of the domestic/agricultural
wastes. Ask questions about :
(a) What do they think about resources
they use?
(b) What is their opinion about the
wastes, and its utilisation?
(c) Collage your results.
RESOURCE PLANNING
Planning is the widely accepted strategy for
judicious use of resources. It has importance
in a country like India, which has enormous
diversity in the availability of resources. There
are regions which are rich in certain types of
resources but are deficient in some other
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 15 ---
3
RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
resources. There are some regions which can
be considered self sufficient in terms of the
availability of resources and there are some
regions which have acute shortage of some vital
resources. For example, the states of
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh and Madhya
Pradesh are rich in minerals and coal deposits.
Arunachal Pradesh has abundance of water
resources but lacks in infrastructural
development. The state of Rajasthan is very well
endowed with solar and wind energy but lacks
in water resources. The cold desert of Ladakh
is relatively isolated from the rest of the
country. It has very rich cultural heritage but
it is deficient in water, infrastructure and some
vital minerals. This calls for balanced resource
planning at the national, state, regional and
local levels.
technology and institutions may hinder
development. There are many regions in our
country that are rich in resources but these
are included in economically backward
regions. On the contrary there are some regions
which have a poor resource base but they are
economically developed.
Can you name some resource rich but
economically backward regions and some
resource poor but economically developed
regions? Give reasons for such a situation.
The history  of colonisation reveals that
rich resources in colonies were the main
attractions for the foreign invaders. It was
primarily the higher level of technological
development of the colonising countries that
helped them to exploit resources of other
regions and establish their supremacy over
the colonies. Therefore, resources can
contribute to development only when they are
accompanied by appropriate technological
development and institutional changes. India
has experienced all this in different phases of
colonisation. Therefore, in India, development,
in general, and resource development in
particular does not only involve the
availability of resources, but also the
technology, quality of human resources and
the historical experiences of the people.
Conservation of Resources: Resources are
vital for any developmental activity. But
irrational consumption and over-utilisation
of resources may lead to socio-economic and
environmental problems. To overcome these
problems, resource conservation at various
levels is important. This had been the main
concern of the leaders and thinkers in the
past. For example, Gandhiji was very apt in
voicing his concern about resource
conservation in these words: “There is enough
Resource Planning in India
Resource planning is a complex process
which involves : (i) identification and
inventory of resources across the regions of
the country. This involves surveying,
mapping and qualitative and quantitative
estimation and measurement of the
resources. (ii) Evolving a planning structure
endowed with appropriate technology, skill
and institutional set up for implementing
resource development plans. (iii) Matching
the resource development plans with overall
national development plans.
India has made concerted efforts for
achieving the goals of resource planning right
from the First Five Year Plan launched after
Independence.
The availability of resources is a necessary
condition for the development of any region,
but mere availability of resources in the
absence of corresponding changes in
What resources are being developed in your
surroundings by the community/village
panchayats/ward level communities with the
help of community participation?
Prepare a list of resources found in your state
and also identify the resources that are
important but deficit in your state.
Rationalised-2023-24