--- PAGE 1 ---
SOCIAL SCIENCE
The Earth : Our Habitat
TEXTBOOK IN GEOGRAPHY FOR CLASS VI
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 2 ---
First Edition
February 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprint
December 2006, November 2007,
January 2009, December 2009,
November 2010, February 2012,
November 2012, November 2013,
December 2015, December 2016,
December 2017, February 2019,
August 2019, January 2021,
August 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944
PD 650T BS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 65.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at General
Offset Printing Press (P.) Ltd., 42, Industrial
Colony, Naini, Allahabad - 211 010 (U.P.)
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production
: Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business
: Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor
: Bijnan Sutar
(In charge)
Production Assistant : Om Prakash
Cover
Sarita Verma Mathur
Illustrations and Cartography
Sarita Verma Mathur, Meha Gupta,
Ishwar Singh, Praveen Mishra
and Narendra Tyagi
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
ISBN  81-7450-491-5
0656 – THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Textbook for Class VI
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 3 ---
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s life at school
must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure from the
legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between
the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF
signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning
and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of
education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this efforts depends on the steps that school principals and teachers will
take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities
and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate
new knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating
the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other
resources and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if
we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of
knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook
proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of
stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden
by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with greater consideration
for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance
this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates the
hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book. We wish
to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari Vasudevan
and the Chief Advisor for this book, Vibha Parthasarathi for guiding the work of this
committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful
to their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material
and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of
Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As an organisation
committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products,
NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
 National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
     Research and Training
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 4 ---
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 5 ---
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load
on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing
the content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with
creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the
exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into
consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the
following:
•
Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the
same class
•
Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•
Difficulty level
•
Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or
peer-learning
•
Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 6 ---
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 7 ---
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES AT THE UPPER
PRIMARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
Vibha Parthasarathi, Principal (Retd.), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Anjali Swami, TGT, N.C. Jindal Public School, New Delhi
Anshu, Reader, Kirorimal College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Durga Singh, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya No.2, Ahmedabad 
Shahla Mujib, PGT, Govt. Boys Sr. Sec. School,Hari Nagar Ashram,  New Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Aparna Pandey, Lecturer, Department of Education in Social Sciences NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 8 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the valuable
contributions of the following participants in finalising this book : Sudeshna Bhattacharya,
Reader, Miranda House, University of Delhi, Delhi; Poonam Behari, Reader, Miranda House,
University of Delhi, Delhi; Vyasraj T. Ambekar, Incharge Headmaster, SVM High School,
Tilakwadi, Belgaum; Seema Agnihotri, Lecturer, Management Education and Research
Institute, I.P. University, New Delhi; Daulat Patel, Teacher (Retd.), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya,
New Delhi; Samita Dasgupta, PGT (Geography), Anandalaya, Anand, Gujarat.
The Council is thankful to the Survey of India for certification of maps given in the
textbook. It also gratefully acknowledges the support of individuals and organisations as
listed below for providing various photographs, and other materials such as articles and
paintings used in this textbook —
Science Popularisation Association of Communications and Educators (SPACE), New
Delhi (Fig. 1.6); Photo Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Govt. of India
(Agricultural Field – Cover page);  ITDC/Ministry of Tourism, Govt. of India, (Fig. 5.5 and
Plateau on Contents page); (Tiger– Cover page); (Himalayas – cover page and page 30);
(Deer on Contents page); Prakash Higher Secondary School, Bodakdev, Ahmedabad (Poem
and paintings related to the Tsunami on page 44 and 45); Social Science, Part-II, Class VI,
NCERT, 2005 (Fig. 1.3).
Special thanks are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department of Education
in Social Sciences and Humanities, NCERT, New Delhi for her support.
Special thanks are due to Shveta Uppal, Chief Editor, NCERT and Vandana R. Singh,
Consultant Editor, for going through the manusrcipt and suggesting relevant changes.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Ishwar Singh
DTP Operator; Sameer Khatana and Amar Kumar Prusty, Copy Editors; Bharat Sanwaria
and Dilip Kumar Agasti, Proof Readers; Dinesh Kumar, Incharge, Computer Station for
giving a final shape to this book. The contribution of the Publication Department in bringing
out this book is also duly acknowledged.
The Council acknowledges the contributions of the review commitee members Kulprit
Singh, PGT Geography, Navyug School, Chanakyapuri, Delhi, Pushpendra Singh, PGT
Geography, Prudence School, Delhi; Aparna Pandey, Professor, DESS, NCERT; Tanu Malik,
Professor, DESS, NCERT, New Delhi for the rationalisation of the content of this textbook.
The following are applicable to all the maps of India used in this book
© Government of India, Copyright 2006
1.
The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher.
2.
The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured from
the appropriate base line.
3.
The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh.
4.
The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map are
as interpreted from the “North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act.1971,” but have yet to be verified.
5.
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by
Survey of India.
6.
The state boundaries between Uttaranchal & Uttar Pradesh, Bihar & Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh &
Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned.
7.
The spellings of names in this map, have been taken from various sources.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 9 ---
Foreword
iii
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks
v
1. The Earth in the Solar System.........................
1
2. Globe : Latitudes and Longitudes....................
10
3. Motions of the Earth........................................
18
4. Maps................................................................
23
5. Major Domains of the Earth.............................
30
6. Our Country – India.........................................
39
Appendix I............................................................
48
Appendix II...........................................................
49
CONTENTS
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 10 ---
Rationalised 2023-24
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 11 ---
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
How wonderful it is to watch the sky after sunset! One
would first notice one or two bright dots shining in
the sky. Soon you would see the number increasing.
You cannot count them any more. The whole sky is
filled with tiny shining objects – some are bright, others
dim. It seems as if the sky is studded with diamonds.
They all appear to be twinkling. But if you look at
them carefully you will notice that some of them do
not twinkle as others do. They simply glow without
any flicker just as the moon shines.
Along with these bright objects, you may also see
the moon on most of the days. It may, however, appear
at different times, in different shapes and at different
positions. You can see the full moon only once in about
a month’s time. It is Full moon night or Poornima. A
fortnight later, you cannot see it at all. It is a New
moon night or Amavasya. On this day, you can watch
the night sky best, provided it is a clear night.
Do you wonder why can’t we see the moon and all
those bright tiny objects during day time? It is because
the very bright light of the sun does not allow us to see
all these bright objects of the night sky.
The sun, the moon and all those objects shining in
the night sky are called celestial bodies.
Some celestial bodies  are very big and hot. They
are made up of gases. They have their own heat and
light, which they emit in large amounts. These celestial
bodies are called stars. The sun is a star.
Countless twinkling stars in the night sky are
similar to the sun. But we do not feel their heat or
light, and they look so tiny because they are very very far
from us.
1
Let’s Do
You’ll need : 1 torch,
1 sheet of plain
paper, pencil and a
needle.
Step :
1. Place the torch in the centre
of the paper with its glass
front touching the paper.
2. Now draw a circle around
the torch.
3. Perforate the paper with the
needle within the circled
area.
4. Now place the perforated
circle part of the paper on
the glass front and wrap the
paper around the torch
with a rubber band.
5. Take care that the switch
of the torch is not covered.
6. In a dark room, stand at
some distance facing a
plain wall. Switch off all
other lights. Now flash the
torch light on the wall. You
will see numerous dots of
light on the wall, like stars
shine in the night.
7. Switch on all the lights in
the room. All dots of light
will be almost invisible.
8. You may now compare the
situation with what happens
to the bright objects of the
night sky after the sun rises
in the morning.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 12 ---
2
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Figure 1.1 : Saptarishi and the
North Star
You must have noticed that all
objects look smaller when seen from a
distance. How small an aeroplane looks
when it is flying at a great height!
While watching the night sky, you
may notice various patterns formed by
different groups of stars. These are
called constellations. Ursa Major or
Big Bear is one such constellation. One
of the most easily recognisable
constellation is the Saptarishi (Sapta-
seven, rishi-sages). It is a group of seven
stars (Figure 1.1) that forms a part of
Ursa Major Constellation. Ask someone
elder in your family or neighbourhood
to show you more stars, planets and
constellations in the sky.
In ancient times, people used to
determine directions during the night
with the help of stars. The North star
indicates the north direction. It is also
called the Pole Star. It always remains
in the same position in the sky. We can
locate the position of the Pole Star with
the help of the Saptarishi. Look at
Figure 1.1. You will notice that, if an imaginary line is
drawn joining the pointer stars and extended further,
it will point to the Pole Star.
Some celestial bodies do not have their own heat
and light. They are lit by the light of the stars. Such
bodies are called planets. The word ‘planet’ comes from
the Greek word “Planetai” which means ‘wanderers’.
The earth on which we live is a planet. It gets all its
heat and light from the sun, which is our nearest star.
If we look at the earth from a great distance, say the
moon, it will appear to be shining just as the moon.
The moon that we see in the sky is a satellite. It is a
companion of our earth and moves round it. Like our
earth, there are seven other planets that get heat and
light from the sun. Some of them have their moons too.
THE SOLAR SYSTEM
The sun, eight planets, satellites and some other
celestial bodies known as asteroids and meteoroids
Interesting Fact
Jupiter, Saturn and
Uranus have rings
around them. These
are belts of small debris.
These 
rings 
may 
be
seen from the earth
with the help of powerful
telescopes.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 13 ---
3
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
1. MERCURY - One orbit around sun - 88 days,
One spin on axis - 59 days.
2. VENUS
- One orbit around sun - 255 days.
One spin on axis - 243 days
3. EARTH
- One orbit around sun - 365 days.
One spin on axis - 1 day
Number of moons - 1
4. MARS
- One orbit around sun - 687 days
One spin on axis - 1 day,
number of moons - 02
5. JUPITER
- One orbit around sun - 11 years, 11
months about 12 years. One spin on
axis - 9 hours, 56 minutes, number of
moons - about 53
6. SATURN
- One orbit around sun - 29 years, 5
months. One spin on axis - 10 hours 40
minutes, number of moons - about 53.
7. URANUS
- One orbit around sun - 84 years. One
spin around axis - 17 hours 14 minutes,
number of moons - about 27.
8. NEPTUNE - One orbit around sun - 164 years.
One spin on axis-16 hours 7
minutes, number of moons - 13.
Inner planets - very close to the sun. They are made up
of rocks.
Outer Planets - Very-very far from the sun and are huge planets made up of gases and liquids.
Figure 1.2 : The Solar System
Saurce: https://planetarynames.wr.usgs.gov/Page/Planets
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 14 ---
4
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
form the solar system. We often call it a solar family,
with the sun as its Head.
The Sun
The sun is in the centre of the solar system. It is huge
and made up of extremely hot gases. It provides the
pulling force that binds the solar system. The sun is
the ultimate source of heat and light for the solar
system. But that tremendous heat is not felt so much
by us because despite being our nearest star, it is far
away from us. The sun is about 150 million km away
from the earth.
Planets
There are eight planets in our solar system. In order of
their distance from the sun, they are: Mercury,
Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and
Neptune.
An easy way to memorise the name of the planets in
order of their distance from the sun is:
MY VERY EFFICIENT MOTHER JUST SERVED US NUTS.
All the eight planets of the solar system move
around the sun in fixed paths. These paths are
elongated. They are called orbits. Mercury is nearest
to the sun. It takes only about 88 days to complete
one round along its orbit. Venus is considered as
‘Earth’s-twin’ because its size and shape are very much
similar to that of the earth.
Till recently (August 2006), Pluto was also
considered a planet. However, in a meeting of the
International Astronomical Union, a decision was
taken that Pluto like other celestial objects (Ceres, 2003
UB313) discovered in recent past may be called
‘dwarf planets.”
The Earth
The earth is the third nearest planet to the sun. In
size, it is the fifth largest planet. It is slightly flattened
at the poles. That is why, its shape is  described as a
Geoid. Geoid means an earth-like shape.
Word Origin
Many words used
in a language may
have been taken
from some other language.
Geography, for example, is
an English word. It has its
origin in Greek, which
relates to the description
of the earth. It is made of
two Greek words, ‘ge’
meaning’ 
‘earth’ 
and
‘graphia’ meaning ‘writing’.
Find out more about the
earth.
Do you know?
‘Sol’ in Roman
mythology 
is
the ‘Sungod’.
‘Solar’ means
‘related to the sun’. The
family of the sun is,
therefore, called the solar
system. Write down as
many words using the word
solar on your own as you
can.
Do you know?
Humans 
have
always 
been
fascinated gazing at the night
sky. Those who study the
celestial bodies and their
movements are called
astronomers. Aryabhatta
was a famous astronomer of
ancient India. He said that
the moon and the planets
shine due to reflected
sunlight. Today, astronomers
all over the world are busy
exploring the universe.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 15 ---
5
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
Conditions favourable to support life are probably
found only on the earth. The earth is neither too hot
nor too cold. It has  water and air, which are very
essential for our survival. The air has life-supporting
gases like oxygen. Because of these reasons, the earth
is a unique planet in the solar system.
From the outer space, the earth appears blue
because its two-thirds surface is covered by water. It
is, therefore, called a blue planet.
The Moon
Our earth has only one
satellite, that is, the
moon. Its diametre is
only one-quarter that of
the earth. It appears so
big because it is nearer to
our planet than other
celestial bodies. It is
about 3,84,400 km away
from us. Now you can
compare the distance of
the earth from the sun
and that from the moon.
The moon moves around the earth in about 27 days.
It takes exactly the same time to complete one spin. As
a result, only one side of the moon is visible to us on
the earth.
The moon does not have conditions favourable for
life. It has mountains, plains and depressions on its
What do animals and
plants require in order
to grow and survive?
Figure 1.3 : The moon as seen from
the space
Do you know?
Light travels at
the speed of
about 300,000
km per second.
Yet, even with this speed,
the light of the sun takes
about eight minutes to
reach the earth.
Interesting Fact
Neil Armstrong was
the first man to
step on the surface
of the moon on 20 July
1969. Find out whether
any Indian has landed on
the moon?
A Satellite is a celestial
body that moves around
the planets in the same
way as the planets move
around the sun.
A Human-made Satellite
is an artificial body. It is
designed by scientists to
gather information about
the 
universe 
or 
for
communication. It is
carried by a rocket and
placed in the orbit around
the earth.
Some 
of 
the 
Indian
satellites in space are INSAT,
IRS, EDUSAT, etc.
Figure 1.4 : Human-made Satellite
Rocket launch
Rocket falls back to the Earth
Satellite enters orbit ?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 16 ---
6
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
surface. These cast shadows on the moon’s surface.
Look at the full moon and observe these shadows.
Asteroids
Apart from the stars, planets and satellites, there are
numerous tiny bodies which also move around the
sun. These bodies are called asteroids. They are found
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter (Figure 1.2).
Scientists are of the view that asteroids are parts of a
planet which exploded many years back.
Meteoroids
The small pieces of rocks which move around the sun
are called meteoroids. Sometimes these meteoroids
come near the earth and tend to drop upon it. During
this process due to friction with the air they get heated
up and burn. It causes a flash of light. Sometimes, a
meteor without being completely burnt, falls on the
earth and creates a hollow.
Do you see a whitish broad band, like a white
glowing path across the sky on a clear starry night? It
is a cluster of millions of stars. This band is the Milky
Way galaxy (Figure 1.6). Our solar system is a part of
this galaxy.  In ancient India, it was imagined to be a
river of light flowing in the sky. Thus, it was named
Akash Ganga. A galaxy is a huge system of billions of
stars, and clouds of dust
and gases. There are
millions of such galaxies
that make the Universe.
It is difficult to imagine
how big the universe is.
Scientists are still trying
to find out more and more
about it. We are not
certain about its size but
we know that all of us –
you and I belong to this
universe.
Figure 1.5 : Asteroid
Figure 1.6 : Milky Way
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 17 ---
7
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
1.
Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)
How does a planet differ from a star?
(b)
What is meant by the ‘Solar System’?
(c)
Name all the planets according to their distance from the sun.
(d)
Why is the Earth called a unique planet?
(e)
Why do we see only one side of the moon always?
(f)
What is the Universe ?
2.
Tick the correct answer.
(a)
The planet known as the “Earth’s Twin” is
(i) Jupiter
(ii) Saturn
(iii) Venus
(b)
Which is the third nearest planet to the sun ?
(i) Venus
(ii) Earth
(iii) Mercury
(c)
All the planets move around the sun in a
(i)  Circular path
(ii) Rectangular path
(iii) Elongated path
(d)
The Pole Star indicates the direction to the
(i)  South
(ii) North
(iii) East
Can you relate yourself with
the universe now? You are on
the earth and the earth is a
part of the solar system. Our
solar system is a part of the
Milky Way galaxy which is part
of the universe. Think about the
universe, and the fact that it
contains millions of such
galaxies. How do you fit in the
picture?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 18 ---
8
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
(e)
Asteroids are found between the orbits of
(i) Saturn and Jupiter
(ii) Mars and Jupiter
(iii) The Earth and Mars
3.
Fill in the blanks.
(a)
A group of ________ forming various patterns is called a ________.
(b)
A huge system of stars is called________.
(c)
________is the closest celestial body to our earth.
(d)
________is the third nearest planet to the sun.
(e)
Planets do not have their own________ and ___________________.
1.
Prepare a chart of the solar system.
2.
During a vacation visit a planetarium and describe your experience
in the class.
3.
Organise a quiz contest on the earth and the solar system.
1.
The sun is commonly known as Soorya or Sooraj in Hindi, Find out its
name in different languages of our country. Take help of your friends,
teachers and neighbours.
2.
You might have heard that people make human chains and run for world
peace etc. You can also make a human solar system and run for fun.
Step 1:
All children of your class can play this game. Assemble in a big
hall or on a playground.
Step 2:
Now draw 8 circles on the ground as shown in the figure drawn on
the opposite page.
Use a 5-metre long rope. Mark at every half a metre with a chalk or
ink. Place a small nail to mark the centre. Now hold one end of
the rope at the central position. Ask your friend to hold a chalk
at the ½ metre mark and move around the nail holding rope and
chalk together on the ground.
You have drawn one circle just as you do on paper using a compass
and a pencil. Draw other circles in the same manner.
Step 3:
Prepare 10 placards. Name them as Sun., Moon, Mercury, Venus,
Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 19 ---
9
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
Step 4:
Select 10 children in the following order and give each one of them
a placard.
Order of placard distribution
The Sun - tallest, The moon - smallest;  Mercury, Mars, Venus and Earth
(almost equal heights); Neptune, Uranus, Saturn and Jupiter taller than
the earlier four planets but smaller than the Sun.
Now ask the children holding placards to take their places with the Sun in
the centre in their orbits. Ask the child holding the moon placard to keep
the hand of the child holding the earth placard always.
Now your Solar System is almost ready to go into action.
Now make everybody move slowly in the anti-clockwise direction. Your class
has turned into a small human replica of the solar system.
While moving on your orbit you can also turn around. For everybody the
spin should be anti-clock wise except for Venus and Uranus who will make
the spin in the clock-wise direction.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 20 ---
Figure 2.1 : Globe
Let’s Do
Take a big round
potato or a ball.
Pierce a knitting
needle through it. The
needle resembles the axis
shown in a globe. You can
now move the potato or the
ball around this axis from
left to right.
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
2
In the previous chapter, you have read that our planet
earth is not a sphere. It is slightly flattened at the
North and the South Poles and bulge in the middle.
Can you imagine how it looks? You may look at a
globe carefully in your classroom to get an idea.
Globe is a true model (miniature form) of the earth
(Figure 2.1).
Globes may be of varying size and type – big ones,
which cannot be carried easily, small pocket globes,
and globe-like balloons, which can be inflated and are
handy and carried with ease. The globe is not fixed. It
can be rotated the same way as a top spin or a potter’s
wheel is rotated. On the globe, countries, continents
and oceans are shown in their correct size.
It is difficult to describe the location of a point on a
sphere like the earth. Now the question arises as to
how to locate a place on it? We need certain points of
reference and lines to find out the location of places.
You will notice that a needle is fixed through the
globe in a tilted manner, which is called its axis. Two
points on the globe through which the needle passes
are two poles – North Pole and South Pole. The globe
can be moved around this needle from west to east
just as the earth moves. But, remember there is a major
difference. The real earth has no such needle. It moves
around its axis, which is an imaginary line.
Another imaginary line running on the globe divides
it into two equal parts. This line is known as the
equator. The northern half of the earth is known as
the Northern Hemisphere and the southern half is
known as the Southern Hemisphere. They are both
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 21 ---
11
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
Figure 2.2 : Latitude
Figure 2.3 : Important Latitudes and Heat Zones
Do you know?
By measuring
the angle of the
Pole Star from
your place, you can know
the latitude of your place.
equal halves. Therefore, the equator is an
imaginary circular line and is a very
important reference point to locate places
on the earth. All parallel circles from the
equator up to the poles are called parallels
of latitudes. Latitudes are measured in
degrees.
The equator represents the zero degree
latitude. Since the distance from the
equator to either of the poles is one-fourth
of a circle round the earth, it will measure
¼th of 360 degrees, i.e. 90°. Thus, 90
degrees north latitude marks the North
Pole and 90 degrees south latitude marks
the South Pole.
As such, all parallels north of the
equator are called ‘north latitudes.’
Similarly all parallels south of the equator are called
‘south latitudes.’
The value of each latitude is, therefore, followed by
either the word north or south. Generally, this is
indicated by the letter ‘N’ or ‘S’. For example, both
Chandrapur in Maharashtra (India) and Belo
Horizonte in Brazil (South America) are located on
parallels of about 20° latitude. But the former is 20°
north of the equator and the latter is 20° south of it.
We, therefore, say that Chandrapur is
situated at 20° N latitude and Belo
Horizonte is situated at 20° S latitude.
We see in Figure 2.2 that as we move
away from the equator, the size of the
parallels of latitude decreases.
IMPORTANT PARALLELS OF LATITUDES
Besides the equator (0°), the North Pole
(90°N) and the South Pole (90° S), there
are four important parallels of latitudes–
(i) Tropic of Cancer (23½° N) in the
Northern Hemisphere. (ii) Tropic of
Capricorn (23½° S) in the Southern
Hemisphere. (iii) Arctic Circle at 66½°
north of the equator. (iv) Antarctic
Circle at 66½° south of the equator.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 22 ---
12
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Figure 2.4 : (b)
Torch-light falling on a slanted
surface is less bright but covers a
bigger area.
Figure 2.5 : Longitudes
Figure 2.4 : (a)
Torch-light falling on a straight
surface is bright and covers a
smaller area.
HEAT ZONES OF THE EARTH
The mid-day sun is exactly overhead at
least once a year on all latitudes in
between the Tropic of Cancer and the
Tropic of Capricorn. This area, therefore,
receives the maximum heat and is called
the Torrid Zone.
The mid-day sun never shines
overhead on any latitude beyond the
Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of
Capricorn. The angle of the sun’s rays
goes on decreasing towards the poles. As
such, the areas bounded by the Tropic
of Cancer and  the Arctic Circle in the
Northern Hemisphere, and the Tropic of
Capricorn and the Antarctic Circle in the
Southern Hemisphere, have moderate
temperatures. These are, therefore, called
Temperate Zones.
Areas lying between the Arctic Circle
and the North Pole in the Northern
Hemisphere and the Antarctic Circle and
the South Pole in the Southern
Hemisphere, are very cold. It is because
here the sun does not  rise  much above
  the horizon. Therefore, its rays are
always slanting and provide less heat.
These are, therefore, called Frigid
Zones (very cold).
WHAT ARE LONGITUDES?
To fix the position of a place, it is
necessary to know something more
than the latitude of that place. You
can see, for example, that Tonga
Islands (in the Pacific Ocean) and
Mauritius Islands (in the Indian
Ocean) are situated on the same
latitude (i.e., 20° S). Now, in order to
locate them precisely, we must find
out how far east or west these places
are from a given line of reference
running from the North Pole to the
South Pole. These lines of references
are called the meridians of longitude,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 23 ---
13
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
Figure 2.6 : Grid
Figure 2.7
Let’s Do
Draw a circle.
Let the Prime
meridian divide
it into two equal halves.
Colour and label the
eastern hemisphere and
the western hemisphere.
Similarly draw another
circle and let the equator
divide it into two halves.
Now colour the Northern
hemisphere and Southern
hemisphere.
and the distances between them are measured in
‘degrees of longitude.’ Each degree is further divided
into minutes, and minutes into seconds. They are semi-
circles and the distance between them decreases
steadily polewards until it becomes zero at the poles,
where all the meridians meet.
Unlike parallels of latitude, all meridians are of equal
length. Thus, it was difficult to number the meridians.
Hence, all countries decided that the count should
begin from the meridian which passed through
Greenwich, where the British Royal Observatory is
located. This meridian is called the Prime Meridian.
Its value is 0° longitude and from it we count 180°
eastward as well as 180° westward.  The Prime Meridian
and 180° meridian divide the earth into
two equal halves, the Eastern Hemisphere
and the Western Hemisphere. Therefore,
the longitude of a place is followed by the
letter E for the east and W for the west. It
is, however, interesting to note that 180°
East and 180° West meridians are on the
same line.
Now look at the grid of the parallels of
latitude and meridians of longitude on the
globe (Figure 2.6). You can locate any point
on the globe very easily if you know its
latitude and longitude. For example,
Dhubri in Assam is situated at 26° N
latitude and 90° E longitude. Find out the
point where these two lines cut each other.
That point will be the location of Dhubri.
To understand this clearly draw equidistant vertical
and horizontal lines on a paper (Figure 2.7). Label the
vertical rows with numbers and horizontal rows with
letters, draw some small circles randomly on points
where these horizontal and vertical lines intersect each
other. Name these small circles as a, b, c, d and e.
Let vertical lines represent East Longitudes and
horizontal lines as North Latitudes.
Now you will see that circle ‘a’ is located on B° N
latitude and 1° E longitude.
Find out the location of other circles.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 24 ---
14
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Figure 2.8 : Time zones of the World
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 25 ---
15
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
LONGITUDE AND TIME
The best means of measuring time is by the movement
of the earth, the moon and the planets. The sun
regularly rises and sets every day, and naturally, it is
the best time-keeper throughout the world. Local time
can be reckoned by the shadow cast by the sun, which
is the shortest at noon and longest at sunrise and
sunset.
When the Prime Meridian of Greenwich has the sun
at the highest point in the sky, all the places along
this meridian will have mid-day or noon.
As the earth rotates from west to east, those places
east of Greenwich will be ahead of Greenwich time and
those to the west will be behind it (Figure 2.8). The
rate of difference can be calculated as follows. The earth
rotates 360° in about 24 hours, which means 15° an
hour or 1° in four minutes. Thus, when it is 12 noon
at Greenwich, the time at 15° east of Greenwich will be
15 × 4 = 60 minutes, i.e., 1 hour ahead of Greenwich
time, which means 1 p.m. But at 15° west of Greenwich,
the time will be behind Greenwich time by one hour,
i.e., it will be 11.00 a.m. Similarly, at 180°, it will be
midnight when it is 12 noon at Greenwich.
At any place a watch can be adjusted to read 12
o’clock when the sun is at the highest point in the
sky, i.e., when it is mid-day. The time shown by such
a watch will give the local time for that place. You can
see that all the places on a given meridian of longitude
have the same local time.
WHY DO WE HAVE STANDARD TIME?
The local time of places which are on different
meridians are bound to differ. For example, it will be
difficult to prepare a time-table for trains which cross
several longitudes. In India, for instance, there will be
a difference of about 1 hour and 45 minutes in the
local times of Dwarka in Gujarat and Dibrugarh in
Assam. It is, therefore, necessary to adopt the local
time of some central meridian of a country as the
standard time for the country. In India, the longitude
of 82½° E (82° 30'E) is treated as the standard
meridian. The local time at this meridian is taken as
the standard time for the whole country. It is known
as the Indian Standard Time (IST).
Figure 2.9 : Indian Standard Meridian
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 26 ---
16
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
1.
Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)
What is the true shape of the earth?
(b)
What is a globe?
(c)
What is the latitudinal value of the Tropic of Cancer?
(d)
What are the three heat zones of the Earth?
(e)
What are parallels of latitude and meridians of longitude?
(f)
Why does the torrid zone receive maximum amount of heat?
(g)
Why is it 5.30 p.m. in India and 12.00 noon in London?
2.   Tick the correct answers.
(a)
The value of the prime meridian is
(i) 90°
(ii) 0°
(iii) 60°
(b)
The frigid zone lies near
(i) the Poles
(ii) the Equator
(iii) the Tropic of Cancer
(c)
The total number of longitudes are
(i) 360
(ii) 180
(iii) 90
(d)
The Antarctic circle is located in
(i)
the Northern hemisphere
(ii)
the Southern hemisphere
(iii)
the Eastern hemisphere
(e)
Grid is a network of
(i)
parallels of latitudes and merdians of longitudes
(ii)
the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn
(iii)
the North Pole and the South Pole
Kabeer lives in a small town near Bhopal. He tells his friend Alok that they will
not be able to sleep tonight. A day and night cricket match between India and
England had started at 2 p.m. in London. This means that the match would begin
at 7.30 p.m. in India and finish well into the night. Do you know what is the time
difference between India and England?
India located east of Greenwich at 82°30'E is 5 hours and 30 minutes ahead of
GMT. So it will be 7:30 p.m. in India when it is 2:00 p.m. noon in London.
Some countries have a great longitudinal extent and so they have adopted
more than one standard time. For example, in Russia, there are as many as eleven
standard times. The earth has been divided into twenty-four time zones of one
hour each. Each zone thus covers 15° of longitude.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 27 ---
17
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
3.
Fill in the blanks.
(a)
The Tropic of Capricorn is located at _________________.
(b)
The Standard Meridian of India is ____________________.
(c)
The 0° Meridian is also known as ____________________.
(d)
The distance between the longitudes decreases towards___________.
(e)
The Arctic Circle is located in the ____________ hemisphere.
1.
Draw a diagram of the globe showing the earth’s axis, the Equator, Tropics
of Cancer and Capricorn, Arctic Circle and Antarctic Circle.
1.
Draw and cut out six circles of the same size (approx. 3 cm. radius) from
cardboard. Mark diametres (NS, EW) and 23½o angles on each face of the
circles as shown on the figure. Place the circle one on top of the other and
stitch along the line NS. Now there are twelve semi-circles. Let one semi-circle
represent 0o or Greenwich Meridian (Prime Meridian). The 6th semi-circle from
it will be the 180o Meridian. Between the 0o and 180o there are 5 semi-circles
on both sides which are West and East longitudes 30o apart. On two ends of
the stapled line stick pins to represent the North and South Poles.
A rubber band around the model touching the EW points will represent the
Equator. Two rubber bands touching the 23½o points, South and North of
the EW points will represent the tropics.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 28 ---
MOTIONS OF THE EARTH
3
Let’s Do
Take a ball to
represent 
the
earth 
and 
a
lighted candle to represent
the sun. Mark a point on
the ball to represent a
town X. Place the ball in
such a way that the town
X is in darkness. Now
rotate the ball from left to
right. As you move the ball
slightly, the town will
have its sunrise. As the
ball continues to move,
the point X gradually gets
away from the sun. This
is sunset.
Figure 3.2 : Day and Night on the Earth due to rotation
Figure 3.1 : Inclination of the Earth’s
axis and the orbital plane
As you know that the earth has two types of motions,
namely rotation and revolution. Rotation is the
movement of the earth on its axis. The movement of
the earth around the sun in a fixed path or orbit is
called Revolution.
The axis of the earth which is an imaginary line,
makes an angle of 66½° with its orbital plane. The
plane formed by the orbit is known as the orbital plane.
The earth receives light from the sun. Due to the
spherical shape of the earth, only half of it gets light
from the sun at a time (Figure 3.2). The portion facing
the sun experiences day while the other half away from
the sun experiences night. The circle that divides the
day from night on the globe is called the circle of
illumination. This circle does not coincide with the
axis as you see in the Figure 3.2. The earth takes about
24 hours to complete one rotation around its axis.
The period of rotation is known as the earthday. This is
the daily motion of the earth.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 29 ---
19
MOTIONS OF THE EARTH
Figure 3.3 : Revolution of the Earth and Seasons
What would happen if the earth did not rotate?  The
portion of the earth facing the sun would always
experience day,  thus bringing continuous warmth to
the region. The other half would remain in darkness
and be freezing cold all the time. Life would not have
been possible in such extreme conditions.
The second motion of the earth around the sun in
its orbit is called revolution. It takes 365¼ days (one
year) to revolve around the sun. We consider a year as
consisting of 365 days only and ignore six hours for
the sake of convenience. 
Six hours saved every year are added to make one
day (24 hours) over a span of four years. This surplus
day is added to the month of February. Thus every
fourth year, February is of 29 days instead of 28 days.
Such a year with 366 days is called a leap year. Find
out when will the next leap year be?
From the Figure 3.3, it is clear that the earth is
going around the sun in an elliptical orbit.
Notice that throughout its orbit, the earth is inclined
in the same direction.
A year is usually divided into  summer, winter, spring
and autumn seasons. Seasons change due to the change
in the position of the earth around the sun.
Do you know?
The ancient Indian
astronomer Aryabhata
had stated that ‘the
earth is round and
rotates on its own axis’
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 30 ---
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
20
Let’s Do
Do you know how to draw an ellipse? Take a pencil, two pins and a loop of
thread. Now fix these pins on a paper as shown in the figure. Put the loop
on the paper enclosing these two pins inside the loop. Now hold the pencil
and draw the line keeping the thread tight and moving the pencil along it. The
figure represents an ellipse.
Look at the Figure 3.3. You will see that on 21st
June, the Northern Hemisphere is tilted towards the
sun. The rays of the sun fall directly on the Tropic of
Cancer. As a result, these areas receive more heat. The
areas near the poles receive less heat as the rays of the
sun are slanting. The North Pole is inclined towards
the sun and the places beyond the Arctic Circle
experience continuous daylight for about six months.
Since a large portion of the Northern Hemisphere is
getting light from the sun, it is summer in the regions
north of the equator. The longest day and the shortest
night at these places occur on 21st June. At this time
in the Southern Hemisphere all these conditions are
reversed. It is winter season there. The nights are longer
than the days. This position of the earth is called the
Summer Solstice.
On 22nd December, the Tropic of Capricorn receives
direct rays of the sun as the South Pole tilts towards
it. As the sun’s rays fall vertically at the Tropic of
Capricorn (23½° S), a larger portion of the Southern
Hemisphere gets light. Therefore, it is summer in the
Southern Hemisphere with longer days and shorter
nights. The reverse happens in the Northern
Hemisphere. This position of the earth is called the
Winter Solstice. Do you know that Christmas is
celebrated in Australia in the summer season?
On 21st March and September 23rd, direct rays of
the sun fall on the equator. At this position, neither of
the poles is tilted towards the sun; so, the whole earth
experiences equal days and equal nights. This is called
an equinox.
On 23rd September, it is autumn season in the
Northern Hemisphere and spring season in the Southern
Hemisphere. The opposite is the case on 21st March,
Let’s Do
To understand
the 
earth’s
inclination 
in
the same direction, draw
a big ellipse on the ground
and take a flag with a
stick. Stand anywhere on
the line of the ellipse.
Point your flag to a fixed
point far away like on a
tree-top. Now move along
the ellipse keeping your
flag 
always 
pointing
towards that fixed point.
In this way, the axis of the
earth remains inclined
permanently in the same
position. The revolution of
the 
earth 
and 
the
inclination of the earth’s
axis in a fixed direction
cause seasons.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 31 ---
21
MOTIONS OF THE EARTH
1.
Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)
What is the angle of inclination of the earth’s axis with its orbital plane?
(b)
Define rotation and revolution.
(c)
What is a leap year?
(d)
Differentiate between the Summer and Winter Solstice.
(e)
What is an equinox?
(f)
Why does the Southern Hemisphere experience Winter and Summer Solstice
in different times than that of the Northern Hemisphere?
(g)
Why do the poles experience about six months day and six months night?
2.
Tick the correct answers.
(a)
The movement of the earth around the sun is known as
(i)  Rotation
(ii) Revolution
(iii) Inclination
(b)
Direct rays of the sun fall on the equator on
(i) 21 March
(ii) 21 June
(iii) 22 December
(c)
Christmas is celebrated in summer in
(i) Japan
(ii) India
(iii) Australia
(d)
Cycle of the seasons is caused due to
(i) Rotation
(ii) Revolution
(iii) Gravitation
3.
Fill in the blanks.
(a)
A leap year has _______________ number of days.
(b)
The daily motion of the earth is _______________.
(c)
The earth travels around the sun in ______________ orbit.
(d)
The sun’s rays fall vertically on the Tropic of ___________ on 21st June.
(e)
Days are shorter during ___________ season.
when it is spring in the Northern Hemisphere and
autumn in the Southern Hemisphere.
Thus, you find that there are days and nights and
changes in the seasons because of the rotation and
revolution of the earth respectively.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 32 ---
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
22
1.
Make a drawing to show the inclination of the earth.
2.
Record the timings of sunrise and sunset at your place taking help from
your local newspaper on the 21st of each month and answer the following :
(a) In which month are the days the shortest?
(b) In which months are the days and nights nearly equal?
1.
Draw different shapes of ellipses by placing two pins nearer and farther
using the same loop of thread. Notice when the ellipse becomes circular.
2.
On any sunny day, take a straight stick that is one metre long. Find out a
clean and level place on the ground. Place this stick into the ground where
it casts a distinctive (sharp) shadow.
Step (1):
Mark the tip of the shadow with a stone or a twig or by any other
means. The first shadow mark is always towards the west. See
after 15 minutes and mark the tip of the shadow again. By then
it would have moved a few centimetres away. Now join the two
points and you have an approximate east-west line.
Step (2) :
Stand with the first mark to your left and the second mark to
your right you are now facing north. This fact is true everywhere
on the earth because the earth rotates in west to east direction.
An alternative method is more accurate but requires more time. Set up your
shadow stick and mark the first shadow in the morning. Use a piece of
string to draw a clean arc through this mark around the stick. At mid-day,
the shadow will shrink or disappear. In the afternoon, it will lengthen again
and at the point where it touches the arc, make a second mark. Draw a line
through the two marks to get an accurate east-west line.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 33 ---
MAPS
4
Let’s Do
Take an old
rubber ball and
draw whatever
you like all over it. You
may also mark north
pole and south pole on
it. Now cut this ball
with a knife and try to
flatten it. Notice how the
drawings are distorted.
You have learnt in the previous chapter about the
advantages of a globe. However, globe has limitations
as well. A globe can be useful when we want to study
the earth as a whole. But, when we want to study only
a part of the earth, as about our country, states,
districts, towns and villages, it is of little help. In such
a situation we use maps. A map is a representation or
a drawing of the earth’s surface or a part of it drawn
on a flat surface according to a scale. But it is
impossible to flatten a round shape completely.
We find that maps are useful to us for various
purposes. One map shows a small area and a few facts.
Another map may contain as many facts as a big book.
When many maps are put together we get an Atlas.
Atlases are of various sizes, measurements drawn on
different scales. Maps provide more information than
a globe. They are of different types. Some of them are
described below.
PHYSICAL MAPS
Maps showing natural features of the earth such as
mountains, plateaus, plains, rivers, oceans etc. are
called physical or relief maps.
POLITICAL MAPS
Maps showing cities, towns and villages, and different
countries and states of the world with their boundaries
are called political maps.
THEMATIC MAPS
Some maps focus on specific information; such as road
N
S
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 34 ---
24
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Let’s Do
Look 
at 
the
Figure 
4.1.
There is a scale.
It may be used for
measuring 
distance
between 
places. 
For
example the distance
between the well and the
tree is 5 cm. It means
that the actual distance
is 50 metres. Now the
distance between the PO
(A) to Karim’s house (E)
is 12 cm. It means 120
metres on the ground but
you can not fly like a bird
directly from E to A. You
will have to walk on the
road. Let us measure the
total walking distance
from E to C, then C to M,
M to B and B to A. Add
all these distances. This
will be the total walking
distance from Karim’s
house to the post office.
maps, rainfall maps, maps showing distribution of
forests, industries etc. are known as thematic maps.
Suitable titles are given on the basis of information
provided in these maps.
There are three Components of Maps – distance,
direction and symbol.
DISTANCE
Maps are drawings, which reduce the entire world or a
part of it to fit on a sheet of paper. Or we can say maps
are drawn to reduced scales. But this reduction is done
very carefully so that the distance between the places
is real. It can only be possible when a small distance
on paper represents a large distance on the ground.
Therefore, a scale is chosen for this purpose. Scale is
the ratio between the actual distance on the ground
and the distance shown on the map. For example, the
distance between your school and your home is 10
km. If you show this 10 km. distance by 2 cm on a
map, it means, 1 cm on the map will show 5 km. on
the ground. The scale of your drawing will be 1cm = 5
km. Thus, scale is very important in any map. If you
know the scale, you will be able to calculate the
distance between any two places on a map.
When large areas like continents or countries are
to be shown on a paper, then we use a small scale. For
example 5 cm. on the map shows 500  km. of the
ground. It is called a small scale map.
When a small area like your village or town is to be
shown on paper, then we use a large scale that is 5
cm. on the map shows 500 metres only on the ground.
It is called a large scale map.
Large scale maps give more information than small
scale maps.
DIRECTION
Most maps contain an arrow marked with the letter
‘N’ at the upper right hand corner. This arrow shows
the north direction. It is called the north line. When
you know the north, you can find out other directions,
for example east, west and south. There are four major
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 35 ---
25
MAPS
Figure 4.1 : Map of a village
directions, North, South, East and West {Figure 4.2
(a)}. They are called cardinal points. Other four
intermediate directions are north-east (NE), south-
east(SE), south-west (SW) and north-west (NW). We
can locate any place more accurately with the help of
these intermediate directions.
Find out the following directions from the
Figure 4.1: (a) The direction of the Community Centre,
the playground from Vikas’s house (b) the direction
of school from shops.
We can find out the direction of a place with the
help of a compass. It is an instrument used to find
out main directions. Its magnetic needle always points
towards north-south direction {Figure 4.2 (b)}.
Figure 4.2 (a) : Cardinal Directions
Figure 4.2 (b) : A compass
N
S
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 36 ---
26
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Various colours are used for the same purpose. For
example, generally blue is used for showing water
bodies, brown for mountain, yellow for plateau and
green is used for plains.
SYMBOLS
It is the third important component of a map. It is not
possible to draw on a map the actual shape and size of
different features such as buildings, roads, bridges,
trees, railway lines or a well. So, they are shown by
using certain letters, shades, colours, pictures and lines
These symbols give a lot of  information in a limited
space. With the use of these symbols, maps can be
drawn easily and are simple to read. Even if you don’t
know the language of an area and therefore cannot
ask someone for directions, you can collect information
from maps with the help of these symbols. Maps have
a universal language that can be understood by all.
There is an international agreement regarding the use
of these symbols. These are called conventional
symbols. Some of the conventional symbols are shown
in the Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3 : Conventional Symbols
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 37 ---
27
MAPS
Figure 4.4 : Sunderpur village and its surrounding areas
Look at the Figure 4.4 and
find out :
(i) In which direction is
the river flowing?
(ii) What kind of road
passes by the side of
village Dumri?
(iii) On what type of
railway 
line 
is
Sunderpur situated ?
(iv) On which side of the
railway bridge is the
police 
station
situated?
(v) On which side of the
railway line do the
following lie :
(a) Chhatri
(b) Church  (c) Pond
(d) Mosque  (e) River
(f) Post and
Telegraph Office
(g) Graveyard
SKETCH
A sketch is a drawing mainly based on memory and
spot observation and not to scale. Sometimes a rough
drawing is required of an area to tell where a
particular place is located with respect to other
places. Suppose, you want to go to your friend’s
house, but you don’t know the way. Your friend may
make a rough drawing to show the way to his house.
Such a rough drawing is drawn without scale, and
is called a sketch map.
PLAN
A plan is a drawing of a small area on a large scale. A
large-scale map gives lot of  information, but there are
certain things which we may sometimes want to know
for example the length and breadth of a room, which
can’t be shown in a map. At that time, we can refer
drawings drawn to scale called a plan.
Let’s Do Visit web portal School Bhuvan-NCERT and
draw online neighbourhood map on satellite imageries.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 38 ---
28
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
1.
Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)
What are the three components of a map?
(b)
What are the four cardinal directions?
(c)
What do you mean by the term ‘the scale of the map’?
(d)
How are maps more helpful than a globe?
(e)
Distinguish between a map and a plan.
(f)
Which map provides detailed information?
(g)
How do symbols help in reading maps?
2.
Tick the correct answers.
(a)
Maps showing distribution of forests are
(i) Physical map
(ii) Thematic Map
(iii) Political map
(b)
The blue colour is used for showing
(i) Water bodies
(ii) Mountains
(iii) Plains
(c)
A compass is used –
(i) To show symbols
(ii) To find the main direction
(iii) To measure distance
(d)
A scale is necessary
(i) For a map
(ii) For a sketch
(iii) For symbols
1.
Draw a plan of your classroom and show the teacher’s table, blackboard,
desks, door and windows.
2.
Draw a sketch of your school and locate the following :
(a) the principal’s room
(b) your classroom
(c) the playground
(d) the library
(e) some big trees
(f) drinking water
Rationalised 2023-24