--- PAGE 30 ---
18
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
1. Multiple choice questions
(i) Which of the following conservation strategies do not directly involve
community participation?
(a) Joint forest management
(c) Chipko Movement
(b) Beej Bachao Andolan
(d) Demarcation of Wildlife sanctuaries
2.
Match the following.
Reserved forests
other forests and wastelands belonging to both
government and private individuals and
communities
Protected forests
forests are regarded as most valuable as far as the
conservation of forest and wildlife resources
Unclassed forests
forest lands are protected from any further
depletion
3.
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What is biodiversity? Why is biodiversity important for human lives?
(ii) How have human activities affected the depletion of flora and fauna? Explain.
4.
Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe how communities have conserved and protected forests and wildlife
in India?
(ii) Write a note on good practices towards conserving forest and wildlife.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 31 ---
You already know that three-fourth of the
earth’s surface is covered with water, but only
a small proportion of it accounts for
freshwater that can be put to use. This
freshwater is mainly obtained from surface
run off and ground water that is continually
being renewed and recharged through the
hydrological cycle. All water moves within the
hydrological cycle ensuring that water is a
renewable resource.
You might wonder that if three-fourth of
the world is covered with water and water is
a renewable resource, then how is it that
countries and regions around the globe suffer
from water scarcity? Why is it predicted that
by 2025, nearly two billion people will live in
absolute water scarcity?
WATER SCARCITY AND THE NEED FOR WATER
CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT
Given the abundance and renewability of
water, it is difficult to imagine that we may
suffer from water scarcity. The moment we
speak of water shortages, we immediately
associate it with regions having low rainfall
or those that are drought prone. We
instantaneously visualise the deserts of
Rajasthan and women balancing many
‘matkas’ (earthen pots) used for collecting
and storing water and travelling long
distances to get water. True, the availability
of water resources varies over space and time,
mainly due to the variations in seasonal and
annual precipitation, but water scarcity in
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 32 ---
20
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
consequent greater demands for water, and
unequal access to it. A large population
requires more water not only for domestic
use but also to produce more food. Hence, to
facilitate higher food-grain production, water
resources are being over-exploited to expand
irrigated areas for dry-season agriculture.
Irrigated agriculture is the largest consumer
of water. Now it is needed to revolutionise the
agriculture through developing drought
resistant crops and dry farming techniques.
You may have seen in many television
advertisements that most farmers have their
Fig. 3.1:  Water Scarcity
most cases is caused by over-exploitation,
excessive use and unequal access to water
among different social groups.
Where is then water scarcity likely to
occur? As you have read in the hydrological
cycle, freshwater can be obtained directly
from precipitation, surface run off and
groundwater.
Is it possible that an area or region may
have ample water resources but is still facing
water scarcity? Many of our cities are such
examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an
outcome of large and growing population and
Water, Water Everywhere, Not a Drop to Drink:
After a heavy downpour, a boy collects drinking
water in Kolkata. Life in the city and its adjacent
districts was paralysed as incessant overnight rain,
meaning a record 180 mm, flooded vast area and
disruted traffic.
A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in
the snow in a devastated village.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 33 ---
21
WATER RESOURCES
You may have already realised that the need
of the hour is to conserve and manage our
water resources, to safeguard ourselves from
health hazards, to ensure food security,
continuation of our livelihoods and productive
activities and also to prevent degradation of our
natural ecosystems. Over exploitation and
mismanagement of water resources will
impoverish this resource and cause ecological
crisis that may have profound impact on
our lives.
own wells and tube-wells in their farms for
irrigation to increase their produce. But have
you ever wondered what this could result in?
That it may lead to falling groundwater levels,
adversely affecting water availability and food
security of the people.
Post-independent India witnessed
intensive industrialisation and urbanisation,
creating vast opportunities for us. Today, large
industrial houses are as commonplace as the
industrial units of many MNCs (Multinational
Corporations). The ever-increasing number of
industries has made matters worse by exerting
pressure on existing freshwater resources.
Industries, apart from being heavy users of
water, also require power to run them. Much
of this energy comes from hydroelectric power.
Today, in India hydroeclectric power
contributes approximately 22 per cent of the
total electricity produced. Moreover,
multiplying urban centres with large and
dense populations and urban lifestyles have
not only added to water and energy
requirements but have further aggravated the
problem. If you look into the housing societies
or colonies in the cities, you would find that
most of these have their own groundwater
pumping devices to meet their water needs.
Not surprisingly, we find that fragile water
resources are being over-exploited and have
caused their depletion in several of these cities.
So far we have focused on the quantitative
aspects of water scarcity. Now, let us consider
another situation where water is sufficiently
available to meet the needs of the people, but,
the area still suffers from water scarcity. This
scarcity may be due to bad quality of water.
Lately, there has been a growing concern that
even if there is ample water to meet the needs
of the people, much of it may be polluted by
domestic and industrial wastes, chemicals,
pesticides and fertilisers used in agriculture,
thus, making it hazardous for human use.
Government of India has accorded highest
priority to improve the quality of life and
enhance ease of living of people especially those
living in rual areas by announcing the Jal
Jeevan Mission (JJM). The Goal of JJM is to
enable every rural household get assured
supply of potable piped water at a service level
of 55 litres per capita per day regularly on
MULTI-PURPOSE RIVER PROJECTS AND
INTEGRATED WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT
But, how do we conserve and manage water?
Archaeological and historical records show
that from ancient times we have been
constructing sophisticated hydraulic
structures like dams built of stone rubble,
reservoirs or lakes, embankments and canals
for irrigation. Not surprisingly, we have
continued this tradition in modern India by
building dams in most of our river basins.
Hydraulic Structures in Ancient India
• In the first century B.C., Sringaverapura
near Allahabad had sophisticated water
harvesting system channelling the flood
water of the river Ganga.
• During the time of Chandragupta Maurya,
dams, lakes and irrigation systems were
extensively built.
India’s rivers, especially the smaller ones,
have all turned into toxic streams. And even
the big ones like the Ganga and Yamuna
are far from being pure. The assault on
India’s rivers – from population growth,
agricultural modernisation, urbanisation and
industrialisation – is enormous and growing
by the day….. This entire life stands
threatened.
Source: The Citizens’ Fifth Report, CSE, 1999.
long-term basis by ensuring functionality of
the tap water connections. (Source: Economic
Survey 2020–21, p.357)
From your everyday experiences, write a short
proposal on how you can conserve water.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 34 ---
22
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
What are dams and how do they help us
in conserving and managing water? Dams
were traditionally built to impound rivers and
rainwater that could be used later to irrigate
agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not
just for irrigation but for electricity generation,
water supply for domestic and industrial
uses, flood control, recreation, inland
navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are
now referred to as multi-purpose projects
where the many uses of the impounded water
are integrated with one another. For example,
in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra –
Nangal project water is being used both for
hydel power production and irrigation.
Similarly, the Hirakud project in the
Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of
water with flood control.
Multi-purpose projects, launched after
Independence with their integrated water
resources management approach, were thought
of as the vehicle that would lead the nation to
development and progress, overcoming the
handicap of its colonial past. Jawaharlal Nehru
proudly proclaimed the dams as the ‘temples of
modern India’; the reason being that it would
integrate development of agriculture and the
village economy with rapid industrialisation and
growth of the urban economy.
Fig. 3.2: Hirakud Dam
We have sown the crops in Asar
We will bring Bhadu in Bhadra
Floods have swollen the Damodar
The sailing boats cannot sail
Oh! Damodar, we fall at your feet
Reduce the floods a little
Bhadu will come a year later
Let the boats sail on your surface
(This popular Bhadu song in the Damodar
valley region narrates the troubles faced by
people owing to the flooding of Damodar river
known as the river of sorrow.)
• Evidences of sophisticated irrigation works
have also been found in Kalinga,
(Odisha), Nagarjunakonda (Andhra
Pradesh), Bennur (Karnataka), Kolhapur
(Maharashtra), etc.
• In the 11th Century, Bhopal Lake, one of the
largest artificial lakes of its time was built.
• In the 14th Century, the tank in Hauz Khas,
Delhi was constructed by Iltutmish for
supplying water to Siri Fort area.
Source: Dying Wisdom, CSE, 1997.
A dam is a barrier across flowing water that
obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often
creating a reservoir, lake or impoundment.
“Dam” refers to the reservoir rather than the
structure. Most dams have a section called a
spillway or weir over which or through which
it is intended that water will flow either
intermittently or continuously. Dams are
classified according to structure, intended
purpose or height. Based on structure and
the materials used, dams are classified as
timber dams, embankment dams or masonry
dams, with several subtypes. According to
the height, dams can be categorised as large
dams and major dams or alternatively as low
dams, medium height dams and high dams.
Find out more about any one traditional
method of building dams and irrigation works.
In recent years, multi-purpose projects
and large dams have come under great
scrutiny and opposition for a variety of
reasons. Regulating and damming of rivers
affect their natural flow causing poor sediment
flow and excessive sedimentation at the bottom
of the reservoir, resulting in rockier stream
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 35 ---
23
WATER RESOURCES
beds and poorer habitats for the rivers’ aquatic
life. Dams also fragment rivers making it
difficult for aquatic fauna to migrate, especially
for spawning. The reservoirs that are created
on the floodplains also submerge the existing
vegetation and soil leading to its
decomposition over a period of time.
Multi-purpose projects and large dams
have also been the cause of many new
environmental movements like the ‘Narmada
Bachao Andolan’ and the ‘Tehri Dam Andolan’
etc. Resistance to these projects has primarily
been due to the large-scale displacement of
local communities. Local people often had to
give up their land, livelihood and their meagre
access and control over resources for the
greater good of the nation. So, if the local
people are not benefiting from such projects
then who is benefited? Perhaps, the
landowners and large farmers, industrialists
and few urban centres. Take the case of the
landless in a village – does he really gain from
such a project?
Irrigation has also changed the cropping
pattern of many regions with farmers shifting
to water intensive and commercial crops. This
has great ecological consequences like
salinisation of the soil. At the same time, it
has transformed the social landscape i.e.
increasing the social gap between the richer
landowners and the landless poor. As we can
see, the dams did create conflicts between
people wanting different uses and benefits
from the same water resources. In Gujarat,
the Sabarmati-basin farmers were agitated
and almost caused a riot over the higher
priority given to water supply in urban areas,
particularly during droughts. Inter-state water
disputes are also becoming common with
regard to sharing the costs and benefits of the
multi-purpose project.
Narmada Bachao Andolan or Save
Narmada Movement is a Non Governmental
Organisation (NGO) that mobilised tribal
people, farmers, environmentalists and
human rights activists against the Sardar
Sarovar Dam being built across the
Narmada river in Gujarat. It originally
focused on the environmental issues related
to trees that would be submerged under the
dam water. Recently it has re-focused the
aim to enable poor citizens, especially
the oustees (displaced people) to get
full 
rehabilitation 
facilities 
from
the government.
People felt that their suffering would not
be in vain… accepted the trauma of
displacement believing in the promise of
irrigated fields and plentiful harvests. So,
often the survivors of Rihand told us that they
accepted their sufferings as sacrifice for the
sake of their nation. But now, after thirty bitter
years of being adrift, their livelihood having
even being more precarious, they keep
asking: “Are we the only ones chosen to
make sacrifices for the nation?”
Source: S. Sharma, quoted in In the Belly of
the River. Tribal conflicts over development in
Narmada valley, A. Baviskar, 1995.
Make a list of inter-state water disputes.
Do you know that the Krishna-Godavari
dispute is due to the objections raised by
Karnataka 
and 
Andhra 
Pradesh
governments? It is regarding the diversion
of more water at Koyna by the Maharashtra
government for a multipurpose project. This
would reduce downstream flow in their
states with adverse consequences for
agriculture and industry.
Sardar Sarovar Dam has been built over
the Narmada River in Gujarat. This is one
of the largest water resource projects of
India covering four states—Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan.
The Sardar Sarovar project would meet the
requirement of water in drought-prone and
desert areas of Gujarat (9,490 villages and
173 towns) and Rajasthan (124 villages).
Source: http://www.sardarsarovardam.org/
project.aspx
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 36 ---
24
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India:  Major Rivers and Dams
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 37 ---
25
WATER RESOURCES
Most of the objections to the projects arose
due to their failure to achieve the purposes
for which they were built. Ironically, the dams
that were constructed to control floods have
triggered floods due to sedimentation in the
reservoir. Moreover, the big dams have mostly
been unsuccessful in controlling floods at the
time of excessive rainfall. You may have seen
or read how the release of water from dams
during heavy rains aggravated the flood
situation in Maharashtra and Gujarat in 2006.
The floods have not only devastated life and
property but also caused extensive soil
erosion. Sedimentation also meant that the
flood plains were deprived of silt, a natural
fertiliser, further adding on to the problem of
land degradation. It was also observed that
the multi-purpose projects induced
earthquakes, caused water-borne diseases and
pests and pollution resulting from excessive
use of water.
RAINWATER HARVESTING
Many thought that given the disadvantages
and rising resistance against the multi-
purpose projects, water harvesting system was
a viable alternative, both socio-economically
and environmentally. In ancient India, along
with the sophisticated hydraulic structures,
there existed an extraordinary tradition of
water-harvesting system. People had in-depth
knowledge of rainfall regimes and soil types
and developed wide ranging techniques to
harvest rainwater, groundwater, river water
and flood water in keeping with the local
ecological conditions and their water needs.
In hill and mountainous regions, people built
diversion channels like the ‘guls’ or ‘kuls’ of
the Western Himalayas for agriculture.
‘Rooftop rainwater harvesting’ was commonly
practised to store drinking water, particularly
in Rajasthan. In the flood plains of Bengal,
people developed inundation channels to
Collect information about flood prone areas of the country
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 38 ---
26
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
•
Rooftop rainwater is collected using a PVC pipe
•
Filtered using sand and bricks
•
Underground pipe takes water to sump for
immediate usage
•
Excess water from the sump is taken to the well
•
Water from the well recharges the underground
•
Take water from the well (later)
(b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell
Fig 3.3:  Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting
In the semi-arid and arid regions of
Rajasthan, particularly in Bikaner, Phalodi
and Barmer, almost all the houses
traditionally had underground tanks or
tankas for storing drinking water. The tanks
could be as large as a big room; one
household in Phalodi had a tank that was
6.1 metres deep, 4.27 metres long and 2.44
metres wide. The tankas were part of the
well-developed rooftop rainwater harvesting
system and were built inside the main house
or the courtyard. They were connected to
the sloping roofs of the houses through a
pipe. Rain falling on the rooftops would
travel down the pipe and was stored in these
underground ‘tankas’. The first spell of rain
was usually not collected as this would
clean the roofs and the pipes. The rainwater
from the subsequent showers was then
collected.
The rainwater can be stored in the
tankas till the next rainfall making it an
extremely reliable source of drinking water
when all other sources are dried up,
(a) Recharge through Hand Pump
irrigate their fields. In arid and semi-arid
regions, agricultural fields were converted into
rain fed storage structures that allowed the
water to stand and moisten the soil like the
‘khadins’ in Jaisalmer and ‘Johads’ in other
parts of Rajasthan.
Fig. 3.4
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 39 ---
27
WATER RESOURCES
Fig 3.5:  Traditional method of rainwater
harvesting
A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above
in the Kaza village, from which water is released
as and when required.
Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the
practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on
the decline as plenty of water is available due
to the perennial Indira Gandhi Canal, though
some houses still maintain the tankas since
they do not like the taste of tap water.
Fortunately, in many parts of rural and urban
India, rooftop rainwater harvesting is being
successfully adapted to store and conserve
water. In Gendathur, a remote backward village
in Mysuru, Karnataka, villagers have installed,
in their household’s rooftop, rainwater harvesting
system to meet their water needs. Nearly 200
households have installed this system and the
village has earned the rare distinction of being
rich in rainwater. See Fig. 3.6 for a better
understanding of the rooftop rainwater
harvesting system which is adapted here.
Gendathur receives an annual precipitation of
1,000 mm, and with 80 per cent of collection
efficiency and of about 10 fillings, every house
can collect and use about 50,000 litres of water
annually. From the 200 houses, the net amount
of rainwater harvested annually amounts to
1,00,000 litres.
Fig. 3.6
Rooftop harvesting was common across the towns
and villages of the Thar. Rainwater that falls on the
sloping roofs of houses is taken through a pipe into
an underground tanka (circular holes in the ground).
built in the main house or in the courtyard. The
picture above shows water being taken from a
neighbour’s roof through a long pipe. Here the
neighbour’s rooftop has been used for collection of
rainwater. The picture shows a hole through which
rainwater flows down into an underground tanka.
Tamil Nadu is the first state in India
which has made rooftop rainwater
harvesting structure compulsory to all
the houses across the state. There are
legal provisions to punish the defaulters.
Rooftop rainwater harvesting is the most
common practice in Shillong, Meghalaya.
It is interesting because Cherapunjee and
Mawsynram  situated at a distance of
55 km. from Shillong receive the highest
rainfall in the world, yet the state capital
Shillong faces acute shortage of water.
Nearly every household in the city has a
rooftop rainwater harvesting structure.
Nearly 15-25 per cent of the total water
requirement of the household comes from
rooftop water harvesting.
Find out other rainwater harvesting systems
existing in and around your locality.
particularly in the summers. Rainwater, or
palar pani, as commonly referred to in
these parts, is considered the purest form
of natural water. Many houses constructed
underground rooms adjoining the ‘tanka’
to beat the summer heat  as it would keep
the room cool.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 40 ---
28
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Fig 3.7
BAMBOO DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM
In Meghalaya, a 200-year-old system of tapping stream
and spring water by using bamboo pipes, is prevalent.
About 18-20 litres of water enters the bamboo pipe system,
gets transported over hundreds of metres, and finally
reduces to 20-80 drops per minute at the site of the plant.
Picture 2 and 3: The channel sections, made of bamboo, divert
water to the plant site where it is distributed into branches, again
made and laid out with different forms of bamboo pipes. The flow of
water into the pipes is controlled by manipulating the pipe positions.
Picture 1: Bamboo pipes are used to divert perennial springs
on the hilltops to the lower reaches by gravity.
Picture 5 and 6
Reduced channel sections
and diversion units are
used at the last stage of
water application. The last
channel section enables
water to be dropped near
the roots of the plant.
Picture 4: If the pipes pass a road,
they are taken high above the land.
1. Collect information on how industries are polluting our water resources.
2. Enact with your classmates a scene of water dispute in your locality.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 41 ---
29
WATER RESOURCES
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
1.
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Based on the information given below classify each of the situations as
‘suffering from water scarcity’ or ‘not suffering from water scarcity’.
(a) Region with high annual rainfall.
(b) Region having high annual rainfall and large population.
(c) Region having high annual rainfall but water is highly polluted.
(d) Region having low rainfall and low population.
(ii) Which one of the following statements is not an argument in favour of multi-
purpose river projects?
(a) Multi-purpose projects bring water to those areas which suffer from
water scarcity.
(b) Multi-purpose projects by regulating water flow helps to control floods.
(c) Multi-purpose projects lead to large scale displacements and loss of
livelihood.
(d) Multi-purpose projects generate electricity for our industries and our
homes.
(iii) Here are some false statements. Identify the mistakes and rewrite them
correctly.
(a) Multiplying urban centres with large and dense populations and urban
lifestyles have helped in proper utilisation of water resources.
(b) Regulating and damming of rivers does not affect the river’s natural
flow and its sediment flow.
(c) In Gujarat, the Sabarmati basin farmers were not agitated when higher
priority was given to water supply in urban areas, particularly during
droughts.
(d) Today in Rajasthan, the practice of rooftop rainwater water harvesting
has gained popularity despite high water availability due to the Indira
Gandhi Canal.
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Explain how water becomes a renewable resource.
(ii) What is water scarcity and what are its main causes?
(iii) Compare the advantages and disadvantages of multi-purpose river projects.
3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Discuss how rainwater harvesting in semi-arid regions of Rajasthan is
carried out.
(ii) Describe how modern adaptations of traditional rainwater harvesting
methods are being carried out to conserve and store water.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 42 ---
India is an agriculturally important country.
Two-thirds of its population is engaged in
agricultural activities. Agriculture is a primary
activity, which produces most of the food that
we consume. Besides food grains, it also
produces raw material for various industries.
Can you name some industries based on
agricultural raw material?
Moreover, some agricultural products like
tea, coffee, spices, etc. are also exported.
TYPES OF FARMING
Agriculture is an age-old economic activity in
our country. Over these years, cultivation
methods have changed significantly depending
upon the characteristics of physical
environment, technological know-how and
socio-cultural practices. Farming varies from
subsistence to commercial type. At present,
in different parts of India, the following
farming systems are practised.
Primitive Subsistence Farming
This type of farming is still practised in few
pockets of India. Primitive subsistence
agriculture is practised on small patches of
land with the help of primitive tools like hoe,
dao and digging sticks, and family/
community labour. This type of farming
depends upon monsoon, natural fertility of
the soil and suitability of other environmental
conditions to the crops grown.
It is a ‘slash and burn’ agriculture.
Farmers clear a patch of land and produce
cereals and other food crops to sustain their
family. When the soil fertility decreases, the
farmers shift and clear a fresh patch of land
for cultivation. This type of shifting allows
Nature to replenish the fertility of the soil
through natural processes; land productivity
in this type of agriculture is low as the farmer
does not use fertilisers or other modern
inputs. It is known by different names in
different parts of the country.
Can you name  some such types of farmings?
It is jhumming in north-eastern states like
Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland;
Pamlou in Manipur, Dipa in Bastar district
of Chhattishgarh, and in Andaman and
Nicobar Islands.
Jhumming: The ‘slash and burn’ agriculture
is known as ‘Milpa’ in Mexico and Central
America, ‘Conuco’ in Venzuela, ‘Roca’ in
Brazil, ‘Masole’ in Central Africa, ‘Ladang’
in Indonesia, ‘Ray’ in Vietnam.
In India, this primitive form of cultivation
is called ‘Bewar’ or ‘Dahiya’ in Madhya
Pradesh, ‘Podu’ or ‘Penda’ in Andhra Pradesh,
‘Pama Dabi’ or ‘Koman’ or Bringa’ in Odisha,
‘Kumari’ in Western Ghats, ‘Valre’ or ‘Waltre’
in South-eastern Rajasthan, ‘Khil’ in the
Himalayan belt, ‘Kuruwa’ in Jharkhand, and
‘Jhumming’ in the North-eastern region.
Fig. 4.1
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 43 ---
Can you name the type of farming Rinjha’s
family is engaged in?
Can you enlist some crops which are grown
in such farming?
Intensive Subsistence Farming
This type of farming is practised in areas of
high population pressure on land. It is labour-
intensive farming, where high doses of
biochemical inputs and irrigation are used
for obtaining higher production.
Can you name some of the states of India
where such farming is practised?
Though the ‘right of inheritance’ leading
to the division of land among successive
generations has rendered land-holding size
uneconomical, the farmers continue to take
maximum output from the limited land in
the absence of alternative source of livelihood.
Thus, there is enormous pressure on
agricultural land.
Commercial Farming
The main characteristic of this type of farming
is the use of higher doses of modern inputs,
e.g. high yielding variety (HYV) seeds, chemical
fertilisers, insecticides and pesticides in order
to obtain higher productivity. The degree of
commercialisation of agriculture varies from
one region to another. For example, rice is a
commercial crop in Haryana and Punjab, but
in Odisha, it is a subsistence crop.
Can you give some more examples of crops
which may be commercial in one region and
may provide subsistence in another region?
Plantation is also a type of commercial
farming. In this type of farming, a single crop
is grown on a large area. The plantation has
an interface of agriculture and industry.
Plantations cover large tracts of land, using
capital intensive inputs, with the help of
migrant labourers. All the produce is used
as raw material in respective industries.
In India, tea, coffee, rubber, sugarcane,
banana, etc., are important plantation crops.
Tea in Assam and North Bengal coffee in
Karnataka are some of the important
plantation crops grown in these states. Since
the production is mainly for market, a well-
developed network of transport and
communication connecting the plantation
areas, processing industries and markets
plays an important role in the development
of plantations.
Rinjha lived with her family in a small village
at the outskirts of Diphu in Assam. She enjoys
watching her family members clearing,
slashing and burning a patch of land for
cultivation. She often helps them in irrigating
the fields with water running through a
bamboo canal from the nearby spring. She
loves the surroundings and wants to stay
here as long as she can, but this little girl
has no idea about the declining fertility of
the soil and her family’s search for fresh a
patch of land in the next season.
31
AGRICULTURE
Fig. 4.2:  Banana plantation in Southern
part of India
Fig. 4.3:  Bamboo plantation in North-east
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 44 ---
32
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
CROPPING PATTERN
You have studied the physical diversities and
plurality of cultures in India. These are also
reflected in agricultural practices and
cropping patterns in the country. Various
types of food and fibre crops, vegetables and
fruits, spices and condiments, etc. constitute
some of the important crops grown in the
country. India has three cropping seasons
— rabi, kharif and zaid.
Rabi crops are sown in winter from October
to December and harvested in summer from
April to June. Some of the important rabi
crops are wheat, barley, peas, gram and
mustard. Though, these crops are grown in
large parts of India, states from the north
and north-western parts such as Punjab,
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and
Kashmir, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh are
important for the production of wheat and
other rabi crops. Availability of precipitation
during winter months due to the western
temperate cyclones helps in the success of
these crops. However, the success of the green
revolution in Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar
Pradesh and parts of Rajasthan has also been
an important factor in the growth of the above-
mentioned rabi crops.
Kharif crops are grown with the onset of
monsoon in different parts of the country and
these are harvested in September-October.
Important crops grown during this season
are paddy, maize, jowar, bajra, tur (arhar),
moong, urad, cotton, jute, groundnut and
soyabean. Some of the most important rice-
growing regions are Assam, West Bengal,
coastal regions of Odisha, Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and
Maharashtra,  particularly the (Konkan coast)
along with Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Recently,
paddy has also become an important crop of
Punjab and Haryana. In states like Assam,
West Bengal and Odisha, three crops of paddy
are grown in a year. These are Aus, Aman
and Boro.
In between the rabi and the kharif seasons,
there is a short season during the summer
months known as the Zaid season. Some of
the crops produced during ‘zaid’ are
watermelon, muskmelon, cucumber,
vegetables and fodder crops. Sugarcane takes
almost a year to grow.
Major Crops
A variety of food and non food crops are
grown in different parts of the country
depending upon the variations in soil, climate
and cultivation practices. Major crops grown
in India are rice, wheat, millets, pulses, tea,
coffee, sugarcane, oil seeds, cotton and jute,
etc.
Rice: It is the staple food crop of a majority of
the people in India. Our country is the second
largest producer of rice in the world after
China. It is a kharif crop which requires high
temperature, (above 25°C) and high humidity
with annual rainfall above 100 cm. In the areas
of less rainfall, it grows with the help of
irrigation.
Fig. 4.4 (b):  Rice is ready to be harvested in the
field
Fig. 4.4 (a):  Rice Cultivation
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 45 ---
33
AGRICULTURE
India:  Distribution of Rice
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 46 ---
34
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Rice is grown in the plains of north and
north-eastern India, coastal areas and the
deltaic regions. Development of dense network
of canal irrigation and tubewells have made
it possible to grow rice in areas of less rainfall
such as Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar
Pradesh and parts of Rajasthan.
Wheat: This is the second most important
cereal crop. It is the main food crop, in north
and north-western part of the country. This
rabi crop requires a cool growing season and
a bright sunshine at the time of ripening. It
requires 50 to 75 cm of annual rainfall evenly-
distributed over the growing season. There
are two important wheat-growing zones in the
country – the Ganga-Satluj plains in the
north-west and black soil region of the Deccan.
The major wheat-producing states are
Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Bihar and Rajasthan.
Millets: Jowar, bajra and ragi are the
important millets grown in India. Though,
these are known as coarse grains, they have
very high nutritional value. For example, ragi
is very rich in iron, calcium, other micro
nutrients and roughage. Jowar is the third
most important food crop with respect to area
and production. It is a rain-fed crop mostly
grown in the moist areas which hardly needs
irrigation. Major Jowar producing States are
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh
and Madhya Pradesh.
Fig. 4.6:  Bajra Cultivation
Bajra grows well on sandy soils and
shallow black soil. Major Bajra producing
States are Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Gujarat and Haryana. Ragi is
a crop of dry regions and grows well on red,
black, sandy, loamy and shallow black soils.
Major ragi producing states are: Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Sikkim, Jharkhand and Arunachal Pradesh.
Maize: It is a crop which is used both as
food and fodder. It is a kharif crop which
requires temperature between 21°C to 27°C
and grows well in old alluvial soil. In some
states like Bihar maize is grown in rabi season
also. Use of modern inputs such as HYV
seeds, fertilisers and irrigation have
contributed to the increasing production of
maize. Major maize-producing states are
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
Fig. 4.5:  Wheat Cultivation
Fig. 4.7:  Maize Cultivation
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 47 ---
35
AGRICULTURE
India:  Distribution of Wheat
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 48 ---
36
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
sowing to harvesting. India is the second
largest producer of sugarcane only after
Brazil. It is the main source of sugar, gur
(jaggary), khandsari and molasses. The major
sugarcane-producing states are Uttar
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil
Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar,
Punjab and Haryana.
Oil Seeds: In 2018 India was the second
largest producer of groundnut in the world
after China. In rapeseed production India was
third largest producer in the world after
Canada and China in 2018. Different oil seeds
are grown covering approximately 12 per cent
of the total cropped area of the country. Main
oil-seeds produced in India are groundnut,
mustard, coconut, sesamum (til), soyabean,
castor seeds, cotton seeds, linseed and
sunflower. Most of these are edible and used
as cooking mediums. However, some of these
are also used as raw material in the
production of soap, cosmetics and ointments.
Groundnut is a kharif crop and accounts
for about half of the major oilseeds produced in
the country. Gujarat was the largest producer
of groundnut followed by Rajasthan and Tamil
Nadu in 2019–20. Linseed and mustard are rabi
crops. Sesamum is a kharif crop in north and
rabi crop in south India. Castor seed is grown
both as rabi and kharif crop.
Tea: Tea cultivation is an example of
plantation agriculture. It is also an important
beverage crop introduced in India initially by
the British. Today, most of the tea plantations
are owned by Indians. The tea plant grows
well in tropical and sub-tropical climates
endowed with deep and fertile well-drained
soil, rich in humus and organic matter. Tea
bushes require warm and moist frost-free
Fig. 4.9:  Groundnut, sunflower and mustard are ready to be harvested in the field
Pulses: India is the largest producer as well
as the consumer of pulses in the world. These
are the major source of protein in a vegetarian
diet. Major pulses that are grown in India are
tur (arhar), urad, moong, masur, peas and
gram. Can you distinguish which of these
pulses are grown in the kharif season and
which are grown in the rabi season? Pulses
need less moisture and survive even in dry
conditions. Being leguminous crops, all these
crops except arhar help in restoring soil
fertility by fixing nitrogen from the air.
Therefore, these are mostly grown in rotation
with other crops. Major pulse producing states
in India  are Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan,
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka.
Food Crops other than Grains
Sugarcane: It is a tropical as well as a
subtropical crop. It grows well in hot and
humid climate with a temperature of 21°C to
27°C and an annual rainfall between 75cm.
and 100cm. Irrigation is required in the
regions of low rainfall. It can be grown on a
variety of soils and needs manual labour from
Fig. 4.8:  Sugarcane Cultivation
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 49 ---
37
AGRICULTURE
climate all through the
year. Frequent showers
evenly distributed over the
year ensure continuous
growth of tender leaves.
Tea is a labour-intensive
industry. It requires
abundant, cheap and
skilled labour. Tea is
processed 
within
the tea garden to restore
its freshness. Major tea-
producing states are Assam, hills of Darjeeling
and Jalpaiguri districts, West Bengal, Tamil
Nadu and Kerala. Apart from these, Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Meghalaya, Andhra
Pradesh and Tripura are also tea-producing
states in the country. In 2018 India was the
second largest producer of tea after China.
Coffee: Indian coffee is known in the world for
its good quality. The Arabica variety initially
brought from Yemen is produced in the
country. This variety is in great demand all over
the world. Initially its cultivation was
introduced on the Baba Budan Hills and even
today its cultivation is confined to the Nilgiri in
Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
Horticulture Crops: In 2018, India was the
second largest producer of fruits and
vegetables in the world after China. India is a
producer of tropical as well as temperate fruits.
Mangoes of Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal,
oranges of Nagpur and Cherrapunjee
(Meghalaya), bananas of Kerala, Mizoram,
Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu, lichi and guava
of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, pineapples of
Meghalaya, grapes of Andhra Pradesh,
Telangana and Maharashtra, apples, pears,
apricots and walnuts of Jammu and Kashmir
and Himachal Pradesh are in great demand
the world over.
Fig. 4.10:  Tea Cultivation
Fig. 4.11:  Tea-leaves Harvesting
Source: Pocket book of agricultural statistics, 2020, Govt. of India. Directorate of Economics and Statistics.
Fig. 4.12:  Apricots, apple and pomegranate
Fig. 4.13:  Cultivation of vegetables – peas, cauliflower, tomato and brinjal
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 50 ---
38
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
 India is an important producer of pea,
cauliflower, onion, cabbage, tomato, brinjal
and potato.
Non-Food Crops
Rubber: It is an equatorial crop, but under
special conditions, it is also grown in tropical
and sub-tropical areas. It requires moist and
humid climate with rainfall of more than 200
cm. and temperature above 25°C.
Rubber is an important industrial raw
material. It is mainly grown in Kerala, Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka and Andaman and Nicobar
islands and Garo hills of Meghalaya.
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil
Nadu, Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh.
Jute: It is known as the golden fibre. Jute grows
well on well-drained fertile soils in the flood
plains where soils are renewed every year. High
temperature is required during the time of
growth. West Bengal, Bihar, Assam, Odisha and
Meghalaya are the major jute producing states.
It is used in making gunny bags, mats, ropes,
yarn, carpets and other artefacts. Due to its
high cost, it is losing market to synthetic fibres
and packing materials, particularly the nylon.
Technological and Institutional Reforms
It was mentioned in the previous pages that
agriculture has been practised in India for
thousands of years. Sustained uses of land
without compatible techno-institutional
changes have hindered the pace of agricultural
development. Inspite of development of sources
of irrigation most of the farmers in large parts
of the country still depend upon monsoon and
natural fertility in order to carry on their
agriculture. For a growing population, this
poses a serious challenge. Agriculture which
provides livelihood for more than 60 per cent
of its population, needs some serious technical
and institutional reforms. Thus, collectivisation,
consolidation of holdings, cooperation and
abolition of zamindari, etc. were given priority
to bring about institutional reforms in the
country after Independence. ‘Land reform’ was
the main focus of our First Five Year Plan. The
right of inheritance had already lead to
fragmentation of land holdings necessitating
consolidation of holdings.
The laws of land reforms were enacted but
the implementation was lacking or lukewarm.
The Government of India embarked upon
introducing agricultural reforms to improve
Indian agriculture in the 1960s and 1970s.
The Green Revolution based on the use of
package technology and the White Revolution
(Operation Flood) were some of the strategies
initiated to improve the lot of Indian agriculture.
But, this too led to the concentration of
development in few selected areas. Therefore,
in the 1980s and 1990s, a comprehensive land
development programme was initiated, which
included both institutional and technical
Fig. 4.14:  Cotton Cultivation
Fibre Crops: Cotton, jute, hemp and natural
silk are the four major fibre crops grown in India.
The first three are derived from the crops grown
in the soil, the latter is obtained from cocoons of
the silkworms fed on green leaves specially
mulberry. Rearing of silk worms for the
production of silk fibre is known as sericulture.
Cotton: India is believed to be the original home
of the cotton plant. Cotton is one of the main
raw materials for cotton textile industry. In
2017, India was second largest producer of
cotton after China. Cotton grows well in drier
parts of the black cotton soil of the Deccan
plateau. It requires high temperature, light
rainfall or irrigation, 210 frost-free days and
bright sun-shine for its growth. It is a kharif
crop and requires 6 to 8 months to mature.
Major cotton-producing states are–
Maharashtra,  Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh,
List the items which are made of rubber and
are used by us.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 51 ---
39
AGRICULTURE
Fig. 4.15:  Modern technological equipments used in agriculture
reforms. Provision for crop insurance against
drought, flood, cyclone, fire and disease,
establishment of Grameen banks, cooperative
societies and banks for providing loan facilities
to the farmers at lower rates of interest were
some important steps in this direction.
Kissan Credit Card (KCC), Personal Accident
Insurance Scheme (PAIS) are some other
schemes introduced by the Government of  India
for the benefit of the farmers. Moreover, special
weather bulletins and agricultural programmes
for farmers were introduced on the radio and
television. The government also announces
minimum support price, remunerative and
procurement prices for important crops to check
the exploitation of farmers by speculators and
middlemen.
Bhoodan – Gramdan
Mahatma Gandhi declared Vinoba Bhave as
his spiritual heir. He also participated in
Satyagraha as one of the foremost
satyagrahis. He was one of the votaries of
Gandhi’s concept of gram swarajya. After
Gandhiji’s martyrdom, Vinoba Bhave
undertook padyatra to spread Gandhiji’s
message covered almost the entire country.
Once, when he was delivering a lecture at
Pochampalli in Andhra Pradesh, some poor
landless villagers demanded some land for
their economic well-being. Vinoba Bhave
could not promise it to them immediately but
assured them to talk to the Government of
India regarding provision of land for them if
they undertook cooperative farming.
Suddenly, Shri Ram Chandra Reddy stood
up and offered 80 acres of land to be
distributed among 80 land-less villagers.
This act was known as ‘Bhoodan’. Later he
travelled and introduced his ideas widely all
over India. Some zamindars, owners of
many villages offered to distribute some
villages among the landless. It was known
as Gramdan. However, many land-owners
chose to provide some part of their land to
the poor farmers due to the fear of land
ceiling act. This Bhoodan-Gramdan
movement initiated by Vinoba Bhave is also
known as the Blood-less Revolution.
Collect information about agriculture,
horticulture, agricultural schemes, etc. from
Farmers’ Portal website https://farmer.
gov.in/FarmerHome.aspx. Discuss about the
benefits of the information available on
the portal.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 52 ---
40
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
1.
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following describes a system of agriculture where a single
crop is grown on a large area?
(a) Shifting Agriculture
(b) Plantation Agriculture
(c) Horticulture
(d) Intensive Agriculture
(ii) Which one of the following is a rabi crop?
(a) Rice
(b) Gram
(c) Millets
(d) Cotton
(iii) Which one of the following is a leguminous crop?
(a) Pulses
(b) Jawar
(c) Millets
(d) Sesamum
2.
Answer the following questions in 30 words.
(i) Name one important beverage crop and specify the geographical conditions
required for its growth.
(ii) Name one staple crop of India and the regions where it is produced.
(iii) Enlist the various institutional reform programmes introduced by the
government in the interest of farmers.
3.
Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Suggest the initiative taken by the government to ensure the increase in
agricultural production.
(ii) Describe the geographical conditions required for the growth of rice.
PROJECT WORK
1.
Group discussion on the necessity of literacy among farmers.
2.
On an outline map of India show wheat producing areas.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 53 ---
41
AGRICULTURE
ACTIVITY
Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the
hidden answers.
1. The two staple food crops of India.
2. This is the summer cropping season of India.
3. Pulses like arhar, moong, gram, urad contain…
4. It is a coarse grain.
5. The two important beverages in India are…
6. One of the four major fibers grown on black soils.
A
Z
M
X
N
C
B
V
N
X
A
H
D
Q
S
D
E
W
S
R
J
D
Q
J
Z
V
R
E
D
K
H
A
R
I
F
G
W
F
M
R
F
W
F
N
L
R
G
C
H
H
R
S
B
S
V
T
G
B
C
W
H
E
A
T
Y
A
C
H
B
R
H
R
T
K
A
S
S
E
P
H
X
A
N
W
J
I
E
S
J
O
W
A
R
J
Z
H
D
T
K
C
L
A
E
G
A
C
O
F
F
E
E
Y
L
T
E
F
Y
M
T
A
T
S
S
R
G
I
P
D
E
J
O
U
Y
V
E
J
G
F
A
U
O
U
M
H
Q
S
U
D
I
T
S
W
S
P
U
O
A
C
O
T
T
O
N
E
A
H
F
O
Y
O
L
F
L
U
S
R
Q
Q
D
T
W
I
T
M
U
A
H
R
G
Y
K
T
R
A
B
F
E
A
K
D
G
D
Q
H
S
U
O
I
W
H
W Q
Z
C
X
V
B
N
M
K
J
A
S
L
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 54 ---
We use different things in our daily life made
from metal. Can you list a number of items
used in your house made of metals. Where do
these metals come from?
You have studied that the earth’s crust is
made up of different minerals embedded in the
rocks. Various metals are extracted from these
minerals after proper refinement.
Minerals are an indispensable part of our
lives. Almost everything we use, from a tiny pin
to a towering building or a big ship, all are
made from minerals. The railway lines and the
tarmac (paving) of the roads, our implements
and machinery too are made from minerals.
Cars, buses, trains, aeroplanes are
manufactured from minerals and run on
power resources derived from the earth. Even
the food that we eat contains minerals. In all
stages of development, human beings have
used minerals for their livelihood, decoration,
festivities, religious and ceremonial rites.
Haban comes to Guwahati with his father
from a remote village.
He sees people getting into strange
house like objects which move along the
road. He also sees a “kitchen” dragging a
number of house along with it. He is amazed
and asked his father “Why don’t our houses
move like the one we saw in Guwahati, Ba?”
Ba replies, “These are not houses, they
are buses and trains. Unlike our houses these
are not made of bricks and stones, metal like
iron and alluminium are used in making
these. They do not move on their own. They
are driven by an engine which needs energy
to work.”
A bright smile from toothpaste
and minerals
Toothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasive
minerals like silica, limestone, aluminium
oxide and various phosphate minerals do the
cleaning. Fluoride which is used to reduce
cavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most
toothpaste are made white with titanium
oxide, which comes from minerals called
rutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle in
some  toothpastes comes from mica. The
toothbrush and tube containing the paste are
made of plastics from petroleum.  Find out
where these minerals are found?
Dig a little deeper and find out how many
minerals are used to make a light bulb?
All living things need minerals
Life processes cannot occur without minerals.
Although our mineral intake represents only
about 0.3 per cent of our total intake of
nutrients, they are so potent and so important
that without them we would not be able to
utilise the other 99.7 per cent of foodstuffs.
Dig a little deeper and collect “Nutritional
Facts” printed on food labels.
What is a mineral?
Geologists 
define 
mineral 
as 
a
“homogenous, natura lly occurring substance
with a definable internal structure.” Minerals
are found in varied forms in nature, ranging
from the hardest diamond to the softest talc.
Why are they so varied?
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 55 ---
You have already learnt about rocks.
Rocks are combinations of homogenous
substances called minerals. Some rocks, for
instance limestone, consist of a single mineral
only, but majority of the rock consist of several
minerals in varying proportions. Although,
over 2000 minerals have been identified, only
a few are abundantly found in most of the
rocks.
A particular mineral that will be formed
from a certain combination of elements
depends upon the physical and chemical
conditions under which the material forms.
This, in turn, results in a wide range of colours,
hardness, crystal forms, lustre and density that
a particular mineral possesses. Geologists use
these properties to classify the minerals.
Study of Minerals by Geographers
and Geologists
Geographers study minerals as part of the
earth’s crust for a better understanding of
landforms. The distribution of mineral
resources and associated  economic activities
are of interest to geographers. A geologist,
however, is interested in the formation of
minerals, their age and physical and
chemical composition.
 However, for general and commercial
purposes minerals can be classified as under.
MODE OF OCCURRENCE OF MINERALS
Where are these minerals found?
Minerals are usually found in “ores”. The
term ore is used to describe an accumulation
of any mineral mixed with other elements.
The mineral content of the ore must be in
sufficient concentration to make its extraction
commercially viable. The type of formation or
structure in which they are found determines
the relative ease with which mineral ores may
be mined. This also determines the cost of
extraction. It is, therefore, important for us
to understand the main types of formations
in which minerals occur.
Minerals generally occur in these forms:
(i) In igneous and metamorphic rocks
minerals may occur in the cracks,
crevices, faults or joints. The smaller
occurrences are called veins and the
larger are called lodes. In most cases,
they are formed when minerals in liquid/
molten and gaseous forms are forced
upward through cavities towards the
earth’s surface. They cool and solidify as
they rise. Major metallic minerals like tin,
copper, zinc and lead etc. are obtained
from veins and lodes.
(ii) In sedimentary rocks a number of minerals
occur in beds or layers. They have been
formed as a result of deposition,
accumulation and concentration in
horizontal strata. Coal and some forms of
iron ore have been concentrated as a result
of long periods under great heat and
pressure. Another group of sedimentary
minerals include gypsum, potash salt and
sodium salt. These are formed as a result
of evaporation especially in arid regions.
(iii) Another mode of formation involves the
decomposition of surface rocks, and the
removal of soluble constituents, leaving
a residual mass of weathered
material containing ores. Bauxite is
formed this way.
43
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Fig. 5.1
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 56 ---
44
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Dig a little deeper: What is the difference
between an open pit mine, a quarry and an
underground mine with shafts?
Rat-Hole Mining. Do you know that most
of the minerals in India are nationalised
and their extraction is possible only after
obtaining due permission from the
government? But in most of the tribal
areas of the north-east India, minerals are
owned by individuals or communities. In
Meghalaya, there are large deposits of coal,
iron ore, limestone and dolomite etc. Coal
mining in Jowai and Cherapunjee is done
by family member in the form of a long
narrow tunnel, known as ‘Rat hole’
mining. The National Green Tribunal has
declared such activities illegal and
recommended that these should be
stopped forthwith.
(iv) Certain minerals may occur as alluvial
deposits in sands of valley floors and the
base of hills. These deposits are called
‘placer deposits’ and generally contain
minerals, which are not corroded by water.
Gold, silver, tin and platinum are most
important among such minerals.
(v) The ocean waters contain vast quantities
of minerals, but most of these are too widely
diffused to be of economic significance.
However, common salt, magnesium and
bromine are largely derived from ocean
waters. The ocean beds, too, are rich in
manganese nodules.
non-ferrous minerals. The vast alluvial plains
of north India are almost devoid of economic
minerals. These variations exist largely because
of the differences in the geological structure,
processes and time involved in the formation
of minerals.
Let us now study the distribution of a few
major minerals in India. Always remember that
the concentration of mineral in the ore, the ease
of extraction and closeness to the market play
an important role in affecting the economic
viability of a reserve. Thus, to meet the demand,
a choice has to be made between a number of
possible options. When this is done a mineral
‘deposit’ or ‘reserve’ turns into a mine.
Ferrous Minerals
Ferrous minerals account for about three-
fourths of the total value of the production of
metallic minerals. They provide a strong base
for the development of metallurgical industries.
India exports substantial quantities of ferrous
minerals after meeting her internal demands.
Iron Ore
Iron ore is the basic mineral and the backbone
of industrial development. India is endowed
with fairly abundant resources of iron ore. India
is rich in good quality iron ores. Magnetite is
the finest iron ore with a very high content of
iron up to 70 per cent. It has excellent magnetic
qualities, especially valuable in the electrical
industry. Hematite ore is the most important
industrial iron ore in terms of the quantity
used, but has a slightly lower iron content than
magnetite. (50-60 per cent). In 2018–19 almost
entire production of iron ore (97%) accrued
from Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and
Jharkhand. The remaining production (3%)
was from other states.
India is fortunate to have fairly rich and
varied mineral resources. However, these are
unevenly distributed. Broadly speaking,
peninsular rocks contain most of the reserves
of coal, metallic minerals, mica and many other
non-metallic minerals. Sedimentary rocks on
the western and eastern flanks of the peninsula,
in Gujarat and Assam have most of the
petroleum deposits. Rajasthan with the rock
systems of the peninsula, has reserves of many
Kudre in Kannada means horse. The
highest peak in the western ghats of
Karnataka resembles the face of a horse.
The Bailadila hills look like the hump of
an ox, and hence its name.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 57 ---
45
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
The major iron ore belts in India are:
•
Odisha-Jharkhand belt: In Odisha high
grade hematite ore is found in Badampahar
mines in the Mayurbhanj and Kendujhar
districts. In the adjoining Singbhum
district of Jharkhand haematite iron ore is
mined in Gua and Noamundi.
•
Durg-Bastar-Chandrapur belt lies in
Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra. Very high
grade hematites are found in the famous
Bailadila range of hills in the Bastar district
of Chhattisgarh. The range of hills
comprise of 14 deposits of super high
grade hematite iron ore. It has the best
physical properties needed for steel
making. Iron ore from these mines is
exported to Japan and South Korea via
Vishakhapatnam port.
•
Ballari-Chitradurga-Chikkamagaluru-
Tumakuru belt in Karnataka has large
reserves of iron ore. The Kudremukh mines
located in the Western Ghats of Karnataka
are a 100 per cent export unit. Kudremukh
deposits are known to be one of the largest
in the world. The ore is transported as
slurry through a pipeline to a port near
Mangaluru.
•
Maharashtra-Goa belt includes the state
of Goa and Ratnagiri district of
Maharashtra. Though, the ores are not of
very high quality, yet they are efficiently
exploited. Iron ore is exported through
Marmagao port.
Manganese
Manganese is mainly used in the
manufacturing of steel and ferro-manganese
alloy. Nearly 10 kg of manganese is required
to manufacture one tonne of steel. It is also
used in manufacturing bleaching powder,
insecticides and paints.
Fig. 5.2:  Iron ore mine
Dig a little deeper: Superimpose the maps
showing distribution of iron ore, manganese,
coal and iron and steel industry. Do you see
any correlation. Why?
Non-Ferrous Minerals
India’s reserves and production of non-
ferrous minerals is not very satisfactory.
However, these minerals, which include
copper, bauxite, lead, zinc and gold play a
vital role in a number of metallurgical,
engineering and electrical industries. Let us
study the distribution of copper and
bauxite.
Fig. 5.3:  Production of Manganese showing
state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19
Odisha
16%
Karnataka
Andhra
Pradesh
10%
Madhya
Pradesh
33%
Others
2%
Maharashtra
27%
12%
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 58 ---
46
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India:  Distribution of Iron Ore, Manganese, Bauxite and Mica
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 59 ---
47
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Copper
India is critically deficient in the reserve and
production of copper. Being malleable, ductile
and a good conductor, copper is mainly used
in electrical cables, electronics  and chemical
Fig. 5.4:  Copper mines at Malanjkhand
Fig. 5.5:  Production of Bauxite showing state-wise
share in per cent, 2018–19
industries. The Balaghat mines in Madhya
Pradesh, Khetri mines in Rajasthan and
Singhbhum district of Jharkhand are leading
producers of copper.
Bauxite
Though, several ores
contain aluminium, it
is from bauxite, a
clay-like substance
that alumina and
later aluminium is
obtained. Bauxite
deposits are formed
by the decomposition
of a wide variety of
rocks 
rich 
in
aluminium silicates.
Aluminium is an
important 
metal
because it combines
the strength of metals
such as iron, with
extreme lightness
and also with good
conductivity and
great malleability.
India’s bauxite
deposits are mainly
found 
in 
the
Amarkantak plateau, Maikal hills and the
plateau region of Bilaspur-Katni.
Odisha was the largest bauxite producing
state in India in 2016-17. Panchpatmali
deposits in Koraput district are the most
important bauxite deposits in the state.
Dig a little deeper: Locate the mines of
Bauxite on the physical map of India.
Fig.5.6:  Bauxite Mine
Others
1%
Odisha
65%
Jharkhand
10%
Gujarat
9%
Chhattisgarh
6%
Maharashtra
6%
Madhya
Pradesh
3%
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 60 ---
48
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Non-Metallic Minerals
Mica is a mineral made up of a series of plates
or leaves. It splits easily into thin sheets. These
sheets can be so thin that a thousand can be
layered into a mica sheet of a few centimeters
high. Mica can be clear, black, green, red yellow
or brown. Due to its excellent di-electric
strength, low power loss factor, insulating
properties and resistance to high voltage, mica
is one of the most indispensable minerals used
in electric and electronic industries.
Mica deposits are found in the northern
edge of the Chota Nagpur plateau. Koderma
Gaya – Hazaribagh belt of Jharkhand is the
leading producer.
In Rajasthan, the major mica producing
area is around Ajmer. Nellore mica belt of
Andhra Pradesh is also an important producer
in the country.
Rock Minerals
Limestone is found in association with rocks
composed of calcium carbonates or calcium
and magnesium carbonates. It is found in
sedimentary rocks of most geological
formations. Limestone is the basic raw
material for the cement industry and
essential for smelting iron ore in the blast
furnace.
Dig a little deeper: Study the maps to explain
why Chota Nagpur is a storehouse of minerals.
Hazards of Mining
Have you ever wondered about the efforts the miners make in making life comfortable
for you? What are the impacts of mining on
the health of the miners and the environment?
The dust and noxious fumes inhaled by
miners make them vulnerable to pulmonary
diseases. The risk of collapsing mine roofs,
inundation and fires in coalmines are a
constant threat to miners.
The water sources in the region get
contaminated due to mining. Dumping of waste
and slurry leads to degradation of land, soil,
and increase in stream and river pollution.
Fig. 5.8:  Air pollution due to
generation of dust in mining areas
After the discovery of aluminium
Emperor Napoleon III wore buttons and
hooks on his clothes made of aluminium
and served food to his more illustrious
guests in aluminium utensils and the
less honourable ones were served in gold
and silver utensils. Thirty years after this
incident aluminium bowls were most
common with the beggars in Paris.
Fig. 5.7:  Production of Limestone showing
state-wise share in per cent, 2018–19
Others
%
8
Karnataka
9%
Telangana
8%
Rajasthan
20%
Gujarat
%
7
Tamil Nadu
6%
Chhattisgarh
%
11
Maharashtra
%
4
Madhya
Pradesh
13%
Andhra
Pradesh
13%
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 61 ---
49
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
Stricter 
safety 
regulations 
and
implementation of environmental laws are
essential to prevent mining from becoming a
“killer industry”.
CONSERVATION OF MINERALS
We all appreciate the strong dependence of
industry and agriculture upon mineral
deposits and the substances manufactured
from them. The total volume of workable
mineral deposits is an insignificant fraction
i.e. one per cent of the earth’s crust. We are
rapidly consuming mineral resources that
required millions of years to be created and
concentrated. The geological processes of
mineral formation are so slow that the rates
of replenishment are infinitely small in
comparison to the present rates of
consumption. Mineral resources are,
therefore, finite and non-renewable. Rich
mineral deposits are our country’s extremely
valuable but short-lived possessions.
Continued extraction of ores leads to
increasing costs as mineral extraction comes
from greater depths along with decrease
in quality.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 62 ---
50
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
A concerted effort has to be made in order
to use our mineral resources in a planned
and sustainable manner. Improved
technologies need to be constantly evolved to
allow use of low grade ores at low costs.
Recycling of metals, using scrap metals and
other substitutes are steps in conserving our
mineral resources for the future.
Dig a little deeper: Make a list of items where
substitutes  are being used instead of minerals.
Where are these substitutes obtained from?
Energy Resources
Energy is required for all activities. It is needed
to cook, to provide light and heat, to propel
vehicles and to drive machinery in industries.
Energy can be generated from fuel
minerals like coal, petroleum, natural gas,
uranium and from electricity. Energy
resources can be classified as conventional
and non-conventional sources. Conventional
sources include: firewood, cattle dung cake,
coal, petroleum, natural gas and electricity
(both hydel and thermal). Non-conventional
sources include solar, wind, tidal, geothermal,
biogas and atomic energy. Firewood and cattle
dung cake are most common in rural India.
According to one estimate more than 70 per
cent energy requirement in rural households
is met by these two ; continuation of these is
increasingly becoming difficult due to
decreasing forest area. Moreover, using dung
cake too is being discouraged because it
consumes most valuable manure which could
be used in agriculture.
Conventional Sources of Energy
Coal: In India, coal is the most abundantly
available fossil fuel. It provides a substantial
part of the nation’s energy needs. It is used
for power generation, to supply energy to
industry as well as for domestic needs. India
is highly dependent on coal for meeting its
commercial energy requirements.
As you are already aware that coal is
formed due the compression of plant material
over millions of years. Coal, therefore, is
found in a variety of forms depending on the
degrees of compression and the depth and
time of burial. Decaying plants in swamps
produce peat. Which has a low carbon and
high moisture contents and low heating
capacity. Lignite is a low grade brown coal,
which is soft with high moisture content. The
principal lignite reserves are in Neyveli in Tamil
Nadu and are used for generation of
electricity. Coal that has been buried deep
and subjected to increased temperatures is
bituminous coal. It is the most popular coal
in commercial use. Metallurgical coal is high
grade bituminous coal which has a special
value for smelting iron in blast furnaces.
Anthracite is the highest quality hard coal.
In India coal occurs in rock series of two
main geological ages, namely Gondwana, a
little over 200 million years in age and in
tertiary deposits which are only about 55
million years old. The major resources of
Gondwana coal, which are metallurgical coal,
are located in Damodar valley (West Bengal-
Fig. 5.9 (a):  A view from inside of a coal mine
Fig. 5.9 (b):  A view from outside of a coal mine
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 63 ---
51
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
India:  Distribution of Coal, Oil and Natural Gas
Collect information about cross country natural gas pipelines laid by GAIL
(India) under “One Nation One Grid”.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 64 ---
52
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Jharkhand). Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are
important coalfields. The Godavari,
Mahanadi, Son and Wardha valleys also
contain coal deposits.
Tertiary coals occur in the north eastern
states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh and Nagaland.
Remember coal is a bulky material, which
loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash.
Hence, heavy industries and thermal power
stations are located on or near the coalfields.
Petroleum
Petroleum or mineral oil is the next major
energy source in India after coal. It provides
fuel for heat and lighting, lubricants for
machinery and raw materials for a number of
manufacturing industries. Petroleum refineries
act as a “nodal industry” for synthetic textile,
fertiliser and numerous chemical industries.
Most of the petroleum occurrences in India
are associated with anticlines and fault traps
in the rock formations of the tertiary age. In
regions of folding, anticlines or domes, it
occurs where oil is trapped in the crest of the
upfold. The oil bearing layer is a porous
limestone or sandstone through which oil may
flow. The oil is prevented from rising or
sinking by intervening non-porous layers.
Petroleum is also found in fault traps
between porous and non-porous rocks. Gas,
being lighter  usually occurs above the oil.
 Mumbai High, Gujarat and Assam are
major petroleum production areas in India.
From the map locate the 3 major off shore
fields of western India. Ankeleshwar is the
most important field of Gujarat. Assam is the
oldest oil producing state of India. Digboi,
Naharkatiya and Moran-Hugrijan are the
important oil fields in the state.
Natural Gas
Natural Gas is found with petroleum deposits
and is released when crude oil is brought to
the surface. It can be used as a domestic and
industrial fuel. It is used as fuel in power sector
to generate electricity, for heating purpose in
industries, as raw material in chemical,
petrochemical and fertilizer industries, as
transport fuel and as cooking fuel. With the
expansion of gas infrastructure and local city
gas distribution (COD) networks, natural gas
is also emerging as a preferred transport fuel
(CNG) and cooking fuel (PNG) at homes. India’s
major gas reserves are found in the Mumbai
High and allied fields along the west coast
which are supplemented by finds in the
Cambay basin. Along the East Coast, new
reserves of natural gas have been discovered
in the Krishna-Godavari basin.
The first 1,700 km long Hazira-Vijaipur-
Jagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline,
constructed by GAIL (India), linked Mumbai
High and Bassein gas fields with various
fertilizer, power and industrial complexes in
western and northen India. This artery
provided impetus to Indian gas market
development. Overall, India’s gas infrastructure
has expanded over ten times from 1,700 km
to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines and
is expected to soon reach over 34, 000 km as
Gas Grid by linking all gas sources and
consuming markets across the country
including North Eastern states.
Electricity
Electricity has such a wide range of
applications in today’s world that, its percapita
consumption is considered as an index of
development. Electricity is generated mainly in
two  ways: by running water which drives hydro
turbines to generate hydro electricity; and by
burning other fuels such as coal, petroleum
and natural gas to drive turbines to produce
thermal power. Once generated the electricity
is exactly the same.
Hydro electricity is generated by fast
flowing water, which is a renewable resource.
India has a number of multi-purpose projects
like the Bhakra Nangal, Damodar Valley
corporation, the Kopili Hydel Project etc.
producing hydroelectric power.
Thermal electricity is generated by using
coal, petroleum and natural gas. The thermal
power stations use non-renewable fossil fuels
for generating electricity.
Name some river valley projects and write
the names of the dams built on these rivers.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 65 ---
53
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
India:  Distribution of Nuclear and Thermal Power Plants
Rawat Bhata
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 66 ---
54
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Collect information about thermal/hydel
power plants located in your state. Show
them on the map of India.
Non-Conventional Sources of Energy
The growing consumption of energy has
resulted in the country becoming increasingly
dependent on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and
gas.  Rising prices of oil and gas and their
potential shortages have raised uncertainties
about the security of energy supply in future,
which in turn has serious repercussions on the
growth of the national economy. Moreover,
increasing use of fossil fuels also causes
serious environmental problems. Hence, there
is a pressing need to use renewable energy
sources like solar energy, wind, tide, biomass
and energy from waste material. These are
called non-conventional energy sources.
India is blessed with an abundance of
sunlight, water, wind and biomass. It has the
largest programmes for the development of
these renewable energy resources.
Nuclear or Atomic Energy
It is obtained by altering the structure of
atoms. When such an alteration is made, much
energy is released in the form of heat and this
is used to generate electric power. Uranium and
Thorium, which are available in Jharkhand and
the Aravalli ranges of Rajasthan are used for
generating atomic or nuclear power. The
Monazite sands of Kerala is also rich in
Thorium.
Locate the 6 nuclear power stations and find
out the state in which they are located.
Solar Energy
India is a tropical country. It has enormous
possibilities of tapping solar energy.
Photovoltaic technology converts sunlight
directly into electricity. Solar energy is fast
becoming popular in rural and remote areas.
Some big solar power plants are being
established in different parts of India which
will minimise the dependence of rural
households on firewood and dung cakes,
which in turn will contribute to environmental
conservation and adequate supply of manure
in agriculture.
Fig. 5.10:  Solar operated electronic milk
testing equipment
Fig. 5.11:  Wind mills – Nagarcoil
Wind power
India has great potential of wind power. The
largest wind farm cluster is located in Tamil
Nadu from Nagarcoil to Madurai. Apart from
these, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat,
Kerala, Maharashtra and Lakshadweep have
important wind farms. Nagarcoil and
Jaisalmer are well known for effective use of
wind energy in the country.
Biogas
Shrubs, farm waste, animal and human waste
are used to produce biogas for domestic
consumption in rural areas. Decomposition
of organic matter yields gas, which has higher
thermal efficiency in comparison to kerosene,
dung cake and charcoal. Biogas plants are
set up at municipal, cooperative and
individual levels. The plants using cattle dung
are known as ‘Gobar gas plants’ in rural India.
These provide twin benefits to the farmer in
the form of energy and improved quality of
Collect information about newly established
solar power plants in India.
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 67 ---
55
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
geothermal gradient is high, high temperatures
are found at shallow depths. Groundwater in
such areas absorbs heat from the rocks and
becomes hot. It is so hot that when it rises to
the earth’s surface, it turns into steam. This
steam is used to drive turbines and generate
electricity.
There are several hundred hot springs in
India, which could be used to generate
electricity. Two experimental projects have been
set up in India to harness geothermal energy.
One is located in the Parvati valley near
Manikarn in Himachal Pradesh and the other
is located in the Puga Valley, Ladakh.
Conservation of Energy Resources
Energy is a basic requirement for economic
development.  Every sector of the national
economy – agriculture, industry, transport,
commercial and domestic – needs inputs of
energy. The economic development plans
implemented since Independence necessarily
required increasing amounts of energy to
remain operational.  As a result, consumption
of energy in all forms has been steadily rising
all over the country.
In this background, there is an urgent need
to develop a sustainable path of energy
development. Promotion of energy conservation
and increased use of renewable energy sources
are the twin planks of sustainable energy.
India is presently one of the least energy
efficient countries in the world. We have to
adopt a cautious approach for the judicious
use of our limited energy resources. For
example, as concerned citizens we can do our
bit by using public transport systems instead
of individual vehicles; switching off electricity
when not in use, using power-saving devices
and using non-conventional sources of energy.
After all, “energy saved is energy produced”.
manure. Biogas is by far the most efficient
use of cattle dung. It improves the quality of
manure and also prevents the loss of trees
and manure due to burning of fuel wood
and cow dung cakes.
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
1.
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Which one of the following minerals is formed by decomposition of rocks,
leaving a residual mass of weathered material?
(a) coal
(b) bauxite
(c) gold
(d) zinc
(ii) Koderma, in Jharkhand is the leading producer of which one of the following
minerals?
(a) bauxite
(b) mica
(c) iron ore
(d) copper
Tidal Energy
Oceanic tides can be used to generate
electricity. Floodgate dams are built across
inlets. During high tide water flows into the
inlet and gets trapped when the gate is closed.
After the tide falls outside the flood gate, the
water retained by the floodgate flows back to
the sea via a pipe that carries it through a
power-generating turbine.
In India the Gulf of Khambhat, the Gulf
of Kuchchh in Gujarat on the western coast
and Gangetic delta in Sunderban regions of
West Bengal provide ideal conditions for
utilising tidal energy.
Geo Thermal Energy
Geo thermal energy refers to the heat and
electricity produced by using the heat from
the interior of the Earth. Geothermal energy
exists because, the Earth grows progressively
hotter with increasing depth. Where the
Fig. 5.12:  Biogas Plant
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 68 ---
56
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
(iii) Minerals are deposited and accumulated in the stratas of which of the
following rocks?
(a) sedimentary rocks
(c) igneous rocks
(b) metamorphic rocks
(d) none of the above
(iv) Which one of the following minerals is contained in the Monazite sand?
(a) oil
(b) uranium
(c) thorium
(d) coal
2.
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Distinguish between the following in not more than 30 words.
(a) ferrous and non-ferrous minerals
(b) conventional and non-conventional sources of energy
(ii) What is a mineral?
(iii) How are minerals formed in igneous and metamorphic rocks?
(iv) Why do we need to conserve mineral resources ?
3.
Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe the distribution of coal in India.
(ii) Why do you think that solar energy has a bright future in India?
ACTIVITY
Fill the name of the correct mineral in the crossword below:
2
1 M
3 M
4
M
2
4
T
6
1
o
7
y
5
5 T
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 69 ---
57
MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES
DOWN
1.
Found in placer deposit (4)
2.
Iron ore mined in Bailadila (8)
3.
Indispensable for electrical industry (4)
4.
Geological Age of coal found in north east
India (8)
5.
Formed in veins and lodes (3)
ACROSS
1.
A ferrous mineral (9)
2.
Raw material for cement industry (9)
3.
Finest iron ore with magnetic properties (9)
4.
Highest quality hard coal (10)
5.
Aluminium is obtained from this ore (7)
6.
Khetri mines are famous for this mineral (6)
7.
Formed due to evaporation (6)
Rationalised-2023-24

--- PAGE 70 ---
58
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Production of goods in large quantities after
processing from raw materials to more
valuable products is called manufacturing. Do
you know that paper is manufactured from
wood, sugar from sugarcane, iron and steel
from iron ore and aluminium from bauxite?
Do you also know that some types of clothes
are manufactured from yarn which itself is an
industrial product?
People employed in the secondary activities
manufacture the primary materials into
finished goods. The workers employed in steel
factories, car, breweries, textile industries,
bakeries etc. fall into this category. Some people
are employed in providing services. In this
chapter, we are mainly concerned with
manufacturing industries which fall in the
secondary sector.
The economic strength of a country is
measured 
by 
the 
development 
of
manufacturing industries.
IMPORTANCE OF MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing sector is considered the backbone
of development in general and economic
development in particular mainly because–
• Manufacturing industries not only help in
modernising agriculture, which forms the
backbone of our economy, they also reduce
the heavy dependence of people on
agricultural income by providing them jobs
in secondary and tertiary sectors.
• Industrial development is a precondition for
eradication of unemployment and poverty
from our country. This was the main
philosophy behind public sector industries
and joint sector ventures in India. It was also
aimed at bringing down regional disparities
by establishing industries in tribal and
backward areas.
• Export of manufactured goods expands
trade and commerce, and brings in much
needed foreign exchange.
• Countries that transform their raw
materials into a wide variety of finished
goods of higher value are prosperous.
India’s prosperity lies in increasing and
diversifying its manufacturing industries as
quickly as possible.
Agriculture and industry are not exclusive
of each other. They move hand in hand.  For
instance, the agro-industries in India have
given a major boost to agriculture by raising
its productivity. They depend on the latter for
raw materials and sell their products such as
irrigation pumps, fertilisers, insecticides,
pesticides, plastic and PVC pipes, machines
and tools, etc. to the farmers. Thus,
development and competitiveness of
On the occassion of Diwali, Harish went to
a market with his parents. They purchased
shoes and clothes for him. His mother
purchased utensils, sugar, tea and diyas
(earthen lamps). Harish observed that the
shops in the market were flooded with
items for sale. He wondered how so many
items could be made in such large
quantities. His father explained that shoes,
clothes, sugar etc. are manufactured by
machines in large industries, some utensils
are manufactured in small industries, while
items like diyas are made by individual
artisans in household industry.
Do you have some ideas about these
industries?
Rationalised-2023-24