--- PAGE 1 ---
INDIA
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
TEXTBOOK IN GEOGRAPHY FOR CLASS XI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 3 ---
INDIA
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
TEXTBOOK IN GEOGRAPHY FOR CLASS XI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 4 ---
First Edition
March 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
November 2006 , December 2007,
December 2008, January 2010,
January  2011, January  2013,
January  2014, December 2014,
February 2016, February 2017,
January 2018, January 2019,
January 2020, January 2021,
July 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
February 2022, Phalguna 1944
PD 150T RSP
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 70.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and
printed at Sita Fine Arts (P.) Ltd., A-16,
Naraina Industrial Area, Phase-II, New
Delhi - 110 028
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-
sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
:
Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production
:
Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business Manager :
Vipin Dewan
Chief Editor (In charge)
:
Bijnan Sutar
Editor
:
R.N. Bhardwaj
Production Assistant
:
Om Prakash
Cover
Shweta Rao
Illustration
Dilip Kumar
Cartography
Cartographic Design
Agency
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
ISBN  81-7450-538-5
11094 – INDIA: PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Textbook in Geography for Class XI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 5 ---
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks
a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our
system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi
and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement
this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the
maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred
system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space,
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the
information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as
the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and
sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we
perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed
body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual  calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and
space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development committee
responsible for this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory
committee for textbooks in Social Sciences, at the higher secondary
level, Professor Hari Vasudevan and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor M.H. Qureshi for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals
for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 6 ---
which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education,
Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and
suggestions which will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
 National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
     Research and Training
vi
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 7 ---
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on
students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the
content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to
rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed
by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
•
Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same
class
•
Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•
Difficulty level
•
Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-
learning
•
Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the
changes given above.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 9 ---
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SOCIAL SCIENCES AT THE HIGHER
SECONDARY LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of Calcutta,
Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISOR
M. H. Qureshi, Professor, Centre for the Study of Regional Development,
Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Aparna Pandey, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Ashok Diwakar, Lecturer,  Government P.G College, Sector 9, Gurgaon
B. S. Butola, Professor, Centre for the Study of Regional Development, Jawaharlal
Nehru University, New Delhi
Beena Srikumar, PGT, CRPF Public School, New Delhi
Noor Mohammad, Professor, Delhi School of Economics, Delhi University, Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Tannu Malik, Lecturer, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 10 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the
contribution of Bhagirathy Jhingran, Teacher, Pathways World School, Gurgaon
in the development of this textbook; the National Bureau of Soil Survey and Landuse
Planning (under ICAR), Government of India, for providing input for the chapter
on Soils. Special thanks are due to Savita Sinha, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Social Sciences and Humanties for her valuable support at every
stage of preparation of this textbook.
The Council is thankful to the Survey of India for Certification of Maps given
in the textbook. It also gratefully acknowledges the support of individuals and
organisations as listed below for providing various photographs used in this
textbook — M.H. Qureshi, Professor, CSRD, JNU for Figure 5.4 and 5.5; B.S. Butola,
Professor, CSRD, JNU for Figure 6.1, 6.5, 6.7 and 6.9; M.V. Srinivasan, Lecturer,
DESSH, NCERT for Figure 6.3; ITDC/Ministry of Tourism, Government of India
for Figure 2.1, 2.3, 2.8, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 3.1, 3.3, 4.4, 5.7; Ministry of Environment
and Forest, Government of India for Figure 5.1 and 5.6; Social Science Textbook
for Class VII, Part II (NCERT, 2005), for Figure 5.3 and Social Science Textbook
for Class VIII, Part II (NCERT, 2005), for Figure 2.10.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Anil Sharma
and Arvind Sharma, DTP Operators;  Sameer Khatana and Amar Kumar Prusty,
Copy Editors; Bharat Sanwaria, Shreshtha and Deepti Sharma, Proof Readers;
Dinesh Kumar, Computer Incharge, who have helped in giving a final shape to
this book. The contribution of the Publication Department, NCERT is also duly
acknowledged.
The following are applicable to all the maps of India used in this book
© Government of India, Copyright 2006
1.
The responsibility for the correctness of internal details rests with the publisher.
2.
The territorial waters of India extend into the sea to a distance of twelve nautical miles measured
from the appropriate base line.
3.
The administrative headquarters of Chandigarh, Haryana and Punjab are at Chandigarh.
4.
The interstate boundaries amongst Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya shown on this map
are  as interpreted from the “North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act.1971,” but have yet to be
verified.
5.
The external boundaries and coastlines of India agree with the Record/Master Copy certified by
Survey of India.
6.
The State boundaries between Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Jharkhand, and
Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh have not been verified by the Governments concerned.
7.
The spellings of names in this map, have been taken from various sources.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 11 ---
CONTENTS
FOREWORD
v
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
vii
UNIT I : INTRODUCTION
1-6
1.
India — Location
2
UNIT II : PHYSIOGRAPHY
7-26
2.
Structure and Physiography
8
3.
Drainage System
17
UNIT III : CLIMATE AND VEGETATION
27-51
4.
Climate
28
5.
Natural Vegetation
42
UNIT IV : NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS: CAUSES,
52-69
     CONSEQUENCES AND MANAGEMENT
6.
Natural Hazards and Disasters
53
GLOSSARY
70-72
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 12 ---
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
• before law and equal protection of laws;
• irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
• of opportunity in public employment;
• by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
• of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
• of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
• of protection of life and personal liberty;
• of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
• of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
• for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
• for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
• freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
• freedom to manage religious affairs;
• freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
• freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
• for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
• for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
• by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 13 ---
INTRODUCTION
This unit deals with
• Location — space relations and India’s place in the world
UNIT
I
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 14 ---
Y
ou have already seen the map of India
in the previous classes. Now you closely
examine the  map of India (Figure 1.1).
Mark the southernmost and northernmost
latitudes and the easternmost and
westernmost longitudes.
The mainland of India, extends from
Kashmir in the north to Kanniyakumari in the
south and  Arunachal Pradesh in the east to
Gujarat in the west. India’s territorial limit
further extends towards the sea upto 12
nautical miles (about 21.9 km) from the coast.
(See the box for conversion).
Statute mile
=
63,360 inches
Nautical mile
=
72,960 inches
1 Statute mile
=
about 1.6 km (1.584 km)
1 Nautical mile
=
about 1.8 km (1.852 km)
Our southern boundary extends upto
6°45' N latitude in the Bay of Bengal.  Let us
try to analyse the implications of having such
a vast longitudinal and latitudinal extent.
If you work out the latitudinal and
longitudinal extent of India, they are roughly
about 30 degrees, whereas the actual distance
measured from north to south extremity is
3,214 km, and that from east to west is only
2,933 km. What is the reason for this
difference? Consult Chapter 3 on the topic
Latitude, Longitude and Time in the book
Practical Work in Geography – Part I (NCERT,
2006) to find out.
This difference is based on the fact that the
distance between two longitudes decreases
towards the poles whereas the distance
between two latitudes remains the same
everywhere. Find out the distance between two
latitudes?
From the values of latitude, it is understood
that the southern part of the country lies
within the tropics and the northern part lies in
the sub-tropical zone or the warm temperate
zone. This location is responsible for large
variations in land forms, climate, soil types and
natural vegetation in the country.
Now, let us observe the longitudinal extent
and its implications on the Indian people. From
the values of longitude, it is quite discernible
that there is a variation of nearly 30 degrees,
which causes a time difference of nearly two
hours between the easternmost and the
westernmost parts of our country. You are
familiar with the concept of Indian Standard
Time (IST).  What is the use of the standard
meridian? While the sun rises in the
northeastern states about two hours earlier as
compared to Jaisalmer, the watches in
Dibrugarh, Imphal in the east and Jaisalmer,
Bhopal or Chennai in the other parts of India
show the same time.  Why does this happen?
INDIA – LOCATION
C H A P T E R
There is a general understanding among the countries of the world to select the standard
meridian in multiples of 7°30' of longitude. That is why 82°30' E  has been selected as the
‘standard meridian’ of India. Indian Standard Time is ahead of Greenwich Mean Time by
5 hours and 30 minutes.
There are some countries where there are more than one standard meridian due to
their vast east-to-west extent. For example, the USA has seven time zones.
Do you Remember?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 15 ---
3
INDIA – LOCATION
Figure 1.1 : India : Administrative Divisions
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 16 ---
4
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 1.2 : Location of India in the Eastern World
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 17 ---
5
INDIA – LOCATION
Name a few places in India through which the
standard meridian passes?
India with its area of 3.28 million sq. km
accounts for 2.4 per cent of the world’s land
surface area and stands as the seventh
largest country in the world.  Find out the
names of the countries which are larger than
India.
SIZE
The size of India has endowed her with great
physical diversity.  Thus, you may appreciate
the presence of lofty mountains in the north;
large rivers such as Ganga, Brahmaputra,
Mahanadi, Krishna, Godavari and Kaveri;
green forested hills in northeast and south
India; and the vast sandy expanse of
Marusthali.  You may further appreciate that
bounded by the Himalayas in the north,
Hindukush and Sulaiman ranges in the north-
west, Purvachal hills in the north-east and by
the large expanse of the Indian ocean in the
south, it forms a great geographic entity known
as the Indian subcontinent. It includes the
countries — Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan,
Bangladesh and India. The Himalayas,
together with other ranges, have acted as a
formidable physical barrier in the past.  Except
for a few mountain passes such as the Khyber,
the Bolan, the Shipkila, the Nathula, the
Bomdila, etc. it was difficult to cross it.  It has
contributed towards the evolving of a unique
regional identity of the Indian subcontinent.
By referring to the physical map of India
you can now describe the physical variations
which you would come across while travelling
from Kashmir to Kanniyakumari and from
Jaisalmer in Rajasthan to Imphal in Manipur.
Peninsular part of India extends towards
the Indian Ocean.  This has provided the
country with a coastline of 6,100 km in the
mainland and 7,517 km in the entire
geographical coast of the mainland plus the
island groups Andaman and Nicobar located
in the Bay of Bengal and the Lakshadweep in
the Arabian Sea.  Thus India, as a country, is
a physically diverse land providing occurrence
of varied resources.
INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS
Examine the location map of India (Figure 1.2).
You will notice that India is located in the
south-central part of the continent of Asia,
bordering the Indian ocean and its two arms
extending in the form of Bay of Bengal and the
Arabian Sea. This maritime location of
Peninsular India has provided links to its
neighbouring regions through the sea and air
routes.
Prepare a list of India’s neighbouring
countries by consulting the map.
Sri Lanka and Maldives are the two island
countries located in the Indian Ocean, which
are our neighbours.  Sri Lanka is separated from
India by the Gulf of Mannar and Palk Strait.
Differentiate between a Gulf and a Strait.
Do you think that physical barrier is a
hindrance in interaction with our neighbouring
countries in modern times?  Give some
examples how we have overcome these
difficulties in the present day.
Do you Remember?
School Bhuvan NCER T is a portal
providing map-based learning to bring
awareness among the students about
country’s 
natural 
resources,
environment and their role in
sustainable development. It is an
initiative of Bhuvan-NRSC/ISRO,
based 
on 
NCER T 
syllabus.
You can explore various maps of India
on http://bhuvan-app1.nrsc.gov.in/
mhrd_ncert/
Activity: Observe the map of India on an atlas/School Bhuvan NCERT portal
and collect information about states/districts/villages located near the
international border of India.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 18 ---
6
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
1.
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i)
Which one of the following latitudinal extent is relevant for the extent of
India’s area?
(a)
8°41'N - 35°7'N
(c)
8°4'N - 35°6'N
(b)
8°4'N - 37°6'N
(d)
6°45'N - 37°6'N
(ii)
Which one of the following countries shares the longest land frontier with
India?
(a) Bangladesh
(c)
Pakistan
(b) China
(d) Myanmar
(iii)
Which one of the following countries is larger in area than India?
(a) China
(c) France
(b) Egypt
(d) Iran
(iv)
Which one of the following longitudes is the standard meridian for India?
(a) 69°30'E
(c) 75°30'E
(b) 82°30'E
(d) 90°30'E
2.
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i)
Does India need to have more than one standard time?  If yes, why do you
think so?
(ii)
What are the implications of India having a long coastline?
(iii)
How is the latitudinal spread of India advantageous to her?
(iv)
While the sun rises earlier in the east, say Nagaland and also sets earlier,
how do the watches at Kohima and New Delhi show the same time?
Project/Activity
Activity based on Appendix I  (Teachers may help in the exercises by explaining
and getting it done by the students).
(i) On a graph paper, plot the number of districts in Madhya Pradesh,
Karnataka, Meghalaya, Goa, Kerala, Haryana.  Do the number of districts
have some relationship with the area of the state?
(ii) Which state amongst Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat, Arunachal
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Tripura and Rajasthan is the most thickly populated
and which one is the least densely populated?
(iii) Find out the relationship between the area of the state and the number of
districts.
(iv) Identify the states with coastal boundaries.
(v) Arrange the states from west to east which have only land boundary.
Activity based on Appendix II
(i) List the Union Territories which have coastal location.
(ii) How do you explain the variation in the area and population of NCT Delhi
and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands?
(iii) On a graph paper, draw a bar diagram to show the area and population of
all the Union Territories.
EXERCISES
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 19 ---
PHYSIOGRAPHY
This unit deals with
• Structure and Relief; physiographic divisions
• Drainage systems: concept of water sheds — the Himalayan
and the Peninsular
UNIT
II
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 20 ---
D
o you know that our earth also has  a
history.  The earth and its landforms
that we see today have evolved over a
very long time. Current estimation shows that
the earth is approximately 460 million years old.
Over these long years, it has undergone many
changes brought about primarily by the
endogenic and exogenic forces. These forces have
played a significant role in giving shape to various
surface and subsurface features of the earth.  You
have already studied  about the Plate Tectonics
and the movement of the Earth’s plates in the
book Fundamentals of Physical Geography
(NCERT, 2006).  Do you know that the Indian
plate was to the south of the equator millions of
years ago? Do you also know that it was much
larger in size and the Australian plate was a part
of it?  Over millions of years, this plate broke into
many parts and the Australian plate moved
towards the southeastern direction and the
Indian plate to the north. Can you map
different phases in the movement of the
Indian plate?  This northward movement
of the Indian plate is still continuing and it
has significant consequences on the
physical 
environment 
of 
the 
Indian
subcontinent.  Can you name some important
consequences of the northward movement
of the Indian plate?
It is primarily through the interplay of
these endogenic and exogenic forces and
lateral movements of the plates that the
present geological structure and geomorphologic
processes active in the Indian subcontinent came
into existence.  Based on the variations in its
geological structure and formations, India can  be
divided into three geological divisions. These
geological regions broadly follow the physical
features:
(i) The Penisular Block
(ii) The Himalayas and other Peninuslar
Mountains
(iii) Indo-Ganga-Brahmaputra Plain.
THE PENINSULAR BLOCK
The northern boundary of the Peninsular
Block may be taken as an irregular line
running from Kachchh along the western
flank of the Aravali Range near Delhi and
then roughly parallel to the Yamuna and
the Ganga as far as the Rajmahal Hills
and the Ganga delta. Apart from these,
the Karbi Anglong and the Meghalaya
Plateau in the northeast and Rajasthan
in the west are also extensions of this
block. The northeastern parts are
separated by the Malda fault in West
Bengal from the Chotanagpur plateau.  In
Rajasthan, the desert and other desert–
like features overlay  this block.
The Peninsula is formed essentially by
a great complex of very ancient gneisses
and granites, which constitutes a major
part of it. Since the Cambrian period, the
Peninsula has been standing like a rigid
block with the exception of some of its
western coast  which is submerged
beneath the sea and some other parts
changed due to tectonic activity without
affecting the original basement. As a part of
the Indo-Australian Plate, it has been subjected
to various vertical movements and block
faulting.  The rift valleys of the Narmada, the
Tapi and the Mahanadi and the Satpura block
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
C H A P T E R
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 21 ---
9
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
mountains are some examples of it.  The
Peninsula mostly consists of relict and residual
mountains like the Aravali hills, the Nallamala
hills, the Javadi hills, the Veliconda hills, the
Palkonda range and the Mahendragiri hills, etc.
The river valleys here are shallow with low
gradients.
You are aware of the method of
calculating the gradient as a part of your
study of the book Practical Work in
Geography– Part I  (NCERT, 2006).  Can
you calculate the gradient of the
Himalayan and the Peninsular rivers and
draw the comparisons?
Most of the east flowing rivers form
deltas before entering  into the Bay of
Bengal.  The deltas formed by the
Mahanadi, the Krishna, the Kaveri and the
Godavari  are important examples.
THE HIMALAYAS AND OTHER
PENINSULAR MOUNTAINS
The Himalayas along with other Peninsular
mountains are young, weak and flexible in their
geological structure unlike the rigid and stable
Peninsular Block. Consequently, they are still
subjected to the interplay of exogenic and
endogenic forces, resulting in the development
of faults, folds and thrust plains. These
mountains are tectonic in origin, dissected by
fast-flowing rivers which are in their youthful
stage. Various landforms like gorges, V-shaped
valleys, rapids, waterfalls, etc. are indicative of
this stage.
INDO-GANGA-BRAHMAPUTRA PLAIN
The third geological division of India
comprises the plains formed by the river
Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
Originally, it was a geo-synclinal
depression which attained its maximum
development during the third phase of
the Himalayan mountain formation
approximately about 64 million years ago.
Since then, it has been gradually filled
by the sediments brought by the
Himalayan 
and 
Peninsular 
rivers.
Average depth of alluvial deposits in
these plains ranges from 1,000-2,000 m.
It is evident from the above discussion
that there are significant variations
among the different regions of India in
terms of their geological structure, which
has far-reaching impact upon other
related aspects.  Variations in the
physiography and relief are important
among these. The relief and physiography
of India has been greatly influenced by
the geological and geomorphological
processes 
active 
in 
the 
Indian
subcontinent.
PHYSIOGRAPHY
‘Physiography’ of an area is the outcome
of structure, process and the stage of
development. The land of India is
characterised by great diversity in its
physical features. The north has a vast
expanse of rugged topography consisting
of a series of mountain ranges with varied
peaks, beautiful valleys and deep gorges.
The south consists of stable table land
with highly dissected plateaus, denuded
rocks and developed series of scarps. In
between these two lies the vast north Indian
plain.
Based on these macro variations, India
can be divided into the following
physiographic divisions:
(1) The Northern and North-eastern
Mountains
(2) The Northern Plain
Figure 2.1 : A Gorge
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 22 ---
10
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 2.2 : India : Physical
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 23 ---
11
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
(3) The Peninsular Plateau
(4) The Indian Desert
(5) The Coastal Plains
(6) The Islands.
The North and Northeastern Mountains
The North and Northeastern Mountains consist
of the Himalayas and the Northeastern hills.
The Himalayas consist of a series of parallel
mountain ranges. Some of the important
ranges are the Greater Himalayan range,
which includes the Great Himalayas and
the Shiwalik. The general orientation of these
ranges is from northwest to the southeast
direction in the northwestern part of India.
Himalayas in the Darjiling and Sikkim regions
lie in an eastwest direction, while in Arunachal
Pradesh they are from southwest to the
northwest direction. In Nagaland, Manipur and
Mizoram, they are in the northsouth direction.
The approximate length of the Great Himalayan
range, also known as the central axial range, is
2,500 km from east to west, and their width varies
between 160-400 km from north to south. It  is
also evident from the map that the Himalayas
stand almost like a strong and long wall between
the Indian subcontinent and the Central and East
Asian countries.
Himalayas are not only the physical barrier,
they are also a climatic, drainage and cultural
divide.  Can you identify the impact of Himalayas
on the geoenvironment of the countries of South
Asia?  Can you find some other examples of
similar geoenvironmental divide in the world?
The Northern Plains
The northern plains are formed by the
alluvial deposits brought by the rivers –
the Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
These plains extend approximately 3,200 km
from the east to the west. The average width
of these plains varies between 150-300 km.
The maximum depth of alluvium deposits
varies between 1,000-2,000 m. From the
north to the south, these can be divided into
three major zones: the Bhabar, the Tarai and
the alluvial plains. The alluvial plains can be
further divided into the Khadar and the
Bhangar.
Bhabar is a narrow belt ranging between
8-10 km parallel to the Shiwalik foothills at
the break-up of the slope. As a result of this,
the streams and rivers coming from the
mountains deposit heavy materials of rocks
and boulders, and at times, disappear in this
zone. South of the Bhabar is the Tarai belt, with
an approximate width of 10-20 km where most
of the streams and rivers re-emerge without
having any properly demarcated channel,
thereby, creating  marshy and swampy
conditions known as the Tarai. This has a
luxurious growth of natural vegetation and
houses a varied wildlife.
The south of Tarai is a belt consisting of
old and new alluvial deposits known as the
Bhangar and Khadar respectively. These
plains have characteristic features of mature
stage of fluvial erosional and depositional
landforms such as sand bars, meanders, ox-
bow lakes and braided channels. The
Brahmaputra plains are known for their
riverine  islands and sand bars. Most of
these areas are subjected to periodic floods
Figure 2.3 : The Himalayas
Figure 2.4 : Northern Plain
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 24 ---
12
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
and shifting river courses forming braided
streams.
The mouths of these mighty rivers also form
some of the largest deltas of the world, for
example, the famous Sunderbans delta.
Otherwise, this is a featureless plain with a
general elevation of 50-150 m above the mean
sea level. The states of Haryana and Delhi form
a water divide between the Indus and the
Ganga river systems.  As opposed to this, the
Brahmaputra river flows from the northeast to
the southwest direction before it takes an
almost 90° southward turn at Dhubri before
it enters into Bangladesh. These river valley
plains have a fertile alluvial soil cover which
supports a variety of crops like wheat, rice,
sugarcane and jute, and hence, supports a
large population.
The Peninsular Plateau
Rising from the height of 150 m above the river
plains up to an elevation of 600-900 m is the
irregular triangle known as the Peninsular
plateau. Delhi ridge in the northwest, (extension
of Aravalis), the Rajmahal hills in the east, Gir
range in the west and the Cardamom hills in
the south constitute the outer extent of the
Peninsular plateau. However, an extension of
this is also seen in the northeast, in the form of
Shillong and Karbi-Anglong plateau. The
Peninsular India is made up of a series of
patland plateaus such as the Hazaribagh
plateau, the Palamu plateau, the Ranchi
plateau, the Malwa plateau, the Coimbatore
plateau and the Karnataka plateau, etc. This
is one of the oldest and the most stable
landmass of  India. The general elevation of the
plateau is from the west to the east,  which is
also proved by the pattern of the flow of rivers.
Name some rivers of the Peninsular plateau
which have their confluence in the Bay of
Bengal and the Arabian sea and mention some
landforms which are typical to the  east flowing
rivers but are absent in the west flowing rivers.
Some of the important physiographic features
of this region are tors, block mountains, rift
valleys, spurs, bare rocky structures, series of
hummocky hills and wall-like quartzite dykes
offering natural sites for water storage. The
western and northwestern part of the plateau
has an emphatic presence of black soil.
This Peninsular plateau has undergone
recurrent phases of upliftment and
submergence accompanied by crustal faulting
and fractures. (The Bhima fault  needs special
mention, because of its recurrent seismic
activities).  These spatial variations have
brought in elements of diversity in the relief
of the Peninsular plateau. The northwestern
part of the plateau has a complex relief of
ravines and gorges. The ravines of Chambal,
Bhind and Morena are some of the well-known
examples.
On the basis of the prominent relief
features, the Peninsular plateau can be
divided into three broad groups:
(i) The Deccan Plateau
(ii) The Central Highlands
(iii) The Northeastern Plateau.
The Deccan Plateau
This is bordered by the Western Ghats in the
west, Eastern Ghats in the east and the
Satpura, Maikal range and Mahadeo hills in
the north.  Western Ghats are locally known
by different names such as Sahyadri in
Maharashtra, Nilgiri hills in Karnataka and
Tamil Nadu and Anaimalai hills and
Cardamom hills in Kerala.  Western Ghats are
Figure 2.5 : A Part of Peninsular Plateau
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 25 ---
13
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
comparatively higher in elevation and more
continuous than the Eastern Ghats. Their
average elevation is about 1,500 m with the
height increasing from north to south.
‘Anaimudi’ (2,695 m), the highest peak of
Peninsular plateau is located on the
Anaimalai hills of the Western Ghats followed
by Dodabetta (2,637 m) on the Nilgiri hills.
Most of the Peninsular rivers have their origin
in the Western Ghats. Eastern Ghats
comprising the discontinuous and low hills
are highly eroded by the rivers such as the
Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna, the
Kaveri, etc. Some of the important ranges
include the Javadi hills, the Palconda range,
the Nallamala hills, the Mahendragiri hills, etc.
The Eastern and the Western Ghats meet each
other at the Nilgiri hills.
The Central Highlands
They are bounded to the west by the Aravali
range. The Satpura range is formed by a
series of scarped plateaus on the south,
generally at an elevation varying between
600-900 m above the mean sea level.  This
forms the northernmost boundary of the
Deccan plateau. It is a classic example of the
relict mountains which are highly denuded
and form discontinuous ranges. The
extension of the Peninsular plateau can be
seen as far as Jaisalmer in the West, where it
has been covered by the longitudinal sand
ridges and crescent-shaped sand dunes
called barchans. This region has undergone
metamorphic processes in its geological
history, which can be corroborated by the
presence of metamorphic rocks such as
marble, slate, gneiss, etc.
The general elevation of the Central
Highlands ranges between 700-1,000 m
above the mean sea level and it slopes
towards the north and northeastern
directions. Most of the tributaries of the river
Yamuna have their origin in the Vindhyan
and Kaimur ranges. Banas is the only
significant tributary of the river Chambal that
originates from the Aravalli in the west.  An
eastern extension of the Central Highland is
formed by the Rajmahal hills, to the south of
which lies a large reserve of mineral resources
in the Chotanagpur plateau.
The Northeastern Plateau
In fact it is an extension of the main Peninsular
plateau. It is believed that due to the force
exerted by the northeastward movement of the
Indian plate at the time of the Himalayan
origin, a huge fault was created between the
Rajmahal hills and the Meghalaya plateau.
Later, this depression got filled up by the
deposition activity of the numerous rivers.
Today, the Meghalaya and Karbi Anglong
plateau stand detached from the main
Peninsular Block.  The Meghalaya plateau is
further sub-divided into three: (i) The Garo
Hills; (ii) The Khasi Hills; (iii) The Jaintia Hills,
named after the tribal groups inhabiting this
region.  An extension of this is also seen in the
Karbi Anglong hills of Assam.  Similar to the
Chotanagpur plateau, the Meghalaya plateau
is also rich in mineral resources like coal, iron
ore, sillimanite, limestone and uranium.  This
area receives maximum rainfall from the south
west monsoon. As a result, the Meghalaya
plateau has a highly eroded surface.
Cherrapunji displays a bare rocky surface
devoid of any permanent vegetation cover.
The Indian Desert
To the northwest of the Aravali hills lies the
Great Indian desert. It is a land of undulating
topography dotted with longitudinal dunes
and barchans. This region receives low rainfall
below 150 mm per year; hence, it has arid
climate with low vegetation cover. It is because
of these characteristic features that this is also
known as Marusthali. It is believed that
during the Mesozoic era, this region was
under the sea. This can be corroborated
by the evidence available at wood fossils
park at Aakal and marine deposits around
Brahmsar, 
near 
Jaisalmer 
(The
approximate age of the wood-fossils is
estimated to be 180 million years). Though
the underlying rock structure of the desert
is an extension of the Peninsular plateau,
yet, due to extreme arid conditions, its surface
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 26 ---
14
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
features have been carved by physical
weathering and wind actions. Some of the well
pronounced desert land features present here
are mushroom rocks, shifting dunes and oasis
(mostly in its southern part). On the basis of
the orientation, the desert can be divided into
two parts: the northern part is sloping towards
Sindh and the southern towards the Rann of
Kachchh. Most of the rivers in this region are
ephemeral.  The Luni river flowing in the
southern part of the desert is of some
significance.  Low precipitation and high
evaporation makes it a water deficit region.
There are some streams which disappear after
flowing for some distance and present a typical
case of inland drainage by joining a lake or
playa.  The lakes and the playas have brackish
water which is the main source of obtaining salt.
The Coastal Plains
You have already read that India has a long
coastline . On the basis of the location and
active geomorphological processes, it can be
broadly divided into two: (i) the western
coastal plains;  (ii) the eastern coastal plains.
The western coastal plains are an example
of submerged coastal plain. It is believed that
the city of Dwaraka which was once a part of
the Indian mainland situated along the west
coast is submerged under water. Because of
this submergence it is a narrow belt and
provides natural conditions for the
development of ports and harbours. Kandla,
Mazagaon, JLN port Navha Sheva, Marmagao,
Mangalore, Cochin, etc. are some of the
important natural ports located along the
west coast. Extending from the Gujarat coast
in the north to the Kerala coast in the south,
the western coast may be divided into
following divisions – the Kachchh and
Kathiawar coast in Gujarat, Konkan coast in
Maharashtra, Goan coast and Malabar coast
in Karnataka and Kerala respectively.  The
western coastal plains are narrow in the
middle and get broader towards north and
south. The rivers flowing through this coastal
plain do not form any delta. The Malabar
coast  has got certain distinguishing features
in the form of ‘Kayals’ (backwaters), which are
used for fishing, inland navigation and also
due to its special attraction for tourists. Every
year the famous Nehru Trophy Vallamkali
(boat race) is held in Punnamada Kayal in
Kerala.
As compared to the western coastal plain,
the eastern coastal plain is broader and is an
example of an emergent coast.  There are well-
developed deltas here, formed by the rivers
flowing eastward in to the Bay of Bengal. These
include the deltas of the Mahanadi, the
Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri. Because
of its emergent nature, it has less number of
ports and harbours. The continental shelf
extends up to 500 km into the sea, which
makes it difficult for the development of
good ports and harbours. Name some ports
on the eastern coast.
Figure 2.6 : The Indian Desert
Can you identify the type of sand
dunes shown in this picture?
Figure 2.7 : Coastal Plains
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 27 ---
15
STRUCTURE AND PHYSIOGRAPHY
The Islands
There are two major island groups in India –
one in the Bay of Bengal and the other in the
Arabian Sea. The Bay of Bengal island groups
consist of about 572 islands/islets. These are
situated roughly between 6°°N-14°°N and
92°°E -94°°E. The two principal groups of islets
include the Ritchie’s archipelago and the
Labrynth island. The entire group of island is
divided into two broad categories – the
Andaman in the north and the Nicobar in
the south. They are separated by a
waterbody which is called the Ten degree
channel. It is believed that these islands are
an elevated portion of submarine mountains.
However, some smaller islands are volcanic in
origin. Barren island, the only active volcano
in India is also situated in the Nicobar islands.
Some important mountain peaks in
Andaman and Nicobar Islands are Saddle
peak (North Andaman – 738 m), Mount
Diavolo (Middle Andaman – 515 m), Mount
Koyob (South Andaman – 460 m) and Mount
Thuiller (Great Nicobar – 642 m).
The coastal line has some coral deposits,
and beautiful beaches. These islands receive
convectional rainfall and have an equatorial
type of vegetation.
On  26 December 2004, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands experienced one of the most
devasting natural calamity. Can you name the calamity and identify some other areas
which were adversely affected by the same calamity?  What was its major consequence?
Figure 2.8 : An Island
The islands of the Arabian sea include
Lakshadweep and Minicoy.  These are
scattered between 8°°N-12°°N  and 71°°E -74°°E
longitude. These islands are located at a
distance of 280 km-480 km off the Kerala
coast. The entire island group is built of
coral deposits. There are approximately 36
islands of which 11 are inhabited. Minicoy is
the largest island with an area of 453 sq. km.
The entire group of islands is broadly divided
by the Ten degree channel, north of  which is
the  Amini Island and to the south of the
Canannore Island. The Islands of this
archipelago have storm beaches consisting of
unconsolidated pebbles, shingles, cobbles and
boulders on the eastern seaboard.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 28 ---
16
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
1.
Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Which one of the water bodies separates the Andaman from the Nicobar?
(a) 11°° Channel
(c) 10°° Channel
(b) Gulf of Mannar
(d) Andaman Sea
(ii) On which of the following hill range is the ‘Dodabeta’ peak situated?
(a) Nilgiri hills
(c) Cardamom hills
(b) Anaimalai hills
(d) Nallamala hills
2.
Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) If a person is to travel to Lakshadweep, from which coastal plain does he
prefer and why?
(ii) Where in India will you find a cold desert?  Name some important
ranges of this region.
(iii) Why is the western coastal plain is devoid of any delta?
3 . Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
(i) Make a comparison of the island groups of the Arabian Sea and the
Bay of Bengal.
(ii) What are the important geomorphological features found in the river
valley plains?
(iii) If you move from Badrinath to Sunderbans delta along the course of
the river Ganga, what major geomorphological features will you come
across?
Project/Activity
(i)
Make a list of major Himalayan peaks from the west to the east with the
help of an atlas.
(ii)
Identify the major landforms of your state and analyse the major economic
activity practised by the people in each landform.
EXERCISES
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 29 ---
Y
ou have observed water flowing through
the rivers, nalas and even channels
during rainy season which drain the
excess water. Had these channels not been
there, large-scale flooding would have
occurred. Wherever channels are ill-defined or
choked, flooding is a common phenomenon.
The flow of water through well-defined
channels is known as ‘drainage’ and the
network of such channels is called a
‘drainage system’. The drainage pattern
of an area is the outcome of the geological
time period, nature and structure of
rocks, topography, slope, amount of
water flowing and the periodicity of
the flow.
Do you have a river near your village or city?
Have you ever been there for boating or bathing?
Is it perennial (always with water) or ephemeral
(water during rainy season, and dry, otherwise)?
Do you know that rivers flow in the same
direction? You have studied about slopes in the
other two textbooks of geography (NCERT,
2006) in this class . Can you, then, explain the
reason for water flowing from one direction to
the other? Why do the rivers originating from the
Himalayas in the northern India and the Western
Ghat in the southern India flow towards the east
and discharge their waters in the Bay of Bengal?
A river drains the water collected from a
specific area, which is called its ‘catchment area’.
An area drained by a river and its tributaries
is called a drainage basin. The boundary line
DRAINAGE SYSTEM
C H A P T E R
Figure 3.1 : A River in the Mountainous Region
Important Drainage Patterns
(i)
The drainage pattern resembling the branches of a tree is known as “dendritic” the examples
of which are the rivers of northern plain.
(ii)
When the rivers originate from a hill and flow in all directions, the drainage pattern is known
as ‘radial’. The rivers originating from the Amarkantak range present a good example of it.
(iii)
When the primary tributaries of rivers flow parallel to each other and secondary tributaries
join them at right angles, the pattern is known as ‘trellis’.
(iv)
When the rivers discharge their waters from all directions in a lake or depression, the
pattern is know as ‘centripetal’.
Find out some of the patterns in the topo sheet given in Chapter 5 of Practical Work in
Geography– Part I (NCERT, 2006).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 30 ---
18
INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Figure 3.2 : Major Rivers of India
Rationalised 2023-24