--- PAGE 2 ---
CONTENTS
Foreword --- iii
Letter to the Readers --- v
Chapter 1
Challenges of Nation Building 2
Chapter 2
Era of One party Dominance 26
Chapter 3
Politics of Planned Development 46
Chapter 4
India’s External Relations 64
Chapter 5
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 82
Chapter 6
The Crisis of Democratic Order 102
Chapter 7
Rise of Popular Movements 128
Chapter 8
Regional Aspirations 148
Chapter 9
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 172

--- PAGE 3 ---
In this chapter…
The first few years in the life of independent India were full of challenges.
Some of the most pressing ones concerned national unity and
territorial integrity of India. We begin the story of politics in India since
Independence by looking at how three of these challenges of nation-
building were successfully negotiated in the first decade after 1947.
• Freedom came with Partition, which resulted in large scale violence
and displacement and challenged the very idea of a secular India.
(cid:129) The integration of the princely states into the Indian union needed
urgent resolution.
(cid:129) The internal boundaries of the country needed to be drawn afresh to
meet the aspirations of the people who spoke different languages.
In the next two chapters we shall turn to other kinds of challenges faced
by the country in this early phase.
hanaJ
linuS
:tiderC
Hindus and Muslims in
Kolkata in 1947 marked
the end of communal
violence by jointly flying
the flags of India and
Pakistan from trucks
patrolling the city.
This rare photograph
captured the joy of
freedom and the tragedy
of partition in India and
in Pakistan.

--- PAGE 4 ---
1
challenges of
nation building
Challenges for the new nation
At the hour of midnight on 14-15 August 1947, India attained independence.
Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of free India, addressed a special session
of the Constituent Assembly that night. This was the famous ‘tryst with destiny’
speech that you are familiar with.
This was the moment Indians had been waiting for. You have read in your history
textbooks that there were many voices in our national movement. But there were
two goals almost everyone agreed upon: one, that after Independence, we shall run
our country through democratic government; and two, that the government will be
run for the good of all, particularly the poor and the socially disadvantaged groups.
Now that the country was independent, the time had come to realise the promise of
freedom.
This was not going to be easy. India was born in very difficult circumstances.
Perhaps no other country by then was born in a situation more difficult than that of
India in 1947. Freedom came with the partition of the country. The year 1947 was a
year of unprecedented violence and trauma of displacement. It was in this situation
that independent India started on its journey to achieve several objectives. Yet the
turmoil that accompanied independence did not make our leaders lose sight of the
multiple challenges that faced the new nation.
BIP
:tiderC
retpahc
Prime Minister Jawahar
Lal Nehru speaking from
theRedFort,
15 August 1947

--- PAGE 5 ---
4 Politics in India since Independence
Three Challenges
Broadly, independent India faced three kinds of challenges. The first
and the immediate challenge was to shape a nation that was united,
yet accommodative of the diversity in our society. India was a land
of continental size and diversity. Its people spoke different languages
and followed different cultures and religions. At that time it was
widely believed that a country full of such kinds of diversity could
not remain together for long. The partition of the country appeared to
prove everyone’s worst fears. There were serious questions about the
future of India: Would India survive as a unified country? Would it do
so by emphasising national unity at the cost of every other objective?
Would it mean rejecting all regional and sub-national identities? And
there was an urgent question: How was integration of the territory of
India to be achieved?
The second challenge was to establish democracy. You have
already studied the Indian Constitution. You know that the
Constitution granted fundamental rights and extended the right to
vote to every citizen. India adopted representative democracy based
on the parliamentary form of government. These features ensure that
the political competition would take place in a democratic framework.
7491
yluJ
91
,semiT
natsudniH
“
Tomorrow we shall be
free from the slavery of the
British domination. But
at midnight India“ will be
partitioned. Tomorrow will
thus be a day of rejoicing as
well as of mourning.
Mahatma Gandhi
14 August 1947,
Kolkata.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Challenges of Nation Building 5
A democratic constitution is necessary but not sufficient for
establishing a democracy. The challenge was to develop democratic
practices in accordance with the Constitution.
The third challenge was to ensure the development and well-being
of the entire society and not only of some sections. Here again the
Constitution clearly laid down the principle of equality and special
protection to socially disadvantaged groups and religious and
cultural communities. The Constitution also set out in the Directive
Principles of State Policy the welfare goals that democratic politics
must achieve. The real challenge now was to evolve effective policies
for economic development and eradication of poverty.
How did independent India respond to these challenges? To what
I always wanted a time
extent did India succeed in achieving the various objectives set out
machine, so that I can
by the Constitution? This entire book is an attempt to respond to go back and participate
these questions. The book tells the story of politics in India since in the celebrations of
Independence so as to equip you to develop your own answers to 15 August 1947. But
big questions like these. In the first three chapters we look at how this looks different
from what I thought.
the three challenges mentioned above were faced in the early years
after Independence.
In this chapter, we focus on the first challenge of nation-
building that occupied centre-stage in the years immediately after
Independence. We begin by looking at the events that formed the
context of Independence. This can help us understand why the
issue of national unity and security became a primary challenge
at the time of Independence. We shall then see how India chose to
shape itself into a nation, united by a shared history and common
destiny. This unity had to reflect the aspirations of people across
the different regions and deal with the disparities that existed
among regions and different sections of people. In the next two
chapters we shall turn to the challenge of establishing a democracy
and achieving economic development with equality and justice.
These three stamps were issued in 1950 to mark the first RepublicDay on 26 January 1950. What
do the images on these stamps tell you about the challenges to the new republic? If you were asked
to design these stamps in 1950, which images would you have chosen?

--- PAGE 7 ---
The Dawn of Freedom
Faiz Ahmed Faiz
This scarred, marred brightness,
this bitten-by-night dawn -
The one that was awaited, surely, this is not that dawn.
This is not the dawn yearning for which
Faiz Ahmed Faiz (1911-1984) Born
Had we set out, friends, hoping to find
in Sialkot; stayed in Pakistan after
sometime, somewhere
Partition. A leftist in his political
The final destination of stars in the wilderness of the sky.
leanings, he opposed the Pakistani
Somewhere, at least, must be a shore for the languid
regime and was imprisoned. Collections
waves of the night,
of his poetry include Naksh-e-Fariyadi,
Somewhere at least must anchor the sad
Dast-e-Saba and Zindan-Nama.
boat of the heart …
Regarded as one of the greatest poets
Translation of an extract from Urdu poem Subh-e-azadi
of South Asia in the twentieth century.
We should begin to work in that spirit and in course of time all these
angularities of the majority and minority communities, the Hindu community
and the Muslim community – because even as regards Muslims you have
Pathans,Punjabis, Shias, Sunnis and so on and among the Hindus you have
Brahmins, Vaishnavas, Khatris, also Bengalees, Madrasis, and so on – will
vanish. … You are free; you are free to go to your temples, you are free to
go to your mosques or to any other place of worship in this State of Pakistan.
You may belong to any religion or caste or creed – that has nothing to do with
the business of the State.
Mohammad Ali Jinnah, Presidential Address to the Constituent Assembly of Pakistan at
Karachi,11 August 1947.
7491
tsuguA
41
,ihcaraK
,nwaD
6 P

--- PAGE 8 ---
Today I call Waris Shah
Amrita Pritam
Today, I call Waris Shah, “Speak from your grave”
And turn, today, the book of love’s next affectionate page
Once, a daughter of Punjab cried and you wrote a wailing saga
Today, a million daughters, cry to you, Waris Shah
Rise! O’ narrator of the grieving; rise! look at your Punjab
Today, fields are lined with corpses, and blood fills the Chenab Amrita Pritam (1919–2005):
Someone has mixed poison in the five rivers’ flow A prominent Punjabi poet and
Their deadly water is, now, irrigating our lands galore fiction writer. Recipient of Sahitya
This fertile land is sprouting, venom from every pore Akademi Award, Padma Shree and
The sky is turning red from endless cries of gore Jnanapeeth Award. After Partition
The toxic forest wind, screams from inside its wake she made Delhi her second home.
Turning each flute’s bamboo-shoot, into a deadly snake … She was active in writing and
editing ‘Nagmani’ a Punjabi monthly
Translation of an extract from a Punjabi poem “Aaj Akhan Waris Shah Nun”
magazine till her last.
We have a Muslim minority who are so large in numbers that they cannot,
even if they want, go anywhere else. That is a basic fact about which there can
be no argument. Whatever the provocation from Pakistan and whatever the
indignities and horrors inflicted on non-Muslims there, we have got to deal with
this minority in a civilised manner. We must give them security and the rights of
citizens in a democratic State. If we fail to do so, we shall have a festering sore
which will eventually poison the whole body politic and probably destroy it.
Jawaharlal Nehru, Letter to Chief Ministers, 15 October 1947.
7491
tsuguA
51
,yabmoB
,aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
7

--- PAGE 9 ---
8 Politics in India since Independence
Partition: displacement and rehabilitation
On 14-15 August 1947, not one but two nation-states came into
(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:259) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:51)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86) (cid:68) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:181)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:182)(cid:15)
the division of British India into India and Pakistan. The drawing
of the border demarcating the territory of each country marked the
culmination of political developments that you have read about in
the history textbooks. According to the ‘two-nation theory’ advanced
by the Muslim League, India consisted of not one but two ‘people’,
Hindus and Muslims. That is why it demanded Pakistan, a separate
country for the Muslims. The Congress opposed this theory and the
demand for Pakistan. But several political developments in 1940s, the
political competition between the Congress and the Muslim League
and the British role led to the decision for the creation of Pakistan.
Process of Partition
Thus it was decided that what was till then known as ‘India’ would
be divided into two countries, ‘India’ and ‘Pakistan’. Such a division
was not only very painful, but also very difficult to decide and to
implement. It was decided to follow the principle of religious majorities.
This basically means that areas where the Muslims were in majority
would make up the territory of Pakistan. The rest was to stay with
India.
The idea might appear simple, but it presented all kinds of
difficulties. First of all, there was no single belt of Muslim majority
areas in British India. There were two areas of concentration, one
in the west and one in the east. There was no way these two parts
could be joined. So it was decided that the new country, Pakistan, will
comprise two territories, West and East Pakistan separated by a long
expanse of Indian territory. Secondly, not all Muslim majority areas
wanted to be in Pakistan. Khan Abdul Gaffar Khan, the undisputed
leader of the North Western Frontier Province and known as ‘Frontier
Gandhi’, was staunchly opposed to the two-nation theory. Eventually,
his voice was simply ignored and the NWFP was made to merge with
Pakistan.
The third problem was that two of the Muslim majority provinces
of British India, Punjab and Bengal, had very large areas where the
non-Muslims were in majority. Eventually it was decided that these
two provinces would be bifurcated according to the religious majority
Oh, now I
at the district or even lower level. This decision could not be made
understand! What
by the midnight of 14-15 August. It meant that a large number of
was ‘East’ Bengal
people did not know on the day of Independence whether they were in
has now become
Bangladesh. That is India or in Pakistan. The Partition of these two provinces caused the
why our Bengal is deepest trauma of Partition.
called ‘West’ Bengal!
This was related to the fourth and the most intractable of all the
problems of partition. This was the problem of ‘minorities’ on both

--- PAGE 10 ---
Challenges of Nation Building 9
sides of the border. Lakhs of Hindus and Sikhs in the areas that were
now in Pakistan and an equally large number of Muslims on the Indian
side of Punjab and Bengal (and to some extent Delhi and surrounding
areas) found themselves trapped. They were to discover that they
were undesirable aliens in their own home, in the land where they
and their ancestors had lived for centuries. As soon as it became clear
that the country was going to be partitioned, the minorities on both
sides became easy targets of attack. No one had quite anticipated the
scale of this problem. No one had any plans for handling this. Initially,
the people and political leaders kept hoping that this violence was
temporary and would be controlled soon. But very soon the violence
went out of control. The minorities on both sides of the border were
left with no option except to leave their homes, often at a few hours’
notice.
Consequences of Partition
The year 1947 was the year of one of the largest, most abrupt,
unplanned and tragic transfer of population that human history
has known. There were killings and atrocities on both sides of the
border. In the name of religion people of one community ruthlessly
killed and maimed people of the other community. Cities like Lahore,
A train full of ‘refugees’ in 1947.
.APD
:tiderC

--- PAGE 11 ---
10 Politics in India since Independence
Amritsar and Kolkata became divided into
Hospitality Delayed ‘communal zones’. Muslims would avoid
going into an area where mainly Hindus
Saadat Hasan Manto
or Sikhs lived; similarly the Hindus and
Rioters brought the running train to a halt.
Sikhs stayed away from areas of Muslim
People belonging to the other community
predominance.
were pulled out and slaughtered with swords
and bullets. Forced to abandon their homes and
move across borders, people went through
The remaining passengers were treated to
immense sufferings. Minorities on both
halwa, fruits and milk.
sides of the border fled their home and
The chief organiser said, ‘Brothers and often secured temporary shelter in ‘refugee
sisters, news of this train’s arrival was camps’. They often found unhelpful local
delayed. That is why we have not been administration and police in what was till
able to entertain you lavishly – the way we recently their own country. They travelled
wanted to.’ to the other side of the new border by all
sorts of means, often by foot. Even during
Source: English translation of Urdu short
this journey they were often attacked,
story Kasre-Nafsi
killed or raped. Thousands of women were
abducted on both sides of the border. They
were made to convert to the religion of the
abductor and were forced into marriage. In many cases women were
killed by their own family members to preserve the ‘family honour’.
Many children were separated from their parents. Those who did
manage to cross the border found that they had no home. For lakhs
of these ‘refugees’ the
country’s freedom meant
life in ‘refugee camps’, for
months and sometimes
for years.
Writers, poets and
film-makers in India and
Pakistan have expressed
the ruthlessness of the
killings and the suffering
of displacement and
violence in their novels,
short-stories, poems and
films. While recounting
the trauma of Partition,
they have often used the
phrase that the survivors
themselves used to
describe Partition — as
a ‘division of hearts’.
The Partition was
not merely a division
Gandhi in Noakhali (now in Bangladesh) in 1947. of properties, liabilities
yrarbiL
dna
muesuM
lairomeM
urheN
:tiderC

--- PAGE 12 ---
Challenges of Nation Building 11
and assets, or a political division of
the country and the administrative
apparatus. What also got divided were
the financial assets, and things like
tables, chairs, typewriters, paper-clips,
books and also musical instruments
of the police band! The employees of
the government and the railways were
also ‘divided’. Above all, it was a violent
separation of communities who had
hitherto lived together as neighbours.
It is estimated that the Partition forced
about 80 lakh people to migrate across
the new border. Between five to ten lakh
people were killed in Partition related
violence.
Beyond the administrative concerns
and financial strains, however, the
Partition posed another deeper issue.
The leaders of the Indian national
struggle did not believe in the two-nation
theory. And yet, partition on religious
basis had taken place. Did that make
India a Hindu nation automatically?
Even after large scale migration of
Muslims to the newly created Pakistan,
the Muslim population in India
accounted for 12 per cent of the total
population in 1951. So, how would the
government of India treat its Muslim
citizens and other religious minorities
(Sikhs, Christians, Jains, Buddhists,
Parsis and Jews)? The Partition had
already created severe conflict between
the two communities.
There were competing political
interests behind these conflicts. The
Muslim League was formed to protect
the interests of the Muslims in colonial
India. It was in the forefront of the
demand for a separate Muslim nation.
Similarly, there were organisations,
which were trying to organise the
Hindus in order to turn India into a
Hindu nation. But most leaders of the
national movement believed that India
must treat persons of all religions
mliF
a
hctaw
s’teL
G H
ARAM AWA
Salim Mirza, a shoe manufacturer
in Agra, increasingly finds himself
a stranger amid the people he
has lived with all his life. He feels
lost in the emerging reality after
Partition. His business suffers
and a refugee from the other side
of partitioned India occupies his
ancestral dwelling. His daughter
too has a tragic end. He believes
that things would soon be normal
again.
But many of his family members
decide to move to Pakistan. Salim
is torn between an impulse to
move out to Pakistan and an urge
to stay back. A decisive moment
comes when Salim witnesses a
students’ procession demanding
fair treatment from the government.
His son Sikandar has joined the
procession. Can you imagine
what Mirza Salim finally did? What
do you think you would have done
in these circumstances?
Year: 1973
Director: M.S. Sathyu
Screenplay: Kaifi Azmi
Actors: Balraj Sahani, Jalal Aga,
Farouque Sheikh, Gita Siddharth

--- PAGE 13 ---
12
Mahatma Gandhi’s sacrifice
On the 15th August 1947 Mahatma Gandhi did not participate in any
of the IndependenceDay celebrations. He was in Kolkata in the areas
which were torn by gruesome riots between Hindus and Muslims.
He was saddened by the communal violence and disheartened that
the principles of ahimsa (non-violence) and satyagraha (active but
non-violent resistance) that he had lived and worked for, had failed
to bind the people in troubled times. Gandhiji went on to persuade
the Hindus and Muslims to give up violence. His presence in Kolkata
greatly improved the situation, and the coming of independence was
celebrated in a spirit of communal harmony, with joyous dancing in
the streets. Gandhiji’s prayer meetings attracted large crowds. But this
was short lived as riots between Hindus and Muslims erupted once
again and Gandhiji had to resort to a fast to bring peace.
Next month Gandhiji moved to Delhi where large scale violence had
erupted. He was deeply concerned about ensuring that Muslims should
be allowed to stay in India with dignity, as equal citizens. He was also
concerned about the relations between India and Pakistan. He was
unhappy with what he saw as the Indian government’s decision not
to honour its financial commitments to Pakistan. With all this in mind
he undertook what turned out to be his last fast in January 1948. As
in Kolkata, his fast had a dramatic effect in Delhi. Communal tension
and violence reduced. Muslims of Delhi and surrounding areas could
safely return to their homes. The Government of India agreed to give
Pakistan its dues.
Gandhiji’s actions were however not liked by all. Extremists in both
the communities blamed him for their conditions. He was particularly
disliked by those who wanted Hindus to take revenge or who wanted
India to become a country for the Hindus, just as Pakistan was for
Muslims. They accused Gandhiji of acting in the interests of the Muslims
andPakistan. Gandhiji thought that these people were misguided. He
was convinced that any attempt to make India into a country only for
the Hindus would destroy India. His steadfast pursuit of Hindu-Muslim
unity provoked Hindu extremists so much that they made several
attempts to assassinate Gandhiji. Despite this he refused to accept
armed protection and continued to meet everyone during his prayer
meetings. Finally, on 30 January 1948, one such extremist, Nathuram
Vinayak Godse, walked up to Gandhiji during his evening prayer in
Delhi and fired three bullets at him, killing him instantly. Thus ended a
life long struggle for truth, non-violence, justice and tolerance.
Gandhiji’s death had an almost magical effect on the communal
situation in the country. Partition-related anger and violence suddenly
subsided. The Government of India cracked down on organisations
that were spreading communal hatred. Organisations like the Rashtriya
Swayamsewak Sangh were banned for some time. Communal politics
began to lose its appeal.

--- PAGE 14 ---
13
h
a
n
a
J
lin
u
S
:tid
e
r
C
The
news of
Gandhi Ji’s
assasination
drew a
crowd in
Kolkata.

--- PAGE 15 ---
14 Politics in India since Independence
hcraes-er
s’teL
equally and that India should not be a country that gave superior
status to adherents of one faith and inferior to those who practiced
another religion. All citizens would be equal irrespective of their
religious affiliation. Being religious or a believer would not be a test
of citizenship. They cherished therefore the ideal of a secular nation.
This ideal was enshrined in the Indian Constitution.
Shweta noticed that her Nana (maternal grandfather) would get very
quiet whenever anyone mentioned Pakistan. One day she decided to
ask him about it. Her Nana told her about how he moved from Lahore to
Ludhiana during Partition. Both his parents were killed. Even he would
not have survived, but a neighbouring Muslim family gave him shelter
and kept him in hiding for several days. They helped him find some
relatives and that is how he managed to cross the border and start a
new life.
Have you heard a similar story? Ask your grandparents or anyone of
that generation about their memories of Independence Day, about the
celebration, about the trauma of Partition, about the expectations they
had from independence.
Write down at least two of these stories.
Integration of Princely States
British India was divided into what were called the British Indian
Provinces and the Princely States. The British Indian Provinces were
directly under the control of the British government. On the other hand,
several large and small states ruled by princes, called the Princely
States, enjoyed some form of control over their internal affairs as long
as they accepted British supremacy. This was called paramountcy or
suzerainty of the British crown. Princely States covered one-third of
the land area of the British Indian Empire and one out of four Indians
lived under princely rule.
The problem
Just before Independence it was announced by the British that with
the end of their rule over India, paramountcy of the British crown
over Princely States would also lapse. This meant that all these
states, as many as 565 in all, would become legally independent. The
British government took the view that all these states were free to join
either India or Pakistan or remain independent if they so wished. This
decision was left not to the people but to the princely rulers of these
states. This was a very serious problem and could threaten the very
existence of a united India.
The problems started very soon. First of all, the ruler of Travancore
announced that the state had decided on Independence. The Nizam

--- PAGE 16 ---
Challenges of Nation Building 15
Note: This
illustration is not
a map drawn to
scale and should
not be taken to
be an authentic
depiction of
India’s external
boundaries.
Can’t we end the
Isn’t it better that
Partition of India
we now learn to
and Pakistan the
live and respect
way they did in
each other as
Germany? I want
independent
to have breakfast
nations?
in Amritsar and
lunch in Lahore!

--- PAGE 17 ---
16 Politics in India since Independence
of Hyderabad made a similar announcement the next day. Rulers like
the Nawab of Bhopal were averse to joining the Constituent Assembly.
This response of the rulers of the Princely States meant that after
Independence there was a very real possibility that India would get
further divided into a number of small countries. The prospects of
democracy for the people in these states also looked bleak. This was a
strange situation, since the Indian Independence was aimed at unity,
self-determination as well as democracy. In most of these princely
states, governments were run in a non-democratic manner and the
“
rulers were unwilling to give democratic rights to their populations.
Government’s approach
We are at a momentous The interim government took a firm stance against the possible
stage in the history of India. division of India into small principalities of different sizes. The Muslim
League opposed the Indian National Congress and took the view that
By common endeavour, we
the States should be free to adopt any course they liked. Sardar Patel
can raise the country to
was India’s Deputy Prime Minister and the Home Minister during
new greatness, while lack
the crucial period immediately following Independence. He played a
of unity will expose us to
historic role in negotiating with the rulers of princely states firmly but
unexpected calamities. I diplomatically and bringing most of them into the Indian Union. It
hope the Indian States will may look easy now. But it was a very complicated task which required
realise fully that if we do skilful persuasion. For instance, there were 26 small states in today’s
Orissa. Saurashtra region of Gujarat had 14 big states, 119 small
not cooperate and work
states and numerous other different administrations.
together in the gener“al
interest, anarchy and chaos The government’s approach was guided by three considerations.
Firstly, the people of most of the princely states clearly wanted to
will overwhelm us all, great
become part of the Indian union. Secondly, the government was
and small, and lead us to
prepared to be flexible in giving autonomy to some regions. The idea
total ruin...
was to accommodate plurality and adopt a flexible approach in dealing
with the demands of the regions. Thirdly, in the backdrop of Partition
which brought into focus the contest over demarcation of territory,
the integration and consolidation of the territorial boundaries of the
Sardar Patel
nation had assumed supreme importance.
Letter to Princely rulers,
1947.
Before 15 August 1947, peaceful negotiations had brought almost
all states whose territories were contiguous to the new boundaries of
India, into the Indian Union. The rulers of most of the states signed
a document called the ‘Instrument of Accession’ which meant that
their state agreed to become a part of the Union of India. Accession of
the Princely States of Junagadh, Hyderabad, Kashmir and Manipur
proved more difficult than the rest. The issue of Junagarh was resolved
after a plebiscite confirmed people’s desire to join India. You will read
about Kashmir in Chapter Eight. Here, let us look at the cases of
Hyderabad and Manipur.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Challenges of Nation Building 17
Sardar Patel with the Nizam of Hyderabad
Hyderabad
Hyderabad, the largest of the Princely States was
surrounded entirely by Indian territory. Some parts of
the old Hyderabad state are today parts of Maharashtra,
Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh. Its ruler carried the title,
‘Nizam’, and he was one of the world’s richest men. The
Nizam wanted an independent status for Hyderabad. He Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel
entered into what was called the Standstill Agreement with (1875-1950): Leader of
India in November 1947 for a year while negotiations with the freedom movement;
the Indian government were going on. Congress leader; follower of
Mahatma Gandhi; Deputy
In the meantime, a movement of the people of
Prime Minister and first Home
Hyderabad State against the Nizam’s rule gathered force.
Minister of independent India;
The peasantry in the Telangana region in particular, was
played an important role in
the victim of Nizam’s oppressive rule and rose against him.
the integration of Princely
Women who had seen the worst of this oppression joined
States with India; member
the movement in large numbers. Hyderabad town was the
of important committees of
nerve centre of this movement. The Communists and the
the Constituent Assembly
Hyderabad Congress were in the forefront of the movement.
on Fundamental Rights,
The Nizam responded by unleashing a para-military force
Minorities,Provincial
known as the Razakars on the people. The atrocities and
Constitution, etc.
communal nature of the Razakars knew no bounds. They
BIP
:tiderC

--- PAGE 19 ---
18 Politics in India since Independence
murdered, maimed, raped and looted, targeting particularly the non-
Muslims. The central government had to order the army to tackle the
situation. In September 1948, Indian army moved in to control the
Nizam’s forces. After a few days of intermittent fighting, the Nizam
surrendered. This led to Hyderabad’s accession to India.
Manipur
A few days before Independence, the Maharaja of Manipur,
Bodhachandra Singh, signed the Instrument of Accession with the
Indian government on the assurance that the internal autonomy of
Manipur would be maintained. Under the pressure of public opinion,
the Maharaja held elections in Manipur in June 1948 and the state
became a constitutional monarchy. Thus Manipur was the first part
I wonder what of India to hold an election based on universal adult franchise.
happened to all
those hundreds In the Legislative Assembly of Manipur there were sharp
of kings, queens, differences over the question of merger of Manipur with India. While
princes and the state Congress wanted the merger, other political parties were
princesses. How opposed to this. The Government of India succeeded in pressurising
did they live
the Maharaja into signing a Merger Agreement in September 1949,
their lives after
without consulting the popularly elected Legislative Assembly of
becoming just
ordinary citizens? Manipur. This caused a lot of anger and resentment in Manipur, the
repercussions of which are still being felt.
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R:tiderC
This cartoon
comments on the
relation between
the people and
the rulers in the
Princely States,
and also on
Patel’s approach
to resolving this
issue.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Challenges of Nation Building 19
Reorganisation of States
The process of nation-building did not come to an end with Partition
and integration of Princely States. Now the challenge was to draw the
internal boundaries of the Indian states. This was not just a matter
of administrative divisions. The boundaries had to be drawn in a way
so that the linguistic and cultural plurality of the country could be
reflected without affecting the unity of the nation.
During colonial rule, the state boundaries were drawn either on
administrative convenience or simply coincided with the territories
annexed by the British government or the territories ruled by the
princely powers.
Our national movement had rejected these divisions as artificial
and had promised the linguistic principle as the basis of formation
of states. In fact after the Nagpur session of Congress in 1920 the
principle was recognised as the basis of the reorganisation of the
Indian National Congress party itself. Many Provincial Congress
“
Committees were created by linguistic zones, which did not follow
the administrative divisions of British India.
Things changed after Independence and Partition. Our leaders
felt that carving out states on the basis of language might lead to ..if lingusitic
disruption and disintegration. It was also felt that this would draw provinces are formed, it
attention away from other social and economic challenges that the will also give a fillip to
country faced. The central leadership decided to postpone matters. the regional languages. It
The need for postponement was also felt because the fate of the
would be absurd to make
Princely States had not been decided. Also, the memory of Partition
Hindustani the “medium
was still fresh.
of instruction in all the
This decision of the national leadership was challenged by the local regions and it is still more
leaders and the people. Protests began in the Telugu speaking areas of
absurd to use English for
the old Madras province, which included present day Tamil Nadu, parts
this purpose.
of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka. The Vishalandhra movement
(as the movement for a separate Andhra was called) demanded that
the Telugu speaking areas should be separated from the Madras
Mahatma Gandhi
province of which they were a part and be made into a separate Andhra January1948
province. Nearly all the political forces in the Andhra region were in
favour of linguistic reorganisation of the then Madras province.
The movement gathered momentum as a result of the Central
government’s vacillation. Potti Sriramulu, a Congress leader and a
veteran Gandhian, went on an indefinite fast that led to his death after
56 days. This caused great unrest and resulted in violent outbursts in
Andhra region. People in large numbers took to the streets. Many were
injured or lost their lives in police firing. In Madras, several legislators
resigned their seats in protest. Finally, the Prime Minister announced
the formation of a separate Andhra state in December 1952.

--- PAGE 21 ---
20 Politics in India since Independence
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be
an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries.
Read the map and answer the following questions:
1. Name the original state from which the following states were carved out:
Gujarat Haryana
Meghalaya Chhattisgarh
2. Name two states that were affected by the Partition of the country.
3. Name two states today that were once a Union Territory.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Challenges of Nation Building 21
The formation of Andhra Pradesh spurred the struggle
for making of other states on linguistic lines in other
parts of the country. These struggles forced the Central
Government into appointing a States Reorganisation
Commission in 1953 to look into the question of redrawing
of the boundaries of states. The Commission in its report
accepted that the boundaries of the state should reflect
the boundaries of different languages. On the basis of
its report the States Reorganisation Act was passed in Potti Sriramulu
1956. This led to the creation of 14 states and six union (1901-1952): Gandhian
territories. worker; left government
job to participate in
Salt Satyagraha; also
participated in individual
Satyagraha; went on a
fast in 1946 demanding
that temples in Madras
province be opened to
dalits;undertook a fast
unto death from 19 October
Now, isn’t this very interesting? Nehru and other 1952demanding separate
leaders were very popular, and yet the people did not
state of Andhra Pradesh;
hesitate to agitate for linguistic states against the
died during the fast on
wishes of the leaders!
15 December 1952.
raknahS
:tiderC
“Struggle for Survival” (Published in 1953) captures contemporary impression
of the demand for linguistic states

--- PAGE 23 ---
22 Politics in India since Independence
One of the most important concerns in the early years
was that demands for separate states would endanger
the unity of the country. It was felt that linguistic
states may foster separatism and create pressures on
the newly founded nation. But the leadership, under
popular pressure, finally made a choice in favour of
linguistic states. It was hoped that if we accept the
regional and linguistic claims of all regions, the threat of
division and separatism would be reduced. Besides, the
accommodation of regional demands and the formation
of linguistic states were also seen as more democratic.
Now it is more than fifty years since the formation of
linguistic states. We can say that linguistic states and
the movements for the formation of these states changed
the nature of democratic politics and leadership in some
basic ways. The path to politics and power was now
open to people other than the small English speaking
elite. Linguistic reorganisation also gave some uniform
basis to the drawing of state boundaries. It did not lead
raknahS
:tiderC
“Coaxing the Genie back” (Published in 1956) asked if the State Reorganisation Commission
could contain the genie of linguism.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Challenges of Nation Building 23
to disintegration of the country as many had feared earlier. On the
contrary it strengthened national unity.
Above all, the linguistic states underlined the acceptance of the
principle of diversity. When we say that India adopted democracy, it
does not simply mean that India embraced a democratic constitution,
nor does it merely mean that India adopted the format of elections. The
choice was larger than that. It was a choice in favour of recognising
and accepting the existence of differences which could at times
be oppositional. Democracy, in other words, was associated with
plurality of ideas and ways of life. Much of the politics in the later
period was to take place within this framework.
Fast Forward Creation of new states
The acceptance of the principle of linguistic states did not mean, however, that all states
immediately became linguistic states. There was an experiment of ‘bilingual’ Bombay state,
consisting of Gujarati and Marathi speaking people. After a popular agitation, the states of
Maharashtra and Gujarat were created in 1960.
In Punjab also, there were two linguistic groups: Hindi speaking and Punjabi speaking. The
Punjabi speaking people demanded a separate state. But it was not granted with other states
in 1956. Statehood for Punjab came ten years later, in 1966, when the territories of today’s
Haryana and Himachal Pradesh were separated from the larger Punjab state.
Another major reorganisation of states took place in the north east in 1972. Meghalaya was
carved out of Assam in 1972. Manipur and Tripura too emerged as separate states in the same
year. The states of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram came into being in 1987. Nagaland had
become a state much earlier in 1963.
Language did not, however, remain the sole basis of organisation of states. In later years
sub-regions raised demands for separate states on the basis of a separate regional culture or
complaints of regional imbalance in development. Three such states, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh
and Uttaranchal, were created in 2000. The story of reorganisation has not come to an end.
There are many regions in the country where there are movements demanding separate and
smaller states. These include Telangana in Andhra Pradesh, Vidarbha in Maharashtra, Harit
Pradesh in the western region of Uttar Pradesh and the northern region of West Bengal.
The US has one-fourth
of our population but 51
states. Why can’t India
have more than 100
states?

--- PAGE 25 ---
24 Politics in India since Independence
1. Which among the following statements about the Partition is incorrect?
(a) Partition of India was the outcome of the “two-nation theory.”
(b) Punjab and Bengal were the two provinces divided on the basis
of religion.
(c) EastPakistan and West Pakistan were not contiguous.
(d) The scheme of Partition included a plan for transfer of
population across the border.
2. Match the principles with the instances:
(a) Mapping of boundaries i. Pakistan and
on religious grounds Bangladesh
(b) Mapping of boundaries on grounds ii. India and
of different languages Pakistan
(c) Demarcating boundaries within a iii. Jharkhand and
country by geographical zones Chhattisgarh
(d) Demarcating boundaries within a iv. HimachalPradesh
country on administrative and and Uttarakhand
political grounds
3. Take a current political map of India (showing outlines of states) and
mark the location of the following Princely States.
(a) Junagadh (b) Manipur
(c) Mysore (d) Gwalior
4. Here are two opinions –
Bismay: “The merger with the Indian State was an extension of
democracy to the people of the Princely States.”
Inderpreet: “I am not so sure, there was force being used. Democracy
comes by creating consensus.”
What is your own opinion in the light of accession of Princely States and
the responses of the people in these parts?
5. Read the following very different statements made in August 1947 –
“Today you have worn on your heads a crown of thorns. The seat of
power is a nasty thing. You have to remain ever wakeful on that seat….
you have to be more humble and forbearing…now there will be no end
to your being tested.” — M.K GANDHI
“…India will awake to a life of freedom….we step out from the old to the
new…we end today a period of ill fortune and India discovers herself
again. The achievement we celebrate today is but a step, an opening of
opportunity…” — JAWAHARLALNEHRU
Spell out the agenda of nation building that flows from these two
statements. Which one appeals more to you and why?
SESICREXE
24 Politics in India since Independence

--- PAGE 26 ---
CChhaalllleennggeses ofof NNaattiioonn BBuuiillddiinngg 2255
6. What are the reasons being used by Nehru for keeping India secular?
Do you think these reasons were only ethical and sentimental? Or were
there some prudential reasons as well?
7. Bring out two major differences between the challenge of nation
building for eastern and western regions of the country at the time of
Independence.
8. What was the task of the States Reorganisation Commission? What
was its most salient recommendation?
9. It is said that the nation is to a large extent an “ imagined community”
held together by common beliefs, history, political aspirations and
imaginations. Identify the features that make India a nation.
10. Read the following passage and answer the questions below:
“In the history of nation-building only the Soviet experiment bears
comparison with the Indian. There too, a sense of unity had to be forged
between many diverse ethnic groups, religious, linguistic communities
and social classes. The scale – geographic as well as demographic
– was comparably massive. The raw material the state had to work with
was equally unpropitious: a people divided by faith and driven by debt
and disease.” — RAMACHANDRA GUHA
(a) List the commonalities that the author mentions between India
and Soviet Union and give one example for each of these from
India.
(b) The author does not talk about dissimilarities between the two
experiments. Can you mention two dissimilarities?
(c) In retrospect which of these two experiment worked better and
why?
LET US DO IT TOGETHER
(cid:129) Read a novel/ story on Partition by an Indian and a Pakistani/
Bangladeshi writer. What are the commonalities of the experience
across the border?
(cid:129) Collect all the stories from the ‘Let’s Re-search’ suggestion in
this chapter. Prepare a wallpaper that highlights the common
experiences and has stories on the unique experiences.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Credit: Shankar
In this chapter…
The challenge of nation-building, covered in the last chapter, was
This famous sketch accompanied by the challenge of instituting democratic politics. Thus,
by Shankar appeared
electoral competition among political parties began immediately after
on the cover of his
Independence. In this chapter, we look at the first decade of electoral
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:259)Don’t Spare
politics in order to understand
Me, Shankar. The
original sketch was
(cid:129) the establishment of a system of free and fair elections;
drawn in the context of
India’s China policy. But (cid:129) the domination of the Congress party in the years immediately
this cartoon captures
after Independence; and
the dual role of the
Congress during the era (cid:129) the emergence of opposition parties and their policies.
of one-party dominance.

--- PAGE 28 ---
2
retpahc era of one-party
dominance
Challenge of building democracy
You now have an idea of the difficult circumstances in which
independent India was born. You have read about the serious
challenge of nation-building that confronted the country right in the
beginning. Faced with such serious challenges, leaders in many other
countries of the world decided that their country could not afford
“
to have democracy. They said that national unity was their first
priority and that democracy will introduce differences and conflicts.
In India,….
Therefore many of the countries that gained freedom from colonialism
experienced non-democratic rule. It took various forms: nominal …hero-worship, plays a part
democracy but effective control by one leader, one party rule or direct in its politics unequalled
“
army rule. Non-democratic regimes always started with a promise of in magnitude by the part
restoring democracy very soon. But once they established themselves, it plays in the politics of
it was very difficult to dislodge them.
any other country….But in
The conditions in India were not very different. But the leaders of politics, .. ..hero-worship is a
the newly independent India decided to take the more difficult path. sure road to degradation and
Any other path would have been surprising, for our freedom struggle
eventual dictatorship.
was deeply committed to the idea of democracy. Our leaders were
conscious of the critical role of politics in any democracy. They did not
see politics as a problem; they saw it as a way of solving the problems.
Dr. Babasaheb
Every society needs to decide how it will govern and regulate itself. Ambedkar
There are always different policy alternatives to choose from. There Speech in Constituent
are different groups with different and conflicting aspirations. How Assembly
25 November 1949
do we resolve these differences? Democratic politics is an answer to
this question. While competition and power are the two most visible
things about politics, the purpose of political activity is and should be
deciding and pursuing public interest. This is the route our leaders
decided to take.
Last year you studied how our Constitution was drafted. You
would remember that the Constitution was ready and signed on
26 November 1949 and it came into effect on 26 January 1950. At that
time the country was being ruled by an interim government. It was
now necessary to install the first democratically elected government
of the country. The Constitution had laid down the rules, now the
What’s so special
machine had to be put in place. Initially it was thought that this was
about our being a
only a matter of a few months. The Election Commission of India was democracy? Sooner
set up in January 1950. Sukumar Sen became the first Chief Election or later every country
Commissioner. The country’s first general elections were expected has become a
democracy, isn’t it?
sometime in 1950 itself.

--- PAGE 29 ---
28 Politics in India since Independence
But the Election Commission discovered that it was not going to
be easy to hold a free and fair election in a country of India’s size.
Holding an election required delimitation or drawing the boundaries
of the electoral constituencies. It also required preparing the electoral
rolls, or the list of all the citizens eligible to vote. Both these tasks took
a lot of time. When the first draft of the rolls was published, it was
discovered that the names of nearly 40 lakh women were not recorded
in the list. They were simply listed as “wife of …” or “daughter of …”.
The Election Commission refused to accept these entries and ordered
a revision if possible and deletion if necessary. Preparing for the first
That was a good general election was a mammoth exercise. No election on this scale
decision. But what
had ever been conducted in the world before. At that time there
about men who still
were 17 crore eligible voters, who had to elect about 3,200 MLAs and
refer to a woman as
Mrs.Somebody, as if 489 Members of Lok Sabha. Only 15 per cent of these eligible voters
she does not have a were literate. Therefore the Election Commission had to think of some
name of her own? special method of voting. The Election Commission trained over 3
lakh officers and polling staff to conduct the elections.
It was not just the size of the country and the electorate that made
this election unusual. The first general election was also the first big
test of democracy in a poor and illiterate country. Till then democracy
had existed only in the prosperous countries, mainly in Europe and
North America, where nearly everyone was literate. By that time
many countries in Europe had not given voting rights to all women.
In this context India’s experiment with universal adult franchise
A cartoonist’s impression of the election committee formed by the Congress to choose party
candidates in 1952. On the committee, besides Nehru: Morarji Desai, Rafi Ahmed Kidwai,
Dr B.C. Roy, Kamaraj Nadar, Rajagopalachari, Jagjivan Ram, Maulana Azad, D.P. Mishra,
P.D. Tandon and Govind Ballabh Pant.
raknahS
:tiderC

--- PAGE 30 ---
Era of One-party Dominance 29
hcraes-er
s’teL
Changing methods of voting
These days we use an Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) to record voters’
preferences. But that is not how we started. In the first general election, it
was decided to place inside each polling booth a box for each candidate with
the election symbol of that candidate. Each voter was given a blank ballot
paper which they had to drop into the box of the candidate they wanted to
vote for. About 20 lakh steel boxes were used for this purpose.
A presiding officer from Punjab described how he
prepared the ballot boxes—“Each box had to have
its candidate’s symbol, both inside and outside it, and
outside on either side, had to be displayed the name
of the candidate in Urdu, Hindi and Punjabi along with
the number of the constituency, the polling station and
the polling booth. The paper seal with the numerical
description of the candidate, signed by the presiding
officer, had to be inserted in the token frame and its
A sample of the window closed by its door which had to be fixed in its place
ballot paper at the other end by means of a wire. All this had to be
used from
done on the day previous to the one fixed for polling. To fix
the third to
symbols and labels the boxes had first to be rubbed with Electronic Voting
the thirteenth
Machine
general sandpaper or a piece of brick. I found that it took about
elections to Lok five hours for six persons, including my two daughters, to
Sabha
complete this work. All this was done at my house.”
After the first two elections this method was changed. Now the ballot paper
carried the names and symbols of all the candidates and the voter was required
to put a stamp on the name of the candidate they wanted to vote for. This method
worked for nearly forty years. Towards the end of 1990s the Election Commission
started using the EVM. By 2004 the entire country had shifted to the EVM.
Ask the elders in your family and neighbourhood about their
experience of participating in elections.
(cid:129) Did anyone vote in the first or second general election? Who did
they vote for and why?
(cid:129) Is there someone who has used all the three methods of voting?
Which one did they prefer?
(cid:129) In which ways do they find the elections of those days different
from the present ones?

--- PAGE 31 ---
30 Politics in India since Independence
appeared very bold and risky. An Indian editor called it “the
biggest gamble in history”. Organiser, a magazine, wrote
that Jawaharlal Nehru “would live to confess the failure
of universal adult franchise in India”. A British member of
the Indian Civil Service claimed that “a future and more
enlightened age will view with astonishment the absurd farce
of recording the votes of millions of illiterate people”.
The elections had to be postponed twice and finally held
from October 1951 to February 1952. But this election is
Maulana Abul Kalam referred to as the 1952 election since most parts of the
Azad (1888-1958): country voted in January 1952. It took six months for
original name — Abul the campaigning, polling and counting to be completed.
Kalam Mohiyuddin (cid:40)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:259) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:72)
Ahmed; scholar of than four candidates for each seat. The level of participation
Islam; freedom fighter was encouraging — more than half the eligible voters turned
and Congress leader; out to vote on the day of elections. When the results were
proponent of Hindu- declared these were accepted as fair even by the losers.
Muslim unity; opposed The Indian experiment had proved the critics wrong. The
to Partition; member of Times of India held that the polls have “confounded all those
Constituent Assembly; sceptics who thought the introduction of adult franchise
Education Minister in too risky an experiment in this country”. The Hindustan
the first cabinet of free Times claimed that “there is universal agreement that the
India. Indian people have conducted themselves admirably in the
largest experiment in democratic elections in the history of
the world”. Observers outside India were equally impressed.
India’s general election of 1952 became a landmark in the
history of democracy all over the world. It was no longer
possible to argue that democratic elections could not be held
in conditions of poverty or lack of education. It proved that
democracy could be practiced anywhere in the world.
Congress dominance in the first three
general elections
The results of the first general election did not surprise anyone. The
Indian National Congress was expected to win this election. The
Congress party, as it was popularly known, had inherited the legacy
of the national movement. It was the only party then to have an
organisation spread all over the country. And finally, in Jawaharlal
Nehru, the party had the most popular and charismatic leader in
Indian politics. He led the Congress campaign and toured through
the country. When the final results were declared, the extent of the
victory of the Congress did surprise many. The party won 364 of the
489 seats in the first Lok Sabha and finished way ahead of any other
challenger. The Communist Party of India that came next in terms of
seats won only 16 seats. The state elections were held with the Lok

--- PAGE 32 ---
Era of One-party Dominance 31
Note:This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be
an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries.

--- PAGE 33 ---
32 Politics in India since Independence
Sabha elections. The Congress scored big victory
in those elections as well. It won a majority of
seats in all the states except Travancore-Cochin
(part of today’s Kerala), Madras and Orissa.
Finally even in these states the Congress formed
the government. So the party ruled all over the
country at the national and the state level. As
expected, Jawaharlal Nehru became the Prime
Minister after the first general election.
A look at the electoral map on the last page
would give you a sense of the dominance of
the Congress during the period 1952-1962.
In the second and the third general elections,
held in 1957 and 1962 respectively, the
Congress maintained the same position in
u the Lok Sabha by winning three-fourth of
d
n the seats. None of the opposition parties
iH
could win even one-tenth of the number
e
h of seats won by the Congress. In the state
T
:t assembly elections, the Congress did not
id
e get majority in a few cases. The most
r
C significant of these cases was in Kerala in 1957
when a coalition led by the CPI formed the government. Apart
from exceptions like this, the Congress controlled the national
and all the state governments.
The extent of the victory of the Congress was artificially
boosted by our electoral system. The Congress won three out of
every four seats but it did not get even half of the votes. In 1952,
for example, the Congress obtained 45 per cent of the total votes.
But it managed to win 74 per cent of the seats. The Socialist
Party, the second largest party in terms of votes, secured more
than 10 per cent of the votes all over the country. But it could
not even win three per cent of the seats. How did this happen?
Rajkumari Amrit Kaur
For this you need to recall the discussion about the first-past-
(1889-1964):A Gandhian
the-post method in your textbook ‘Constitution at Work’ last
and Freedom fighter;
year.
belonged to the royal
family of Kapurthala; In this system of election, that has been adopted in our
inherited Christian country, the party that gets more votes than others tends to get
religion from her mother; much more than its proportional share. That is exactly what
member of Constituent worked in favour of the Congress. If we add up the votes of all
Assembly; Minister for the non-Congress candidates it was more than the votes of the
Health in independent Congress. But the non-Congress votes were divided between
India’s first ministry; different rival parties and candidates. So the Congress was still
continued as Health way ahead of the opposition and managed to win.
Minister till 1957.

--- PAGE 34 ---
Communist victory in Kerala
As early as in 1957, the Congress party had the bitter taste of defeat in Kerala.
In the assembly elections held in March 1957, the Communist Party won the
largest number of seats to the Kerala legislature. The party won 60 of the
126 seats and had the support of five independents. The governor invited
E. M. S. Namboodiripad, the leader of the Communist legislature party, to form
the ministry. For the first time in the world, a Communist party government
had come to power through democratic elections.
On losing power in the State, the Congress party began a ‘liberation struggle’
against the elected government. The CPI had come to power on the promise of
carrying out radical and progressive policy measures. The Communists claimed
that the agitation was led by vested interests and religious organisations.
In 1959 the Congress government at
the Centre dismissed the Communist
government in Kerala under Article 356
of the Constitution. This decision proved
very controversial and was widely cited
as the first instance of the misuse of
constitutional emergency powers.
E.M.S. Namboodiripad, leading a procession of
Communist Party workers, after his ministry was
dismissed from office in Trivandrum in August
1959.
udniH
:tiderC
33

--- PAGE 35 ---
3344 PPoolliittiiccss iinn IInnddiiaa ssiinnccee IInnddeeppeennddeennccee
Socialist Party
The origins of the Socialist Party can be traced
back to the mass movement stage of the Indian
National Congress in the pre-independence era.
The Congress Socialist Party (CSP) was formed
within the Congress in 1934 by a group of young
leaders who wanted a more radical and egalitarian
Congress. In 1948, the Congress amended its
constitution to prevent its members from having a
dual party membership. This forced the Socialists
to form a separate Socialist Party in 1948. The
Party’s electoral performance caused much
disappointment to its supporters. Although the
Party had presence in most of the states of India,
it could achieve electoral success only in a few
pockets.
The socialists believed in
the ideology of democratic
socialism which distinguished
them both from the Congress
as well as from the
Communists. They criticised
the Congress for favouring
capitalists and landlords and
for ignoring the workers and
the peasants. But the socialists faced a dilemma when
in 1955 the Congress declared its goal to be the socialist
Acharya Narendra
pattern of society. Thus it became difficult for the socialists
Dev (1889-1956):
to present themselves as an effective alternative to the
Freedom fighter and
Congress. Some of them, led by Rammanohar Lohia,
founding President of
increased their distance from and criticism of the Congress
the Congress Socialist
party. Some others like Asoka Mehta advocated a limited
Party; jailed several
cooperation with the Congress.
times during the
freedom movement; The Socialist Party went through many splits and reunions
active in peasants’ leading to the formation of many socialist parties. These
movement; a scholar included the Kisan Mazdoor Praja Party, the Praja Socialist
of Buddhism; after Party and Samyukta Socialist Party. Jayaprakash Narayan,
independence led the Achyut Patwardhan, Asoka Mehta, Acharya Narendra Dev,
Socialist Party and Rammanohar Lohia and S.M. Joshi were among the leaders
later the Praja Socialist of the socialist parties. Many parties in contemporary India,
Party. like the Samajwadi Party, the Rashtriya Janata Dal, Janata
Dal (United) and the Janata Dal (Secular) trace their origins
to the Socialist Party.

--- PAGE 36 ---
Era of One-party Dominance 35
Nature of Congress dominance
India is not the only country to have experienced the
dominance of one party. If we look around the world,
we find many other examples of one-party dominance.
But there is a crucial difference between these and
the Indian experience. In the rest of the cases the
dominance of one party was ensured by compromising
democracy. In some countries like China, Cuba and
Syria the constitution permits only a single party to
rule the country. Some others like Myanmar, Belarus,
Egypt, and Eritrea are effectively one-party states due
to legal and military measures. Until a few years ago,
Mexico, South Korea and Taiwan were also effectively
one-party dominant states. What distinguished the dominance of the
Congress party in India from all these cases was it happened under
democratic conditions. Many parties contested elections in conditions
of free and fair elections and yet the Congress managed to win election
after election. This was similar to the dominance the African National
Congress has enjoyed in South Africa after the end of apartheid.
Founded in 1929, as National
Revolutionary Party and later renamed
as the Institutional Revolutionary
Party, the PRI (in Spanish), exercised
power in Mexico for almost six
decades. It represented the legacy
Babasaheb Bhimrao Ramji
of the Mexican revolution. Originally
Ambedkar (1891-1956): Leader of
PRI was a mixture of various interests
the anti-caste movement and the
including political and military leaders, labour and peasant
struggle for justice to the Dalits;
organisations and numerous political parties. Over a period
scholar and intellectual; founder
of time, Plutarco Elías Calles, the founder of PRI, was able
of Independent Labour Party; later
to capture the organisation and thereby the government.
founded the Scheduled Castes
Elections were held at regular intervals and it was the
Federation; planned the formation
PRI which won every time. Other parties existed in name
of the Republican Party of India;
only so as to give the ruling party greater legitimacy. The
Member of Viceroy’s Executive
electoral laws were operated in a manner so as to ensure
Council during the Second
that the PRI always won. Elections were often rigged and
World War; Chairman, Drafting
manipulated by the ruling party. Its rule was described
Committee of the Constituent
as ‘the perfect dictatorship’. Finally the party lost in the
Assembly; Minister in Nehru’s
Presidential elections held in 2000. Mexico is no longer
first cabinet after Independence;
a one-party dominated country. But the tactics adopted
resigned in 1951 due to differences
by the PRI during the period of its dominance had a long-
over the Hindu Code Bill; adopted
term effect on the health of democracy. The citizens have
Buddhism in 1956, with thousands
yet to develop full confidence in the free and fair nature
of followers.
of elections.

--- PAGE 37 ---
36 Politics in India since Independence
The roots of this extraordinary success of the Congress
party go back to the legacy of the freedom struggle. Congress
was seen as inheritor of the national movement. Many
leaders who were in the forefront of that struggle were now
contesting elections as Congress candidates. The Congress
was already a very well-organised party and by the time the
other parties could even think of a strategy, the Congress
had already started its campaign. In fact, many parties
were formed only around Independence or after that. Thus,
the Congress had the ‘first off the blocks’ advantage. By
Rafi Ahmed Kidwai the time of Independence the party had not only spread
(1894-1954): across the length and breadth of the country as we had
Congress leader from seen in the maps but also had an organisational network
U.P.; Minister in U.P. down to the local level. Most importantly, as the Congress
in 1937 and again was till recently a national movement, its nature was all-
in 1946; Minister for inclusive. All these factors contributed to the dominance of
Communications in the Congress party.
the first ministry of
free India; Food and Congress as social and ideological coalition
Agriculture Minister,
1952-54. You have already studied the history of how Congress evolved
from its origins in 1885 as a pressure group for the newly
educated, professional and commercial classes to a mass
movement in the twentieth century. This laid the basis for
its eventual transformation into a mass political party and
its subsequent domination of the political system. Thus the Congress
began as a party dominated by the English speaking, upper caste,
upper middle-class and urban elite. But with every civil disobedience
movement it launched, its social base widened. It brought together
diverse groups, whose interests were often contradictory. Peasants
and industrialists, urban dwellers and villagers, workers and owners,
middle, lower and upper classes and castes, all found space in the
Earlier we had
coalition in a Congress. Gradually, its leadership also expanded beyond the upper
party, now we caste and upper class professionals to agriculture based leaders with
have coalition of a rural orientation. By the time of Independence, the Congress was
parties. Does it transformed into a rainbow-like social coalition broadly representing
mean that we have
India’s diversity in terms of classes and castes, religions and languages
had a coalition
and various interests.
government since
1952?
Many of these groups merged their identity within the Congress.
Very often they did not and continued to exist within the Congress
as groups and individuals holding different beliefs. In this sense the
Congress was an ideological coalition as well. It accommodated the
revolutionary and pacifist, conservative and radical, extremist and
moderate and the right, left and all shades of the centre. The Congress
was a ‘platform’ for numerous groups, interests and even political
parties to take part in the national movement. In pre-Independence
days, many organisations and parties with their own constitution and
organisational structure were allowed to exist within the Congress.

--- PAGE 38 ---
EErraa ofof OOnnee--ppaarrttyy DDoommiinnaannccee 3377
The Communist Party of India
In the early 1920s communist groups emerged
in different parts of India taking inspiration
from the Bolshevik revolution in Russia
and advocating socialism as the solution to
problems affecting the country. From 1935,
the Communists worked mainly from within
the fold of the Indian National Congress.
A parting of ways took place in December
1941, when the Communists decided to
support the British in their war against Nazi
Germany. Unlike other non-Congress parties
the CPI had a well-oiled party machinery and
dedicated cadre at the time of Independence.
However, Independence raised different
voices in the party. The basic question that
troubled the party was the nature of Indian
independence. Was India
really free or was freedom
a sham?
Soon after Independence,
the party thought that
the transfer of power
in 1947 was not true
independence and encouraged violent uprisings
in Telangana. The Communists failed to generate
popular support for their position and were crushed
by the armed forces. This forced them to rethink their
position. In 1951 the Communist Party abandoned the
A.K. Gopalan
path of violent revolution and decided to participate
(1904-1977):Communist
in the approaching general elections. In the first
leader from Kerala,
general election, CPI won 16 seats and emerged as
worked as a Congress
the largest opposition party. The party’s support was
worker initially; joined
more concentrated in Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal,
the Communist Party in
Bihar and Kerala.
1939; after the split in
A. K. Gopalan, S.A. Dange, E.M.S. Namboodiripad, the Communist Party
P.C. Joshi, Ajay Ghosh and P. Sundarraya were in 1964, joined the
among the notable leaders of the CPI. The Party went CPI (M) and worked
through a major split in 1964 following the ideological for strengthening the
rift between Soviet Union and China. The pro-Soviet party; respected as a
faction remained as the CPI, while the opponents parliamentarian; Member
formed the CPI(M). Both these parties continue to of Parliament from 1952.
exist to this day.

--- PAGE 39 ---
38 Politics in India since Independence
Some of these, like the Congress
Socialist Party, later separated from
the Congress and became opposition
parties. Despite differences regarding
the methods, specific programmes and
policies the party managed to contain
if not resolve differences and build a
consensus.
Tolerance and management
of factions
This coalition-like character of the
Congress gave it an unusual strength.
Firstly, a coalition accommodates all
those who join it. Therefore, it has
to avoid any extreme position and
strike a balance on almost all issues.
Compromise and inclusiveness are the
hallmarks of a coalition. This strategy
put the opposition in a difficulty.
Anything that the opposition wanted
to say, would also find a place in
the programme and ideology of the
Congress. Secondly, in a party that
has the nature of a coalition, there is a
greater tolerance of internal differences
and ambitions of various groups
and leaders are accommodated. The
Congress did both these things during
the freedom struggle and continued
doing this even after Independence.
That is why, even if a group was not
happy with the position of the party
or with its share of power, it would
remain inside the party and fight the
other groups rather than leaving the
party and becoming an ‘opposition’.
These groups inside the party are
called factions. The coalitional nature
of the Congress party tolerated and
in fact encouraged various factions.
Some of these factions were based
on ideological considerations but
very often these factions were rooted
in personal ambitions and rivalries.
Instead of being a weakness, internal
factionalism became a strength of
mliF
a
hctaw
s’teL
S
IMHASAN
This Marathi film, based on Arun
Sadhu’s two novels ‘Simhasan’
and ‘Mumbai Dinank’, depicts
the tussle for the post of Chief
Minister in Maharashtra. The story
is told through journalist Digu
Tipnis as the silent ‘Sutradhar’. It
tries to capture the intense power
struggle within the ruling party
and the secondary role of the
Opposition.
Finance Minister, Vishwasrao
Dabhade is making all-out efforts
to unseat the incumbent Chief
Minister. Both contenders are
trying to woo trade union leader
D’Casta to obtain his support. In
this factional fight, other politicians
too seek to obtain maximum
advantage while bargaining with
both sides. Smuggling in Mumbai
and the grim social reality in rural
Maharashtra form the sub-plots in
this film.
Year: 1981
Director: Jabbar Patel
Screenplay: Vijay Tendulkar
Cast: Nilu Phule, Arun Sarnaik,
Dr.Shreeram Lagoo, Satish
Dubashi, Datta Bhat, Madhukar
Toradmal, Madhav Watve, Mohan
Agashe

--- PAGE 40 ---
EErraa ofof OOnnee--ppaarrttyy DDoommiinnaannccee 3399
haratiya Jana Sangh
The Bharatiya Jana Sangh was
formed in 1951 with Shyama Prasad
Mukherjee as its founder-President. Its
lineage however can be traced back
to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh
(RSS) and the Hindu Mahasabha
beforeIndependence.
The Jana Sangh was different from
other parties in terms of ideology and
programmes. It emphasised the idea
of one country, one culture and one
nation and believed that the country
could become modern, progressive
and strong on the basis of Indian
culture and traditions. The
party called for a reunion
of India and Pakistan in
Akhand Bharat. The party
was in forefront of the
agitation to replace English
with Hindi as the official
language of India and
was also opposed to the
granting of concessions
to religious and cultural
Deen Dayal
minorities. The party was
Upadhyaya
a consistent advocate of India developing nuclear
(1916-1968):Full-
weapons especially after China carried out its atomic
time RSS worker
tests in 1964.
since 1942; founder
In the 1950s Jana Sangh remained on the margins member of the
of the electoral politics and was able to secure only 3 Bharatiya Jana
Lok Sabha seats in 1952 elections and 4 seats in 1957 Sangh; General
general elections to Lok Sabha. In the early years its Secretary and
support came mainly from the urban areas in the Hindi later President of
speaking states like Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi Bharatiya Jana
and Uttar Pradesh. The party’s leaders included Shyama Sangh; initiated the
Prasad Mukherjee, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya and Balraj concept of integral
Madhok. The Bharatiya Janata Party traces its roots to humanism.
the Bharatiya Jana Sangh.

--- PAGE 41 ---
40 Politics in India since Independence
the Congress. Since there was room within the party for various
factions to fight with each other, it meant that leaders representing
different interests and ideologies remained within the Congress
rather than go out and form a new party.
Most of the state units of the Congress were made up of
numerous factions. The factions took different ideological positions
making the Congress appear as a grand centrist party. The other
parties primarily attempted to influence these factions and thereby
indirectly influenced policy and decision making from the “margins”.
They were far removed from the actual exercise of authority. They
were not alternatives to the ruling party; instead they constantly
pressurised and criticised, censured and influenced the Congress.
The system of factions functioned as balancing mechanism within
the ruling party. Political competition therefore took place within the
I thought factions Congress. In that sense, in the first decade of electoral competition
were a disease that
the Congress acted both as the ruling party as well as the opposition.
needed to be cured.
That is why this period of Indian politics has been described as the
You make it sound
as if factions are ‘Congress system’.
normal and good.
Emergence of opposition parties
As we have noted above, it is not that India did
not have opposition parties during this period.
While discussing the results of the elections,
we have already come across the names of
many parties other than the Congress. Even
then India had a larger number of diverse
and vibrant opposition parties than many
other multi-party democracies. Some of
these had come into being even before the first
general election of 1952. Some of these parties
played an important part in the politics of the
country in the ’sixties and ’seventies. The
roots of almost all the non-Congress parties of
today can be traced to one or the other of the
opposition parties of the 1950s.
All these opposition parties succeeded in
gaining only a token representation in the
Lok Sabha and state assemblies during this
period. Yet their presence played a crucial role
in maintaining the democratic character of the
“Tug of War” (29 August 1954) is a cartoonist’s system. These parties offered a sustained and
impression of the relative strength of the opposition
often principled criticism of the policies and
and the government. Sitting on the tree are Nehru
practices of the Congress party. This kept the
and his cabinet colleagues. Trying to topple the
tree are opposition leaders A. K. Gopalan, Acharya ruling party under check and often changed
Kripalani, N.C. Chatterjee, Srikantan Nair and the balance of power within the Congress. By
Sardar Hukum Singh. keeping democratic political alternative alive,
raknahS
:tiderC

--- PAGE 42 ---
EErraa ofof OOnnee--ppaarrttyy DDoommiinnaannccee 4411
Swatantra Party
Swatantra Party was formed in August
1959 after the Nagpur resolution of the
Congress which called for land ceilings,
take-over of food grain trade by the state
and adoption of cooperative farming. The
party was led by old Congressmen like C.
Rajagopalachari, K.M.Munshi, N.G.Ranga
and Minoo Masani. The party stood out
from the others in terms of its position on
economic issues.
The Swatantra Party wanted the
government to be less and less involved
in controlling the economy. It believed
that prosperity could come only through
individual freedom.
It was critical of the
development strategy
of state intervention
in the economy,
centralised planning,
nationalisation and the
public sector. It instead
favoured expansion of a
free private sector. The Swatantra Party was against
land ceilings in agriculture, and opposed cooperative
farming and state trading. It was also opposed to the
progressive tax regime and demanded dismantling C. Rajagopalachari
of the licensing regime. It was critical of the policy of (1878-1972):A senior leader
non-alignment and maintaining friendly relations with of Congress and literary
the Soviet Union and advocated closer ties with the writer; close associate of
United States. The Swatantra Party gained strength Mahatma Gandhi; member
in different parts of the Country by way of merger with of Constituent Assembly; first
numerous regional parties and interests. It attracted Indian to be the Governor
the landlords and princes who wanted to protect General of India (1948-
their land and status that was being threatened by 1950); minister in Union
the land reforms legislation. The industrialists and Cabinet; later became Chief
business class who were against nationalisation and Minister of Madras state;
the licensing policies also supported the party. Its first recipient of the Bharat
narrow social base and the lack of a dedicated cadre Ratna Award; founder of the
of party members did not allow it to build a strong SwatantraParty (1959).
organisational network.

--- PAGE 43 ---
42 Politics in India since Independence
“
these parties prevented the resentment with the system from turning
……Tandon’s
anti-democratic. These parties also groomed the leaders who were to
election is considered
play a crucial role in the shaping of our country.
(by Congress members)
“ In the early years there was a lot of mutual respect between
more important than my
the leaders of the Congress and those of the opposition. The
presence in the Govt or the
interim government that ruled the country after the declaration of
Congress….. .. .. … ..I have Independence and the first general election included opposition
completely exhausted my leaders like Dr. Ambedkar and Shyama Prasad Mukherjee in the
utility both in the Congress cabinet. Jawaharlal Nehru often referred to his fondness for the
and Govt. Socialist Party and invited socialist leaders like Jayaprakash Narayan
to join his government. This kind of personal relationship with and
respect for political adversaries declined after the party competition
Jawaharlal Nehru grew more intense.
in a letter to Rajaji, after
Thus this first phase of democratic politics in our country was
the election of Tandon
quite unique. The inclusive character of the national movement led
as Congress president
against his wishes. by the Congress enabled it to attract different sections, groups and
interests making it a broad based social and ideological coalition. The
Nehru’s Cabinet after the swearing-in of Chakravarti Rajagopalachari as Governor-General in 1948.
Sitting from left to right: Rafi Ahmad Kidwai, Baldev Singh, Maulana Azad, Prime Minister Nehru,
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Rajkumari Amrit Kaur, Mr. John Matthai
and Jagjivan Ram. Standing from left to right: Mr. Gadgil, Mr. Neogi, Dr. Ambedkar, Shyama
Prasad Mukherji, Mr. Gopalaswamy Iyengar and Mr. Jayramdas Daulatram.

--- PAGE 44 ---
Era of One-party Dominance 43
Party competition in a Bihar village
When two buffalos fight, the grass beneath them gets crushed. The
Congress and Socialist parties are fighting with each other. Both of
them are seeking new members. The poor people will be ground
between the two grindstones!
“No, the poor people won’t be crushed. In fact, they’ll benefit”, was
someone’s reply. “Things aren’t accomplished by one party alone. It
is the competition and rivalry between two groups that benefits the
public...”
The news of Socialist Party meeting had agitated the Santhals. The
news of the opening of the hospital hadn’t made much impression on
them – nor did they ever bother much about the fights and quarrels,
Fanishwarnath Renu
or the friendly gatherings of the villagers. But this meeting was for the
tillers of the soil. .... “To whom does the land belong? To the tiller!
He who tills will sow! He who sows will harvest! He who works will eat, come what may!”
Kalicharan lectured....
There was turmoil in the District Office of the Congress Party too. They were about to elect a
Party Chairman. There were four candidates — two real contenders and two dummy candidates.
It was a contest between Rajputs and Bhumihars The wealthy businessmen and zamindars
from both the castes were cruising all over the district in their motorcars, campaigning. All
kinds of mudslinging was going on between them. The Seth who owned the Katihar cotton mill
was representing the Bhumihar party, and the owner of Farbigang jute mill was representing
the Rajputs …. You should see the money they’re flashing around.
Translated extracts from Fanishwarnath Renu’s novel “Maila Anchal”. The novel is set in
Purnia district in North East Bihar in the early years after Independence.
key role of the Congress in the freedom
struggle thus gave it a head start over Shyama Prasad Mukherjee
others. As the ability of the Congress (1901-1953):Leader of
to accommodate all interests and all Hindu Mahasabha; founder
aspirants for political power steadily of Bharatiya Jana Sangh;
declined, other political parties started Minister in Nehru’s first cabinet
gaining greater significance. Thus, afterIndependence; resigned
Congress dominance constitutes only in 1950 due to differences
one phase in the politics of the country. over relations with Pakistan;
We shall come to the other phases in Member of Constituent
later parts of this textbook. Assembly and later, the first Lok Sabha;
was opposed to India’s policy of autonomy
to Jammu & Kashmir; arrested during Jana
Sangh’s agitation against Kashmir policy; died
during detention.

--- PAGE 45 ---
44 Politics in India since Independence
SESICREXE
44 Politics in India since Independence
1. Choose the correct option to fill in the blanks.
(a) The First General Elections in 1952 involved simultaneous
elections to the Lok Sabha and ………………….(The President of
India/ State Assemblies/ Rajya Sabha/ The Prime Minister)
(b) The party that won the second largest number of Lok Sabha seats
in the first elections was the………………….(Praja Socialist Party/
Bharatiya Jana Sangh/ Communist Party of India/Bharatiya Janata
Party)
(c) One of the guiding principles of the ideology of the Swatantra
Party was………………….(Working class interests/ protection of
Princely States / economy free from State control / Autonomy of
States within the Union)
2. Match the following leaders listed in List A with the parties in List B.
List A List B
(a) S. A. Dange i. Bharatiya Jana Sangh
(b) Shyama Prasad Mukherjee ii. Swatantra Party
(c) Minoo Masani iii. Praja Socialist Party
(d) Asoka Mehta iv. Communist Party of India
3. Four statements regarding one- party dominance are given below. Mark
each of them as true or false.
(a) One-party dominance is rooted in the absence of strong alternative
political parties.
(b) One-party dominance occurs because of weak public opinion.
(c) One-party dominance is linked to the nation’s colonial past.
(d) One-party dominance reflects the absence of democratic ideals in
a country.
4. If Bharatiya Jana Sangh or the Communist Party of India had formed the
government after the first election, in which respects would the policies
of the government have been different? Specify three differences each
for both the parties.
5. In what sense was the Congress an ideological coalition? Mention the
various ideological currents present within the Congress.
6. Did the prevalence of a ‘one party dominant system’ affect adversely
the democratic nature of Indian politics?
7. Bring out three differences each between Socialist parties and the
Communist party and between Bharatiya Jana Sangh and Swatantra
Party.
8. What would you consider as the main differences between Mexico and
India under one party domination?

--- PAGE 46 ---
EErraa ofof OOnnee--ppaarrttyy DDoommiinnaannccee 4455
9. Take a political map of India (with State outlines) and mark:
(a) two states where Congress was not in power at some point
during 1952-67.
(b) two states where the Congress remained in power through
this period.
10. Read the following passage and answer the questions below:
“Patel, the organisational man of the Congress, wanted to purge the
Congress of other political groups and sought to make of it a cohesive
and disciplined political party. He …. sought to take the Congress away
from its all-embracing character and turn it into a close-knit party of
disciplined cadres. Being a ‘realist’ he looked more for discipline than
for comprehension. While Gandhi took too romantic a view of “carrying
on the movement,” Patel’s idea of transforming the Congress into
strictly political party with a single ideology and tight discipline showed
an equal lack of understanding of the eclectic role that the Congress,
as a government, was to be called upon to perform in the decades to
follow.” — RAJNI KOTHARI
(a) Why does the author think that Congress should not have been
a cohesive and disciplined party?
(b) Give some examples of the eclectic role of the Congress party
in the early years.
(c) Why does the author say that Gandhi’s view about
Congress’ future was romantic?
LET US DO IT TOGETHER
Make a chart of elections and governments in your State since 1952.
The chart could have the following columns: year of election, name of
the winning party, name of ruling party or parties, name of the Chief
Minister(s).

--- PAGE 47 ---
In this chapter…
In the last two chapters we have studied how the leaders of independent
India responded to the challenges of nation-building and establishing
democracy. Let us now turn to the third challenge, that of economic
Stamps like these, development to ensure well-being of all. As in the case of the first two
issued mostly between challenges, our leaders chose a path that was different and difficult. In
1955 and 1968,
this case their success was much more limited, for this challenge was
depicted a vision of
tougher and more enduring.
planned development.
Left to right, top to In this chapter, we study the story of political choices involved in some
bottom: Damodar
of the key questions of economic development.
Valley, Bhakra
Dam, Chittaranjan (cid:129) What were the key choices and debates about development?
Locomotives, Gauhati
Refinery, Tractor, Sindri (cid:129) Which strategy was adopted by our leaders in the first two
Fertilisers, Bhakra Dam, decades? And why?
Electric Train, Wheat
Revolution, Hirakud (cid:129) What were the main achievements and limitations of this strategy?
Dam, Hindustan Aircraft
(cid:129) Why was this development strategy abandoned in later years?
Factory

--- PAGE 48 ---
3
retpahc politics of planned
development
As the global demand for steel increases, Orissa, which has one of
the largest reserves of untapped iron ore in the country, is being
seen as an important investment destination. The State government
hopes to cash in on this unprecedented demand for iron ore and
has signed Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with both
international and domestic steel makers. The government believes
that this would bring in necessary capital investment and proivde a
lot of employment opportunities. The iron ore resources lie in some
of the most underdeveloped and predominantly tribal districts of the
state. The tribal population fears that the setting up of industries
would mean displacement from their home and livelihood. The
environmentalists fear that mining and industry would
pollute the environment. The central government feels Orissa villagers protest
that if the industry is not allowed it would set a bad against POSCO plant
example and discourage investments in the country.
Staff Reporter
Can you identify the various interests involved in this
case? What are their key points of conflict? Do you think BHUBANESWAR: People facing
there are any common points on which everyone can displacement by the proposed
agree? Can this issue be resolved in a way which satisfies POSCO-India steel plant in
all the various interests? As you ask these questions, you Jagatsinghpur district staged
would find yourself facing yet bigger questions. What a demonstration outside the
kind of development does Orissa need? Indeed, whose Korean company’s office here on
need can be called Orissa’s need? Thursday. They were demanding
cancellation of the memorandum of
Political contestation understanding signed between the
company and the Orissa government
These questions cannot be answered by an expert. one year ago.
Decisions of this kind involve weighing the interests of
More than 100 men and women
one social group against another, present generation
from the gram panchayats of
against future generations. In a democracy such major
Dhinkia, Nuagaon and Gadakujanga
decisions should be taken or at least approved by the
tried to enter the office premises
people themselves. It is important to take advice from
but the police prevented them.
experts on mining, from environmentalists and from
Raising slogans, the protesters
economists. Yet the final decision must be a political
said the company should not be
decision, taken by people’s representatives who are in
allowed to set up its plant at the cost
touch with the feelings of the people.
of their lives and livelihood. The
After Independence our country had to make a series demonstration was organised by the
of major decisions like this. Each of these decisions Rashtriya Yuva Sangathan and the
could not be made independent of other such decisions. Nabanirman Samiti.
All these decisions were bound together by a shared
The Hindu, 23 June 2006
vision or model of economic development. Almost

--- PAGE 49 ---
48 Politics in India since Independence
everyone agreed that the development
hat is Left and what is Right of India should mean both economic
growth and social and economic
In the politics of most countries, you will always
justice. It was also agreed that this
come across references to parties and groups
matter cannot be left to businessmen,
with a Left or Right ideology or leaning. These terms
industrialists and farmers themselves,
characterise the position of the concerned groups or
that the government should play a key
parties regarding social change and role of the state
role in this. There was disagreement,
in effecting economic redistribution. Left often refers
however, on the kind of role that the
to those who are in favour of the poor, downtrodden
government must play in ensuring
sections and support government policies for the
growth with justice. Was it necessary
benefit of these sections. The Right refers to those
to have a centralised institution to
who believe that free competition and market economy
plan for the entire country? Should
alone ensure progress and that the government should
the government itself run some key
not unnecessarily intervene in the economy.
industries and business? How much
Can you tell which of the parties in the 1960s were importance was to be attached to the
Rightist and which were the Left parties? Where needs of justice if it differed from the
would you place the Congress party of that time? requirements of economic growth?
Each of these questions involved
contestation which has continued ever
since. Each of the decision had political
consequence. Most of these issues involved political judgement and
required consultations among political parties and approval of the
public. That is why we need to study the process of development as a
part of the history of politics in India.
Ideas of development
Very often this contestation involves the very idea of development. The
example of Orissa shows us that it is not enough to say that everyone
wants development. For ‘development’ has different meanings for
different sections of the people. Development would mean different
things for example, to an industrialist who is planning to set up a
steel plant, to an urban consumer of steel and to the Adivasi who
lives in that region. Thus any discussion on development is bound to
I thought the
generate contradictions, conflicts and debates.
connection was simpler!
All big decisions involve The first decade after Independence witnessed a lot of debate around
big money and that is
this question. It was common then, as it is even now, for people to refer
why politicians take
to the ‘West’ as the standard for measuring development. ‘Development’
these decisions.
was about becoming more ‘modern’ and modern was about becoming
more like the industrialised countries of the West. This is how common
people as well as the experts thought. It was believed that every country
would go through the process of modernisation as in the West, which
involved the breakdown of traditional social structures and the rise
of capitalism and liberalism. Modernisation was also associated with
the ideas of growth, material progress and scientific rationality. This
kind of idea of development allowed everyone to talk about different
countries as developed, developing or underdeveloped.

--- PAGE 50 ---
Politics of Planned Development 49
On the eve of Independence, India had before it, two models
of modern development: the liberal-capitalist model as in much of
Are you saying
Europe and the US and the socialist model as in the USSR. You have
we don’t have
already studied these two ideologies and read about the ‘cold war’
to be western
between the two super powers. There were many in India then who
in order to be
were deeply impressed by the Soviet model of development. These modern? Is that
included not just the leaders of the Communist Party of India, but possible?
also those of the Socialist Party and leaders like Nehru within the
Congress. There were very few supporters of the American style
capitalist development.
This reflected a broad consensus that had developed during
the national movement. The nationalist leaders were clear that the
economic concerns of the government of free India would have to
be different from the narrowly defined commercial functions of the
colonial government. It was clear, moreover, that the task of poverty
alleviation and social and economic redistribution was being seen
primarily as the responsibility of the government. There were debates
among them. For some, industrialisation seemed to be the preferred
path. For others, the development of agriculture and in particular
alleviation of rural poverty was the priority.
Planning
Despite the various differences, there was a consensus on one point:
that development could not be left to private actors, that there was the
need for the government to develop a design or plan for development.
In fact the idea of planning as a process of rebuilding economy earned
a good deal of public support in the 1940s and 1950s all over the
world. The experience of Great Depression in Europe, the inter-war
semiT
natsudniH
:tiderC
Nehru
addressing
the staff of
thePlanning
Commission

--- PAGE 51 ---
Planning Commission
Do you recall any reference to the Planning Commission in your book
Constitution at Work last year? Actually there was none, for the Planning
Commission is not one of the many commissions and other bodies set up by
the Constitution. The Planning Commission was set up in March, 1950 by a
simple resolution of the Government of India. It has an advisory role and its
recommendations become effective only when the Union Cabinet approved
these. The resolution which set up the Commission defined the scope of its
work in the following terms :
“The Constitution of India has guaranteed certain Fundamental Rights to the
citizens of India and enunciated certain Directive Principles of State Policy,
in particular, that the State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people
by securing and protecting….a social order in which justice, social, economic
and political, shall …….. …. direct its policy towards securing, among other
things,
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an
adequate means of livelihood ;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the
community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
and
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in
Commission has
actually followed these the concentration of wealth and means of production to the common
objectives in practice. detriment.
naniN:tiderC

--- PAGE 52 ---
Politics of Planned Development 51
reconstruction of Japan and Germany, and most of all the spectacular
economic growth against heavy odds in the Soviet Union in the 1930s
and 1940s contributed to this consensus.
Thus the Planning Commission was not a sudden invention. In fact,
it has a very interesting history. We commonly assume that private
investors, such as industrialists and big business entrepreneurs,
are averse to ideas of planning: they seek an open economy without
any state control in the flow of capital. That was not what happened
here. Rather, a section of the big industrialists got together in 1944
and drafted a joint proposal for setting up a planned economy in the
country. It was called the Bombay Plan. The Bombay Plan wanted
the state to take major initiatives in industrial and other economic
investments. Thus, from left to right, planning for development was
the most obvious choice for the country after Independence. Soon
after India became independent, the Planning Commission came into
being. The Prime Minister was its Chairperson. It became the most
influential and central machinery for deciding what path and strategy
India would adopt for its development.
The Early Initiatives
As in the USSR, the Planning Commission of India opted for five year
plans (FYP). The idea is very simple: the Government of India prepares
a document that has a plan for all its income and expenditure for the
next five years. Accordingly the budget of the central and all the State
governments is divided into two parts: ‘non-plan’ budget that is spent
on routine items on a yearly basis and ‘plan’ budget that is spent on a
five year basis as per the priorities fixed by the plan. A five year plan
has the advantage of permitting the government to focus on the larger
picture and make long-term intervention in the economy.

--- PAGE 53 ---
52 Politics in India since Independence
The draft of the First Five Year Plan and then the actual Plan
Document, released in December 1951, generated a lot of excitement
(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:17) (cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:72) (cid:259) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:15) (cid:77)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:15)
government and private sector employees, industrialists, farmers,
(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:17) (cid:259) (cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:17)
The excitement with planning reached its peak with the launching of
the Second Five Year Plan in 1956 and continued somewhat till the
Third Five Year Plan in 1961. The Fourth Plan was due to start in 1966.
By this time, the novelty of planning had declined considerably, and
moreover, India was facing acute economic crisis. The government
decided to take a ‘plan holiday’. Though many criticisms emerged both
about the process and the priorities of these plans, the foundation of
India’s economic development was firmly in place by then.
The First Five Year Plan
(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:41)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87) (cid:41)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:60)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:51)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:11)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:259)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:12) (cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:182)(cid:86)
economy out of the cycle of poverty. K.N. Raj, a young economist
involved in drafting the plan, argued that India should ‘hasten
slowly’ for the first two decades as a fast rate of development might
endanger democracy. The First Five Year Plan addressed, mainly,
the agrarian sector including investment in dams and irrigation.
noissimmoC
gninnalP
dna
PDNU/raD
rihduS
:tiderC
First Five Year Plan
document

--- PAGE 54 ---
Politics of Planned Development 53
Agricultural sector was hit hardest by Partition and needed urgent
attention. Huge allocations were made for large-scale projects like
the Bhakhra Nangal Dam. The Plan identified the pattern of land
distribution in the country as the principal obstacle in the way of
agricultural growth. It focused on land reforms as the key to the
country’s development.
One of the basic aims of the planners was to raise the level of
national income, which could be possible only if the people saved
more money than they spent. As the basic level of spending was
very low in the 1950s, it could not be reduced any more. So the
planners sought to push savings up. That too was difficult as the
total capital stock in the country was rather low compared to the
total number of employable people. Nevertheless, people’s savings
Tenth Five Year Plan
did rise in the first phase of the planned process until the end of document
the Third Five Year Plan. But, the rise was not as spectacular as
was expected at the beginning of the First Plan. Later, from the
early 1960s till the early 1970s, the proportion of savings in the
country actually dropped consistently.
Rapid Industrialisation
The Second FYP stressed on heavy industries. It was drafted
by a team of economists and planners under the leadership of
P. C. Mahalanobis. If the first plan had preached patience, the
second wanted to bring about quick structural transformation by
making changes simultaneously in all possible directions. Before
this plan was finalised, the Congress party at its session held at
Avadi near the then Madras city, passed an important resolution.
It declared that ‘socialist pattern of society’ was its goal. This was
reflected in the Second Plan. The government imposed substantial
tariffs on imports in order to protect domestic industries. Such
protected environment helped both public and private sector
industries to grow. As savings and investment were growing in this
period, a bulk of these industries like electricity, railways, steel,
P.C. Mahalanobis
machineries and communication could be developed in the public
(1893-1972):
sector. Indeed, such a push for industrialisation marked a turning
Scientist and
point in India’s development.
statistician of
It, however, had its problems as well. India was technologically international repute;
backward, so it had to spend precious foreign exchange to buy founder of Indian
technology from the global market. That apart, as industry attracted Statistical Institute
more investment than agriculture, the possibility of food shortage (1931); architect of
loomed large. The Indian planners found balancing industry and theSecondPlan;
agriculture really difficult. The Third Plan was not significantly supporter of rapid
different from the Second. Critics pointed out that the plan industrialisation and
strategies from this time around displayed an unmistakable active role of the
“urban bias”. Others thought that industry was wrongly given public sector.
priority over agriculture. There were also those who wanted focus
on agriculture-related industries rather than heavy ones.

--- PAGE 55 ---
54 Politics in India since Independence
Key Controversies
Decentralised planning
The strategy of development followed
It is not necessary that all planning always has to in the early years raised several
be centralised; nor is it that planning is only about important questions. Let us examine
big industries and large projects. The ‘Kerala two of these disputes that continue
model’ is the name given to the path of planning to be relevant.
and development charted by the State of Kerala.
There has been a focus in this model on education, Agriculture versus industry
health, land reform, effective food distribution, and
We have already touched upon a big
poverty alleviation. Despite low per capita incomes,
question: between agriculture and
and a relatively weak industrial base, Kerala
industry, which one should attract
achieved nearly total literacy, long life expectancy,
more public resources in a backward
low infant and female mortality, low birth rates
economy like that of India? Many
and high access to medical care. Between 1987
thought that the Second Plan lacked
and 1991, the government launched the New
an agrarian strategy for development,
Democratic Initiative which involved campaigns
and the emphasis on industry
for development (including total literacy especially
caused agriculture and rural India
in science and environment) designed to involve
to suffer. Gandhian economists
people directly in development activities through
like J. C. Kumarappa proposed an
voluntary citizens’ organisations. The State has
alternative blueprint that put greater
also taken initiative to involve people in making
emphasis on rural industrialisation.
plans at the Panchayat, block and district level.
Chaudhary Charan Singh, a Congress
leader who later broke from the
party to form Bharatiya Lok Dal,

--- PAGE 56 ---
Politics of Planned Development 55
.C. Kumarappa
(1892-1960): Original name
J.C. Cornelius; economist and
chartered accountant; studied
in England and USA; follower
of Mahatma Gandhi; tried to
apply Gandhian principles to
economic policies; author of
‘Economy of Permanence’;
participated in planning
process as member of the
Planning Commission
forcefully articulated the case for
keeping agriculture at the centre of
planning for India. He said that the
planning was leading to creation of
prosperity in urban and industrial
section at the expense of the
farmers and rural population.
Others thought that without
a drastic increase in industrial
production, there could be no
escape from the cycle of poverty.
They argued that Indian planning
did have an agrarian strategy
to boost the production of food-
grains. The state made laws for
land reforms and distribution of
resources among the poor in the
villages. It also proposed progra-
mmes of community development
and spent large sums on irrigation
projects. The failure was not that of
policy but its non-implementation,
because the landowning classes
mliF
a
hctaw
s’teL
P P
ATHER ANCHALI
This film tells the story of a poor
family in a Bengal village and its
struggle to survive. Durga, the
daughter of Harihar and Sarbajaya,
with her younger brother, Apu,
goes on enjoying life oblivious of
the struggles and the poverty. The
film revolves around the simple
life and the efforts of the mother
of Durga and Apu to maintain
the family.
Pather Panchali (Song of the Little
Road) narrates the desires and
disappointments of the poor family
through the tale of the youngsters.
Finally, during monsoon, Durga
falls ill and dies while her father
is away. Harihar returns with gifts,
including a sari for Durga…..
The film won numerous awards
nationally and internationally,
including the President’s Gold and
Silver medals for the year 1955.
Year: 1955
Director: Satyajit Ray
Story: Bibhutibhushan
Bandyopadhyay
Screenplay: Satyajit Ray
Actors: Kanu Bannerjee, Karuna
Bannerjee, Subir Bannerjee, Uma
Das Gupta Durga, Chunibala Devi

--- PAGE 57 ---
56 Politics in India since Independence
had lot of social and political power. Besides, they also argue that
even if the government had spent more money on agriculture it would
not have solved the massive problem of rural poverty.
Public versus private sector
(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:259)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:71)
not accept the capitalist model of development in which development
was left entirely to the private sector, nor did it follow the socialist
model in which private property was abolished and all the production
was controlled by the state. Elements from both these models were
taken and mixed together in India. That is why it was described as
‘mixed economy’. Much of the agriculture, trade and industry were left
in private hands. The state controlled key heavy industries, provided
industrial infrastructure, regulated trade and made some crucial
interventions in agriculture.
A mixed model like this was open to criticism from both the left
and the right. Critics argued that the planners refused to provide
the private sector with enough space and the stimulus to grow.
The enlarged public sector produced powerful vested interests that
Astride the Public
Sector are Central
Ministers Lal Bahadur
Shastri, Ajit Prasad
Jain, Kailash Nath
Katju, Jagjivan Ram,
T. T. Krishnamachari,
Swaran Singh,
Gulzari Lal Nanda and
B. K. Keskar
raknahS
:tiderC

--- PAGE 58 ---
Politics of Planned Development 57
created enough hurdles for private capital, especially by way of
installing systems of licenses and permits for investment. Moreover,
the state’s policy to restrict import of goods that could be produced
in the domestic market with little or no competition left the private
sector with no incentive to improve their products and make them
cheaper. The state controlled more things than were necessary and
this led to inefficiency and corruption.
Then there were critics who thought that the state did not do
enough. They pointed out that the state did not spend any significant
amount for public education and healthcare. The state intervened
only in those areas where the private sector was not prepared to go.
Thus the state helped the private sector to make profit. Also, instead
of helping the poor, the state intervention ended up creating a new
‘middle class’ that enjoyed the privileges of high salaries without
much accountability. Poverty did not decline substantially during this
period; even when the proportion of the poor reduced, their numbers
kept going up.
Major Outcomes
Of the three objectives that were identified in independent India,
discussed in the first three chapters here, the third objective proved
most difficult to realise. Land reforms did not take place effectively in
most parts of the country; political power remained in the hands of
the landowning classes; and big industrialists continued to benefit
and thrive while poverty did not reduce much. The early initiatives
for planned development were at best realising the goals of economic
development of the country and well-being of all its citizens. The
inability to take significant steps in this direction in the very first
stage was to become a political problem. Those who benefited from
unequal development soon became politically powerful and made it
even more difficult to move in the desired direction.
Foundations
An assessment of the outcomes of this early phase of planned
development must begin by acknowledging the fact that in this period
the foundations of India’s future economic growth were laid. Some of
the largest developmental projects in India’s history were undertaken
during this period. These included mega-dams like Bhakhra-Nangal
and Hirakud for irrigation and power generation. Some of the
(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:92) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:259) (cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:79) (cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:15) (cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:79) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:15)
(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:15) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:17) (cid:259) (cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)
this period. Infrastructure for transport and communication was
improved substantially. Of late, some of these mega projects have
come in for a lot of criticism. Yet much of the later economic growth,
including that by the private sector, may not have been possible in
the absence of these foundations.

--- PAGE 59 ---
58 Politics in India since Independence
Government Campaign reaches the village
“In a way the advertisement stuck or written on walls gave an accurate introduction to the
villager’s problems and how to solve them. For example, the problem was that India was a
farming nation, but farmers refused to produce more grain out of sheer perversity. The solution
was to give speeches to farmers and show them all sorts of attractive pictures. These advised
them that if they didn’t want to grow more grain for themselves then they should do so for the
nation. As a result the posters were stuck in various places to induce farmers to grow grain
for the nation. The farmers were greatly influenced by the combined effect of the speeches
and posters, and even most simple-minded cultivator began to feel the likelihood of there was
some ulterior motive behind the whole campaign.
One advertisement had become especially well known in Shivpalganj. It showed a healthy
farmer with turban wrapped around his head, earrings and a quilted jacket, cutting a tall crop
of wheat with a sickle. A woman was standing behind him, very pleased with herself; she was
laughing like an official from the Department of Agriculture.
Below and above the picture was written in Hindi and English – ‘Grow More Grain’. Farmers
with earrings and a quilted jacket who were also scholars of English were expected to be won
over by the English slogans, and those who were scholars of Hindi, by the Hindi version. And
those who didn’t know how to read either language could at least recognise the figures of the
man and the laughing woman. The government hoped that as soon as they saw the man and
the laughing woman, farmer would turn away from the poster and start growing more grain like
men possessed”.
Extracts of translation from ‘Raag arbari’ by Shrilal Shukla. The satire is set in a village
Shivpalganj in Uttar Pradesh in the s.
Land reforms
In the agrarian sector, this period witnessed a serious attempt at
land reforms. Perhaps the most significant and successful of these
was the abolition of the colonial system of zamindari. This bold act
not only released land from the clutches of a class that had little
interest in agriculture, it also reduced the capacity of the landlords
(cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:17) (cid:36)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:259) (cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)
small pieces of land together in one place so that the farm size could
(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72) (cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:259) (cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:82) (cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:17) (cid:37)(cid:88)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)
Oh! I thought land
other two components of land reforms were much less successful.
reforms were about
Though the laws were made to put an upper limit or ‘ceiling’ to how
improving the quality of
much agricultural land one person could own, people with excess
soil!
land managed to evade the law. Similarly, the tenants who worked on
someone else’s land were given greater legal security against eviction,
but this provision was rarely implemented.
It was not easy to turn these well-meaning policies on agriculture
into genuine and effective action. This could happen only if the rural,
landless poor were mobilised. But the landowners were very powerful
and wielded considerable political influence. Therefore, many proposals
for land reforms were either not translated into laws, or, when made into

--- PAGE 60 ---
5 9
ood Crisis
The agricultural situation went from bad to worse in the 1960s. Already, the rate of growth of
food grain production in the 1940s and 1950s was barely staying above rate of population
growth. Between 1965 and 1967, severe droughts occurred in many parts of the country. As
we shall study in the next chapter, this was also the period when the country faced two wars
and foreign exchange crisis. All this resulted in a severe food shortage and famine – like
conditions in many parts of the country.
It was in Bihar that the food-crisis was most acutely felt as the state faced a near-famine
situation. The food shortage was significant in all districts of Bihar, with 9 districts producing
less than half of their normal output. Five of these districts, in fact, produced less than one-third
of what they produced normally. Food deprivation subsequently led to acute and widespread
malnutrition. It was estimated that the calorie intake dropped from 2200 per capita per day to
as low as 1200 in many regions of the state (as against the requirement of 2450 per day for
the average person). Death rate in Bihar in 1967 was 34 higher than the number of deaths
that occurred in the following year. Food prices also hit a high in Bihar during the year, even
when compared with other north Indian states. For wheat and rice the prices in the state were
twice or more than their prices in more prosperous Punjab. The government had “zoning”
policies that prohibited trade of food across states; this reduced the availability of food in Bihar
dramatically. In situations such as this, the poorest sections of the society suffered the most.
The food crisis had many consequences. The government had to import wheat and had to
accept foreign aid, mainly from the US. Now the first priority of the planners was to somehow
attain self-sufficiency in food. The entire planning process and sense of optimism and pride
associated with it suffered a setback.

--- PAGE 61 ---
60 Politics in India since Independence
laws, they remained only on paper. This shows that economic policy is
part of the actual political situation in the society. It also shows that in
spite of good wishes of some top leaders, the dominant social groups
would always effectively control policy making and implementation.
The Green Revolution
In the face of the prevailing food-crisis, the country was clearly
vulnerable to external pressures and dependent on food aid, mainly
from the United States. The United States, in turn, pushed India to
change its economic policies. The government adopted a new strategy
for agriculture in order to ensure food sufficiency. Instead of the
earlier policy of giving more support to the areas and farmers that
were lagging behind, now it was decided to put more resources into
those areas which already had irrigation and those farmers who were
already well-off. The argument was that those who already had the
capacity could help increase production rapidly in the short run.
Thus the government offered high-yielding variety seeds, fertilizers,
pesticides and better irrigation at highly subsidised prices. The
government also gave a guarantee to buy the produce of the farmers
at a given price. This was the beginning of what was called the ‘green
revolution’.
The rich peasants and the large landholders were the major
beneficiaries of the process. The green revolution delivered only a
moderate agricultural growth (mainly a rise in wheat production) and
raised the availability of food in the country, but increased polarisation
between classes and regions. Some regions like Punjab, Haryana
and western Uttar Pradesh became agriculturally prosperous, while
others remained backward. The green revolution had two other
effects: one was that in many parts, the stark contrast between the
poor peasantry and the landlords produced conditions favourable for
hcraes-er
s’teL
Why don’t we call it
wheat revolution? And
why does everything
have to be ‘revolution’?
Srikanth still remembers the struggle his elder brother had to undergo
in order to get the monthly supply of ration for the ration shop. Their
family was totally dependent on the supplies from the ration shop for
rice, oil and kerosene. Many times, his brother would stand in the
queue for an hour or so only to find out that the supply had ended and
he would have to come later when fresh supply arrives. Find out from
talking to elders in your family what is a ration card and ask your elders
what, if any, items they buy from the ration shop. Visit a ration shop in
the vicinity of your school or home and find out what is the difference
in the prices of at least three commodities—wheatrice, cooking oil,
sugar—between the ration shop and the open market.

--- PAGE 62 ---
PPoolliittiiccss ofof PPllaannnneedd DDeevveellooppmmeenntt 6611
Fast F rwar he hite e l ti
You must be familiar with the jingle ‘utterly butterly delicious’ and
the endearing figure of the little girl holding a buttered toast. Yes, the
Amul advertisements! Did you know that behind Amul products lies a
successful history of cooperative dairy farming in India. Verghese Kurien,
nicknamed the ‘Milkman of India’, played a crucial role in the story of
Gujarat Cooperative Milk and Marketing Federation Ltd that launched
Amul.
Based in Anand, a town in Gujarat, Amul is a dairy cooperative movement
joined by about 2 and half million milk producers in Gujarat. The Amul
pattern became a uniquely appropriate model for rural development and
poverty alleviation, spurring what has come to be known as the White
Revolution. In 1970 the rural development programme called Operation Flood was started.
Operation Flood organised cooperatives of milk producers into a nationwide milk grid, with the
purpose of increasing milk production, bringing the producer and consumer closer by eliminating
middlemen, and assuring the producers a regular income throughout the year. Operation
Flood was, however, not just a dairy programme. It saw dairying as a path to development,
for generating employment and income for rural households and alleviating poverty. The
number of members of the cooperative has continued to increase with the numbers of women
members and Women’s Dairy Cooperative Societies also increasing significantly.
leftwing organisations to organise the poor peasants. Secondly, the
green revolution also resulted in the rise of what is called the middle
peasant sections. These were farmers with medium size holdings, who
benefited from the changes and soon emerged politically influential in
many parts of the country.
Later developments
The story of development in India took a significant turn from the
end of 1960s. You will see in Chapter Five how after Nehru’s death
the Congress system encountered difficulties. Indira Gandhi emerged
as a popular leader. She decided to further strengthen the role of
the state in controlling and directing the economy. The period from
1967 onwards witnessed many new restrictions on private industry.
Fourteen private banks were nationalised. The government announced
many pro-poor programmes. These changes were accompanied by an
ideological tilt towards socialist policies. This emphasis generated
heated debates within the country among political parties and also
among experts.
However, the consensus for a state-led economic development
did not last forever. Planning did continue, but its salience was
significantly reduced. Between 1950 and 1980 the Indian economy
grew at a sluggish per annum rate of 3 to 3.5%. In view of the prevailing

--- PAGE 63 ---
62 Politics in India since Independence
inefficiency and corruption in some public sector enterprises and the
not-so-positive role of the bureaucracy in economic development, the
public opinion in the country lost the faith it initially placed in many
of these institutions. Such lack of public faith led the policy makers to
reduce the importance of the state in India’s economy from the 1980s
onwards. We shall look at that part of the story towards the end of
this book.
raknahS
:tiderC
1. Which of these statements about the Bombay Plan is incorrect?
(a) It was a blueprint for India’s economic future.
(b) It supported state-ownership of industry.
(c) It was made by some leading industrialists.
(d) It supported strongly the idea of planning.n
2. Which of the following ideas did not form part of the early phase of
India’s development policy?
(a) Planning (c) Cooperative Farming
(b) Liberalisation (d) Self sufficiency
3. The idea of planning in India was drawn from
(a) the Bombay plan (c) Gandhian vision of
society
(b) experiences of the Soviet (d) Demand by peasant
bloc countries organisations
i. b and d only iii. a and b only
ii. d and c only iv. all the above
SESICREXE

--- PAGE 64 ---
Politics of Planned Development 63
EXERCISES
Politics of Planned Development 63
4. Match the following.
(a) Charan Singh i. Industrialisation
(b) P C Mahalanobis ii. oning
(c) Bihar Famine iii. Farmers
(d) Verghese Kurien iv. Milk Cooperatives
5. What were the major differences in the approach towards development
at the time of Independence? Has the debate been resolved?
6. What was the major thrust of the First Five Year Plan? In which ways
did the Second Plan differ from the first one?
7. What was the Green Revolution? Mention two positive and two
negative consequences of the Green Revolution.
8. State the main arguments in the debate that ensued between
industrialisation and agricultural development at the time of the
Second Five Year Plan.
9. “Indian policy makers made a mistake by emphasising the role of
state in the economy. India could have developed much better if
private sector was allowed a free play right from the beginning”. Give
arguments for or against this proposition.
10. Read the following passage and answer the questions below:
“In the early years of Independence, two contradictory tendencies
were already well advanced inside the Congress party. n the one
hand, the national party executive endorsed socialist principles
of state ownership, regulation and control over key sectors of the
economy in order to improve productivity and at the same time curb
economic concentration. n the other hand, the national Congress
government pursued liberal economic policies and incentives to
private investment that was justified in terms of the sole criterion of
achieving maximum increase in production. “ — FRANCINE FRANKEL
(a) What is the contradiction that the author is talking about?
What would be the political implications of a contradiction like
this?
(b) If the author is correct, why is it that the Congress was
pursuing this policy? Was it related to the nature of the
opposition parties?
(c) Was there also a contradiction between the central leadership
of the Congress party and its Sate level leaders?

--- PAGE 65 ---
In this chapter…
Thus far we have focussed in this book on the developments within
the country and on domestic challenges. We now turn to the external
challenges. Here too our leaders faced the challenge with an innovative
response by way of the policy of non-alignment. But they also found
themselves in conflict with neighbours. This led to three wars in 1962,
1965 and 1971. These wars, and the external relations in general, were
shaped by and had its impact on the politics in the country.
In this chapter we study the story of this relationship between the
Nehru with Nkrumah
external and the internal politics by focussing on
from Ghana, Nasser
from Egypt, Sukarno (cid:129) the international context that shaped India’s external relations;
from Indonesia and Tito
from Yugoslavia at the (cid:129) the operational principles that informed the country’s foreign
Afro-Asian conference in policy;
Bandung in 1955. These
(cid:129) the history of India’s relations with China and Pakistan; and
five comprised the core
leadership of the Non
(cid:129) the evolution of India’s nuclear policy.
Aligned Movement.
LMMN
:tiderC

--- PAGE 66 ---
4
International context
India was born in a very trying and challenging international context.
The world had witnessed a devastating war and was grappling
with issues of reconstruction; yet another attempt to establish
an international body was underway; many new countries were
emerging as a result of the collapse of colonialism; and most new
nations were trying to come to terms with the twin challenges of
welfare and democracy. Free India’s foreign policy reflected all these
concerns in the period immediately after Independence. Apart from
these factors at the global level, India had its own share of concerns.
The British government left behind the legacy of many international
disputes; Partition created its own pressures, and the task of poverty
alleviation was already waiting for fulfilment. This was the overall
context in which India started participating in the world affairs as an
independent nation-state.
As a nation born in the backdrop of the world war, India decided
to conduct its foreign relations with an aim to respect the sovereignty
of all other nations and to achieve security through the maintenance
of peace. This aim finds an echo in the Directive Principles of State
Policy.
Just as both internal and external factors guide the behaviour of an
individual or a family, both domestic and international environment
influence the foreign policy of a nation. The developing countries
lack the required resources to effectively advocate their concerns in
the international system. So they pursue more modest goals than
the advanced states. They focus more on peace and development in
their own neighbourhood. Moreover, their economic and security
dependence on the more powerful states occasionally influences
their foreign policy. In the period immediately after the Second World
War, many developing nations chose to support the foreign policy
preferences of the powerful countries who were giving them aid or
credits. This resulted in the division of countries of the world into two
clear camps. One was under the influence of the United States and
its western allies and the other was under the influence of the then
Soviet Union. You have read about this in the book on Contemporary
World Politics. You have read there about the experiment called the
Non-Aligned Movement. As you also read there, the end of the Cold
War changed the context of international relations entirely. But when
India achieved its freedom and started framing its foreign policy, the
retpahc india’s external
relations
“
What does
independence consist of?
It consists fundamentally
and basically of foreign
relations. That is the test
of independence. All e“lse is
local autonomy. Once foreign
relations go out of your
hands into the charge of
somebody else, to that extent
and in that measure you are
not independent.
Jawaharlal Nehru
during a debate in the
Constituent Assembly in
March 1949.

--- PAGE 67 ---
66 Politics in India since Independence
The Constitutional principles
Article 51 of the Indian Constitution lays down some Directive Principles of State Policy on
‘Promotion of international peace and security’.
“The State shall endeavour to –
(a) Promote international peace and security
(b) Maintain just and honourable relations between nations
(c) Foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of organised
people with one another; and
(d) Encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.”
How well did the Indian state live up to these principles in the first two decades after
Independence? You may come back to this question after reading the chapter.
Cold War was just beginning and the world was getting divided into
these two camps. Did India belong to any of these two camps in global
politics of the fifties and the sixties? Was it successful in conducting
its foreign policy peacefully and avoiding international conflicts?
Policy of non-alignment
The Indian national movement was not an isolated process. It was a
part of the worldwide struggle against colonialism and imperialism.
It influenced the liberation movements of many Asian and African
countries.Prior to India’s Independence, there were contacts between
the nationalist leaders of India and those of other colonies, united
as they were in their common struggle against colonialism and
imperialism. The creation of the Indian National Army (INA) by Netaji
Subhash Chandra Bose during the Second WorldWar was the clearest
manifestation of the linkages established between India and overseas
Indians during the freedom struggle.
The foreign policy of a nation reflects the interplay of domestic
and external factors. Therefore, the noble ideals that inspired India’s
struggle for freedom influenced the making of its foreign policy. But
India’s attainment of independence coincided with the beginning of
the Cold War era. As you read in the first chapter of the book on
It’s ContemporaryWorldPolitics, this period was marked by the political,
the fourth chapter economic, and military confrontation at the global level between the
and it’s Nehru once two blocs led by the superpowers, the US and the USSR. The same
again!Was he a
period also witnessed developments like the establishment of the
superman or what? Or
UN, the creation of nuclear weapons, the emergence of Communist
have the historians
glorified his role?

--- PAGE 68 ---
India’s external relations 67
China, and the beginning of decolonisation. So India’s leadership had
to pursue its national interests within the prevailing international
context.
Nehru’s role
The first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru played a crucial role in
setting the national agenda. He was his own foreign minister. Thus
both as the Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister, he exercised
profound influence in the formulation and implementation of India’s
foreign policy from 1946 to 1964. The three major objectives of
Nehru’s foreign policy were to preserve the hard-earned sovereignty,
protect territorial integrity, and promote rapid economic development.
Nehru wished to achieve these objectives through the strategy of non-
alignment. There were of course parties and groups in the country “
that believed that India should be more friendly with the bloc led
by US because that bloc claimed to be pro-democracy. Among those
Our general
who thought on these lines were leaders like Dr Ambedkar. Some
policy is to avoid
political parties, which were opposed to communism, also wanted
India to follow a pro-US foreign policy. These included the Bharatiya entanglement in power
Jan Sangh and later the Swatantra Party. But Nehru possessed politics and not to join
considerable leeway in formulating the foreign policy. any group of powers as
against any other group.
Distance from two camps
The two leading groups
The foreign policy of independent India vigorously pursued the dream today are the Russian
of a peaceful world by advocating the policy of non-alignment, by bloc and the Anglo-
reducing the Cold War tensions and by contributing human resources American bloc. We must
to the UN peacekeeping operations. You might ask why India did not
be friendly to both and
join either of the two camps during the Cold War era. India wanted
yet not join either. Both
to keep away from the military alliances led by US and Soviet Union
America and Russia
against each other. As you have read in the book on Contemporary
World Politics, during the Cold War, the US-led North Atlantic are extraordinarily
Treaty Organisation (NATO) and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact came suspicious of each other
into existence. India advocated non-alignment as the ideal foreign as well as of other
policy approach. This was a difficult balancing act and sometimes countries. This makes “
the balance did not appear perfect. In 1956 when Britain attacked
our path difficult
Egypt over the Suez canal issue, India led the world protest against
and we may well be
this neo-colonial invasion. But in the same year when the USSR
suspected by each of
invaded Hungary, India did not join its public condemnation. Despite
such situation, by and large India did take an independent stand on leaning towards the
various international issues and could get aid and assistance from other. This cannot be
members of both the blocs. helped.
While India was trying to convince the other developing countries
Jawaharlal Nehru
about the policy of non-alignment, Pakistan joined the US-led military
Letter to K .P. S.
alliances. The US was not happy about India’s independent initiatives
Menon, January
and the policy of non-alignment. Therefore, there was a considerable
1947.

--- PAGE 69 ---
68 Politics in India since Independence
unease in Indo-US relations during the 1950s. The US also resented
India’s growing partnership with the Soviet Union.
You have studied in the last chapter, the strategy of planned
economic development adopted by India. This policy emphasised
import-substitution. The emphasis on developing a resource base also
meant that export oriented growth was limited. This development
strategy limited India’s economic interaction with the outside world.
Afro-Asian unity
Yet, given its size, location and power potential, Nehru envisaged a
major role for India in world affairs and especially in Asian affairs.
His era was marked by the establishment of contacts between India
Did we have more
and other newly independent states in Asia and Africa. Throughout
recognition and power
the 1940s and 1950s, Nehru had been an ardent advocate of Asian
in the world when we
were younger, poorer unity. Under his leadership, India convened the Asian Relations
and more vulnerable Conference in March 1947, five months ahead of attaining its
than now? Isn’t that independence. India made earnest efforts for the early realisation of
strange?
freedom of Indonesia from the Dutch colonial regime by convening
an international conference in 1949 to support its freedom struggle.
India was a staunch supporter of the decolonisation process and
firmly opposed racism, especially apartheid in South Africa. The Afro-
“
Asian conference held in the Indonesian city of Bandung in 1955,
commonly known as the Bandung Conference, marked the zenith of
a country without India’s engagement with the newly independent Asian and African
material, men or money nations. The Bandung Conference later led to the establishment
– the three mea“ns of power of the NAM. The First Summit of the NAM was held in Belgrade in
– is now fast coming to be September 1961. Nehru was a co-founder of the NAM (See Chapter 1
of Contemporary World Politics).
recognised as the biggest
moral power in the civilised
world …her word listened to Peace and conflict with China
with respect in the councils
of the great. Unlike its relationship with Pakistan, free India began its relationship
with China on a very friendly note. After the Chinese revolution in
1949, India was one of the first countries to recognise the communist
C. Rajagopalachari government. Nehru felt strongly for this neighbour that was coming out
Letter to Edwina of the shadow of western domination and helped the new government
Mountbatten, 1950. in international fora. Some of his colleagues, like Vallabhbhai Patel,
were worried about a possible Chinese aggression in future. But Nehru
thought it was ‘exceedingly unlikely’ that India will face an attack
from China. For a very long time, the Chinese border was guarded by
para-military forces, not the army.
The joint enunciation of Panchsheel, the Five Principles of Peaceful
Coexistence, by the Indian Prime Minister Nehru and the Chinese
Premier Zhou Enlai on 29 April 1954 was a step in the direction of
stronger relationship between the two countries. Indian and Chinese
leaders visited each other’s country and were greeted by large and
friendly crowds.

--- PAGE 70 ---
IInnddiiaa’’ss extexteerrnnaall rreellaattiioonnss 6699
TIBET
The plateau of the central Asian region called Tibe
is one of the major issues that historically caused
tension between India and China. From time to
time in history, China had claimed administrative
control over Tibet. And from time to time, Tibet was
independent too. In 1950, China took over contro
of Tibet. Large sections of the Tibetan population
o
C
W
p
h
h
p
in
e
o
a
n
s e
to
d
th
re
e
t
c
h
o
i
P
s
g
a
n
t
n
i
a
s
c
k
e
h
e
s
T
o
h
i
v
b
e
e
e
e
r
t
l
.
’ s
I
a
c
n
l
g
a
d
r
i
i
e
m
a
e
s
m
t r
fo
i
e
e
r
n
d
i
t
n d
t
w
o
e
a
p
s
p
e
e
n
r
d
s
s
e
i
u
g
n
a
n
c
d
e
e
e
d
Dalai
Lama
enters India
with his followers.
between India and China in 1954, through one of
its clauses about respecting each other’s territorial
integrity and sovereignty, India conceded China’s
claim over Tibet. The Tibetan spiritual leader Dalai Lama accompanied the Chinese Premier Zhou
Enlai during the official Chinese visit to India in 1956. He informed Nehru about the worsening situation
in Tibet. But China had already assured India that Tibet will be given greater autonomy than enjoyed
by any other region of China. In 1958, there was armed uprising in Tibet against China’s occupation.
This was suppressed by the Chinese forces. Sensing that the situation had become worse, in 1959, the
Dalai Lama crossed over into the Indian border and sought asylum which was granted. The Chinese
government strongly protested against this. Over the last half century, a large number of Tibetans have
also sought refuge in India and many other countries of the world. In India, particularly in Delhi, there
are large settlements of Tibetan refugees. Dharmashala in Himachal Pradesh is perhaps the largest
refuge settlement of Tibetans in India. The Dalai Lama has also made Dharmashala his home in India.
In the 1950s and 1960s many political leaders and parties in India including the Socialist Party and the
Jan Sangh supported the cause of Tibet’s independence.
China has created the Tibet autonomous region, which is an integral part of China. Tibetans oppose the
Chinese claim that Tibet is part of Chinese territory. They also oppose the policy of bringing into Tibet
more and more Chinese settlers. Tibetans dispute China’s claim that autonomy is granted to the region.
They think that China wants to undermine the traditional religion and culture of Tibet.

--- PAGE 71 ---
7700
Note: This
illustration
is not a map
drawn to
scale and
should not
be taken
to be an
authentic
depiction
of India’s
external
boundaries.
Border disputes with
China erupted in 1960. Talks
between Nehru and Mao Tsetung
proved futile.

--- PAGE 72 ---
71
1962
n
a
m
x
a
L
K.
R.
dit:
e
r
C
China roller
evidence
V.K. Krishna
under
construction. Menon
(1897-1974):
Diplomat and
minister; active
in the Labour
Party in UK
between 1934-
1947; Indian High
Commissioner in UK and later head
of India’s delegation to UN; Rajya
Sabha MP and later Lok Sabha MP;
member of the Union Cabinet from
1956; Defence Minsiter since 1957;
considered very close to Nehru;
resigned after the India-China war in
1962.

--- PAGE 73 ---
72 Politics in India since Independence
The Chinese invasion, 1962
Two developments strained this relationship. China annexed Tibet in
“ 1950 and thus removed a historical buffer between the two countries.
“ Initially, the government of India did not oppose this openly. But as
Frankly ...my more information came in about the suppression of Tibetan culture,
impression (of Zhou Enlai) the Indian government grew uneasy. The Tibetan spiritual leader, the
Dalai Lama, sought and obtained political asylum in India in 1959.
was very favourable. ….the
China alleged that the government of India was allowing anti-China
Chinese premier is, I believe
activities to take place from within India.
a good type of man and
trustworthy. A little earlier, a boundary dispute had surfaced between India
and China. India claimed that the boundary was a matter settled in
colonial time, but China said that any colonial decision did not apply.
C. Rajagopalachari The main dispute was about the western and the eastern end of the
In a letter, December 1956 long border. China claimed two areas within the Indian territory:
Aksai-chin area in the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir and
much of the state of Arunachal Pradesh in what was then called
NEFA (North Eastern Frontier Agency). Between 1957 and 1959,
the Chinese occupied the Aksai-chin area and built a strategic road
there. Despite a very long correspondence and discussion among top
leaders, these differences could not be resolved. Several small border
skirmishes between the armies of the two countries took place.
Do you remember the Cuban Missile Crisis in Chapter One of the
Contemporary World Politics? While the entire world’s attention was
on this crisis involving the two superpowers, China launched a swift
and massive invasion in October 1962 on both the disputed regions.
The first attack lasted one week and Chinese forces captured some
key areas in Arunachal Pradesh. The second wave of attack came next
month. While the Indian forces could block the Chinese advances on
the western front in Ladakh, in the east the Chinese managed to
advance nearly to the entry point of Assam plains. Finally, China
declared a unilateral ceasefire and its troops withdrew to where they
I heard
were before the invasion began.
it from my
grandfather. Nehru
The China war dented India’s image at home and abroad. India
Ji cried in public when
had to approach the Americans and the British for military assistance
Lata Mangeshkar sang
to tide over the crisis. The Soviet Union remained neutral during
“Ai mere watan ke logo…”
after the 1962 war. the conflict. It induced a sense of national humiliation and at the
same time strengthened a spirit of nationalism. Some of the top army
commanders either resigned or were retired. Nehru’s close associate
and the then Defence Minister, V. Krishna Menon, had to leave the
cabinet. Nehru’s own stature suffered as he was severely criticised
for his naïve assessment of the Chinese intentions and the lack of
military preparedness. For the first time, a no-confidence motion
against his government was moved and debated in the Lok Sabha.
Soon thereafter, the Congress lost some key by-elections to Lok
Sabha. The political mood of the country had begun to change.

--- PAGE 74 ---
India’s external relations 73
Fast Forward
Sino-Indian relations since 1962
It took more than a decade for India and
China to resume normal relations. It was
in 1976 that full diplomatic relations were
restored between the two countries. Atal
Behari Vajpayee was the first top level
leader (he was then External Affairs
Minister) to visit China in 1979. Later,
Rajiv Gandhi became the first Prime
Minister after Nehru to visit China. Since
then, the emphasis is more on trade
relations between the two countries. In
the book, Contemporary World Politics,
you have already read about these
developments.
mliF
a
hctaw
s’teL
H
AQEEQAT
A small platoon of Indian army
is rescued by the gypsies in
Ladakh region. The enemy has
The Sino-Indian conflict affected the surrounded their post. Capt.
opposition as well. This and the growing Bahadur Singh and his gypsy
rift between China and the Soviet Union girlfriend Kammo help the
created irreconcilable differences within jawans vacate their posts. Both
the Communist Party of India (CPI). The Bahadur Singh and Kammo die
while holding the Chinese but
pro-USSR faction remained within the
thejawans too, are out powered
CPI and moved towards closer ties with
by the enemy and lay down their
the Congress. The other faction was for
lives for the country.
sometime closer to China and was against
any ties with the Congress. The party
split in 1964 and the leaders of the latter
Set in the backdrop of the China
faction formed Communist Party of India
war of 1962, this film portrays
(Marxist) (CPI-M). In the wake of China the soldier and his travails as its
war, many leaders of what became CPI central theme. It pays tribute to
(M) were arrested for being pro-China. the soldiers while depicting their
plight, and the political frustration
The war with China alerted Indian
over the betrayal by the Chinese.
leadership to the volatile situation in
The film uses documentary
the Northeast region. Apart from being
footage of war scenes and is
isolated and extremely underdeveloped, considered as one of the early
this region also presented India with war films made in Hindi.
the challenge of national integration
and political unity. The process of its
reorganisation began soon after the China Year: 1964
war. Nagaland was granted statehood; Director: Chetan Anand
Manipur and Tripura, though Union Actors: Dharmendra, Priya
Territories, were given the right to elect Rajvansh, Balraj Sahni, Jayant,
their own legislative assemblies. Sudhir, Sanjay Khan, Vijay
Anand

--- PAGE 75 ---
74 Politics in India since Independence
Wars and Peace with Pakistan
In the case of Pakistan the conflict started just after Partition over
the dispute on Kashmir. You will read more about the dispute in
Chapter 8. A proxy war broke out between Indian and Pakistani army
in Kashmir during 1947 itself. But this did not turn into a full war.
The issue was then referred to the UN. Pakistan soon emerged as a
critical factor in India’s relations with the US and subsequently with
China.
The Kashmir conflict did not prevent cooperation between the
governments of India and Pakistan. Both the governments worked
together to restore the women abducted during Partition to their
original families. A long-term dispute about the sharing of river
waters was resolved through mediation by the World Bank. The India-
Pakistan Indus Waters Treaty was signed by Nehru and General Ayub
Khan in 1960. Despite all ups and downs in the Indo-Pak relations,
this treaty has worked well.
A more serious armed conflict between the two countries began
in 1965. As you would read in the next chapter, by then Lal Bahadur
Shastri had taken over as the Prime Minister. In April 1965 Pakistan
launched armed attacks in the Rann of Kutch area of Gujarat. This
was followed by a bigger offensive in Jammu and Kashmir in August-
September.Pakistani rulers were hoping to get support from the local
population there, but it did not happen. In order to ease the pressure
on the Kashmir front, Shastri ordered Indian troops to launch a
counter-offensive on the Punjab border. In a fierce battle, the Indian
army reached close to Lahore.
The hostilities came to an end with the UN intervention. Later,
Indian Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri and Pakistan’s General
Ayub Khan signed the Tashkent Agreement, brokered by the Soviet
Union, in January 1966. Though India could inflict considerable
military loss on Pakistan, the 1965 war added to India’s already
Why do
difficult economic situation.
we say India
andPakistan had
a war? Leaders quarrel Bangladesh war, 1971
and armies fight wars.
Beginning in 1970, Pakistan faced its biggest internal crisis. The
Most ordinary citizens
have nothing to do (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:182)(cid:86) (cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87) (cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:68) (cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87) (cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87) (cid:259) (cid:61)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:85) (cid:36)(cid:79)(cid:76)
with these. Bhutto’s party emerged a winner in West Pakistan, while the Awami
League led by Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman swept through East Pakistan.
The Bengali population of East Pakistan had voted to protest against
years of being treated as second class citizens by the rulers based
in West Pakistan. The Pakistani rulers were not willing to accept the
democratic verdict. Nor were they ready to accept the Awami League’s
demand for a federation.
Instead, in early 1971, the Pakistani army arrested Sheikh Mujib
and unleashed a reign of terror on the people of East Pakistan. In

--- PAGE 77 ---
76 Politics in India since Independence
response to this, the people started a struggle to liberate ‘Bangladesh’
from Pakistan. Throughout 1971, India had to bear the burden of
about 80 lakh refugees who fled East Pakistan and took shelter in
This
the neighbouring areas in India. India extended moral and material
sounds like
support to the freedom struggle in Bangladesh. Pakistan accused
joining the Soviet
India of a conspiracy to break it up.
bloc. Can we say that
we were non-aligned
Support for Pakistan came from the US and China. The US-China
even after signing this
rapprochement that began in the late 1960s resulted in a realignment
treaty with the Soviet
of forces in Asia. Henry Kissinger, the adviser to the US President
Union?
Richard Nixon, made a secret visit to China via Pakistan in July
1971. In order to counter the US-Pakistan-China axis, India signed a
20-year Treaty of Peace and Friendship with the Soviet Union in
August 1971. This treaty assured India of Soviet support if the country
faced any attack.
After months of diplomatic tension and military build-up, a
full-scale war between India and Pakistan broke out in December
1971. Pakistani aircrafts attacked Punjab and Rajasthan, while the
army moved on the Jammu and Kashmir front. India retaliated with
an attack involving the air force, navy and the army on both the
Western and the Eastern front. Welcomed and supported by the local
population, the Indian army made rapid progress in East Pakistan.
Within ten days the Indian army had surrounded Dhaka from three
sides and the Pakistani army of about 90,000 had to surrender. With
Bangladesh as a free country, India declared a unilateral ceasefire.
Later, the signing of the Shimla Agreement between Indira Gandhi and
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto on 3 July 1972 formalised the return of peace.
A decisive victory in the war led to national jubiliation. Most people
in India saw this as a moment of glory and a clear sign of India’s
growing military prowess. As you would read in the next chapter,
Indira Gandhi was the Prime Minister at this time. She had already
won the Lok Sahba elections in 1971. Her personal popularity soared
Fast Forward Kargil Confrontation
In the early part of 1999 several points on the Indian side of the LoC in the Mashkoh, Dras, Kaksar
and Batalik areas were occupied by forces claiming to be Mujahideens. Suspecting involvement
of the Pakistan Army, Indian forces started reacting to this occupation. This led to a confrontation
between the two countries. This is known as the Kargil conflict. This conflict went on during May
and June 1999. By 26 July 1999, India had recovered control of many of the lost points. The Kargil
conflict drew attention worldwide for the reason that only one year prior to that, both India and
Pakistan had attained nuclear capability. However, this conflict remained confined only to the Kargil
region. In Pakistan, this conflict has been the source of a major controversy as it was alleged later
that the Prime Minister of Pakistan was kept in the dark by the Army Chief. Soon after the conflict,
the government of Pakistan was taken over by the Pakistan Army led by the Army Chief, General
Parvez Musharraf.

--- PAGE 79 ---
78 Politics in India since Independence
further after the 1971 war. After the war, assembly elections in most
States took place, bringing large majorities for the Congress party in
many states.
India, with its limited resources, had initiated development
planning. However, conflicts with neighbours derailed the five-year
plans. The scarce resources were diverted to the defence sector especially
after 1962, as India had to embark on a military modernisation drive.
The Department of Defence Production was established in November
1962 and the Department of Defence Supplies in November 1965.
The Third Plan (1961-66) was affected and it was followed by three
Annual Plans and the Fourth Plan could be initiated only in 1969.
India’s defence expenditure increased enormously after the wars.
India’s nuclear policy
Another crucial development of this period was the first nuclear
explosion undertaken by India in May 1974. Nehru had always put
his faith in science and technology for rapidly building a modern
India. A significant component of his industrialisation plans was the
nuclear programme initiated in the late 1940s under the guidance of
Homi J. Bhabha. India wanted to generate atomic energy for peaceful
purposes. Nehru was against nuclear weapons. So he pleaded with
the superpowers for comprehensive nuclear disarmament. However,
the nuclear arsenal kept rising. When Communist China conducted
nuclear tests in October 1964, the five nuclear weapon powers, the
(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:15)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:54)(cid:53)(cid:15)(cid:56)(cid:46)(cid:15)(cid:41)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:11)(cid:55)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:12) (cid:259)
(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:56)(cid:49)(cid:54)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:259)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:87)(cid:82)
impose the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 on the rest
of the world. India always considered the NPT as discriminatory and
had refused to sign it. When India conducted its first nuclear test, it
was termed as peaceful explosion. India argued that it was committed
to the policy of using nuclear power only for peaceful purposes.
I am The period when the nuclear test was conducted was a difficult
confused! Isn’t
period in domestic politics. Following the Arab-Israel War of 1973, the
it all about atom
entire world was affected by the Oil Shock due to the massive hike in
bombs?Why don’t
the oil prices by the Arab nations. It led to economic turmoil in India
we say so?
resulting in high inflation. As you will read in Chapter Six, many
agitations were going on in the country around this time, including a
nationwide railway strike.
Although there are minor differences among political parties about
how to conduct external relations, Indian politics is generally marked
by a broad agreement among the parties on national integration,
protection of international boundaries, and on questions of national
interest. Therefore, we find that in the course of the decade of
1962-1972, when India faced three wars, or even later, when different
parties came to power from time to time, foreign policy has played
only a limited role in party politics.

--- PAGE 80 ---
India’s external relations 79
Fast Forward India’s Nuclear Programme
India has opposed the international treaties aimed at non-proliferation since
they were selectively applicable to the non-nuclear powers and legitimised
the monopoly of the five nuclear weapons powers. Thus, India opposed
the indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995 and also refused to sign the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT).
India conducted a series of nuclear tests in May 1998, demonstrating its
capacity to use nuclear energy for military purposes. Pakistan soon followed,
thereby increasing the vulnerability of the region to a nuclear exchange. The
international community was extremely critical of the nuclear tests in the
subcontinent and sanctions were imposed on both India and Pakistan, which
were subsequently waived. India’s nuclear doctrine of credible minimum
nuclear deterrence professes “no first use” and reiterates India’s commitment
to global, verifiable and non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament leading to a
nuclear weapons free world.
Shifting alliances in world politics
As you will read in Chapter Six and also in Chapter Nine, many non-Congress governments
came to power in the period starting 1977. This was also the time when world politics was
changing dramatically. What did it mean for India’s external relations?
The Janata Party government that came to power in 1977 announced that it would follow
genuine non-alignment. This implied that the pro-Soviet tilt in the foreign policy will be
corrected. Since then, all governments (Congress or non-Congress) have taken initiatives
for restoring better relations with China and entering into close ties with US. In Indian
politics and in popular mind, India’s foreign policy is always very closely linked to two
questions. One is India’s stand vis-à-vis Pakistan and the other is Indo-US relations. In
the post-1990 period the ruling parties have often been criticised for their pro-US foreign
policy.
Foreign policy is always dictated by ideas of national interest. In the period after 1990,
Russia, though it continues to be an important friend of India, has lost its global pre-
eminence. Therefore, India’s foreign policy has shifted to a more pro-US strategy. Besides,
the contemporary international situation is more influenced by economic interests than by
military interests. This has also made an impact on India’s foreign policy choices. At the
same time, Indo-Pakistan relations have witnessed many new developments during this
period. While Kashmir continues to be the main issue between the two countries, there
have been many efforts to restore normal relations. This means that cultural exchanges,
movement of citizens and economic cooperation would be encouraged by both countries.
Do you know that a train and a bus service operate between these two countries? This
has been a major achievement of the recent times. But that could not avoid the near-war
situation from emerging in 1999. Even after this setback to the peace process, efforts at
negotiating durable peace have been going on.

--- PAGE 81 ---
80 Politics in India since Independence
SESICREXE
80 Politics in India since Independence
1. Write ‘true’ or ‘false’ against each of these statements.
(a) Non-alignment allowed India to gain assistance both from USA and
USSR.
(b) India’s relationship with her neighbours has been strained from the
beginning.
(c) The cold war has affected the relationship between India and
Pakistan.
(d) The treaty of Peace and Friendship in 1971 was the result of India’s
closeness to USA.
2. Match the following
(a) The goal of India’s foreign i. Tibetan spiritual leader who
policy in the period 1950-1964 crossed over to India
(b) Panchsheel ii. Preservation of territorial
integrity, sovereignty and
economic development
(c) Bandung Conference iii. Five principles of peaceful
coexistence
(d) Dalai Lama iv. Led to the establishment of
NAM
3. Why did Nehru regard conduct of foreign relations as an essential
indicator of independence? State any two reasons with examples to
support your reading.
4. “The conduct of foreign affairs is an outcome of a two-way interaction
between domestic compulsions and prevailing international climate”.
Take one example from India’s external relations in the 1960s to
substantiate your answer.
5. Identify any two aspects of India’s foreign policy that you would like to
retain and two that you would like to change, if you were to become a
decision maker. Give reasons to support your position.
6. Write short notes on the following.
(a) India’s Nuclear policy
(b) Consensus in foreign policy matters
7. India’s foreign policy was built around the principles of peace and
cooperation. But India fought three wars in a space of ten years
between 1962 and 1972. Would you say that this was a failure of the
foreign policy? Or would you say that this was a result of international
situation? Give reasons to support your answer.

--- PAGE 82 ---
IInnddiiaa’’ss extexteerrnnaall rreellaattiioonnss 8811
8. Does India’s foreign policy reflect her desire to be an important regional
power? Argue your case with the Bangladesh war of 1971 as an
example.
9. How does political leadership of a nation affect its foreign policy?
Explain this with the help of examples from India’s foreign policy.
10. Read this passage and answer the questions below:
“Broadly, non-alignment means not tying yourself off with military
blocs….It means trying to view things, as far as possible, not from
the military point of view, though that has to come in sometimes,
but independently, and trying to maintain friendly relations with all
countries.” — JAWAHARLAL NEHRU
(a) Why does Nehru want to keep off military blocs?
(b) Do you think that the Indo-Soviet friendship treaty violated the
principle of non-alignment? Give reasons for your answer.
(c) If there were no military blocs, do you think non-alignment would
have been unnecessary?

--- PAGE 83 ---
a
id
n
I
fo
s
e
m
iT
e
h
t
n
i
n
a
m
x
a
L
.K
.R
:tid
e
r
C
In this chapter…
In Chapter Two we read about the emergence of the Congress
system.This system was first challenged during the 1960s. As political
competition became more intense, the Congress found it difficult to
retain its dominance. It faced challenges from the opposition that was
more powerful and less divided than before. The Congress also faced
challenges from within, as the party could no longer accommodate all
kinds of differences. In this chapter we pick the story from where we left
it in ChapterTwo, in order to
Originally the election (cid:129) understand how the political transition took place after Nehru;
symbol of the Congress
was a pair of bullocks. (cid:129) describe how the opposition unity and the Congress split posed a
This famous cartoon challenge to Congress dominance;
depicts the changes
within the Congress (cid:129) explain how a new Congress led by Indira Gandhi overcame these
leading to a head- challenges; and
on confrontation in
the 22nd year after (cid:129) analyse how new policies and ideologies facilitated the restoration
Independence. of the Congress system.

--- PAGE 84 ---
5
Challenge of Political Succession
retpahc challenges to and
restoration of the
congress system
Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru passed away in May 1964. He
had been unwell for more than a year. This had generated a lot of
speculation about the usual question of succession: after Nehru,
who? But in a newly independent country like India, this situation
gave rise to a more serious question: after Nehru, what?
The second question arose from the serious doubts that many
When
outsiders had about whether India’s democratic experiment will
France
survive after Nehru. It was feared that like so many other newly
orCanada have
independent countries, India too would not be able to manage a
similar problems, no
democratic succession. A failure to do so, it was feared, could lead one talks about failure
to a political role for the army. Besides, there were doubts if the new or disintegration. Why are
leadership would be able to handle the multiple crises that awaited we under this constant
suspicion?
a solution. The 1960s were labelled as the ‘dangerous decade’ when

--- PAGE 85 ---
84 Politics in India since Independence
unresolved problems like poverty, inequality, communal and regional
divisions etc. could lead to a failure of the democratic project or even
the disintegration of the country.
From Nehru to Shastri
The ease with which the succession after Nehru took place proved all
the critics wrong. When Nehru passed away, K. Kamraj, the president
of the Congress party consulted party leaders and Congress members
al aha ur of Parliament and found that there was a consensus in favour of Lal
hastri Bahadur Shastri. He was unanimously chosen as the leader of the
(19 4-19 ): Congress parliamentary party and thus became the country’s next
Prime Minister of Prime Minister. Shastri was a non-controversial leader from Uttar
India; participated Pradesh who had been a Minister in Nehru’s cabinet for many years.
in the freedom Nehru had come to depend a lot on him in his last year. He was
movement since known for his simplicity and his commitment to principles. Earlier
1930; minister he had resigned from the position of Railway Minister accepting moral
in UP cabinet; responsibility for a major railway accident.
General Secretary
Shastri was the country’s Prime Minister from 1964 to 1966.
of Congress;
During Shastri’s brief Prime Ministership, the country faced two
Minister in Union
major challenges. While India was still recovering from the economic
Cabinet from
implications of the war with China, failed monsoons, drought and
1951 to 1956 when
serious food crisis presented a grave challenge. As discussed in the
he resigned taking
previous chapter, the country also faced a war with Pakistan in
responsibility for
1965. Shastri’s famous slogan ‘Jai Jawan Jai Kisan’, symbolised the
the railway accident
country’s resolve to face both these challenges.
and later from 1957
to 1964; coined the Shastri’s Prime Ministership came to an abrupt end on 10 January
famous slogan ‘Jai 1966, when he suddenly expired in Tashkent, then in USSR and
Jawan-Jai Kisan’. currently the capital of Uzbekistan. He was there to discuss and sign
an agreement with Muhammad Ayub Khan, the then President of
Pakistan, to end the war.
“
From Shastri to Indira Gandhi
…new Prime
“Thus the Congress faced the challenge of political succession for the
Minister of India, in spite
second time in two years. This time there was an intense competition
of all forebodings, had been
between Morarji Desai and Indira Gandhi. Morarji Desai had earlier
named with more dispatch, served as Chief Minister of Bombay state (today’s Maharashtra and
and much more dignity, Gujarat) and also as a Minister at the centre. Indira Gandhi, the
than was the new Prime daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru, had been Congress President in the
Minister of Britain. past and had also been Union Minister for Information in the Shastri
cabinet. This time the senior leaders in the party decided to back
Indira Gandhi, but the decision was not unanimous. The contest
was resolved through a secret ballot among Congress MPs. Indira
Editorial in The Guardian,
Gandhi defeated Morarji Desai by securing the support of more than
London, 3 June 1964,
comparing the political two-thirds of the party’s MPs. A peaceful transition of power, despite
succession after Nehru intense competition for leadership, was seen as a sign of maturity of
with the succession drama
India’s democracy.
after Harold Macmillan in
Britain.

--- PAGE 86 ---
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 85
It took some time before the new Prime Minister could settle down.
While Indira Gandhi had been politically active for very long, she had
served as a minister under Lal Bahadur Shastri only for a short period.
The senior Congress leaders may have supported Indira Gandhi in the
belief that her administrative and political inexperience would compel
her to be dependent on them for support and guidance. Within a
year of becoming Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi had to lead the party
in a Lok Sabha election. Around this time, the economic situation in
the country had further deteriorated, adding to her problems. Faced
with these difficulties, she set out to gain control over the party and
to demonstrate her leadership skills.
n ira an hi (1917-1984): Prime Minister of India from 1966 to 1977
and 1980 to 1984; daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru; participated in the
freedom struggle as a young Congress worker; Congress President
in 1958; minister in Shastri’s cabinet from 1964-66; led the Congress
party to victory in 1967, 1971 and 1980 general elections; credited with
the slogan ‘garibi hatao’, victory in 1971 war and for policy initiatives
like abolition of Privy Purse, nationalisation of banks, nuclear test and
environmental protection; assassinated on 31 October 1984.
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC

--- PAGE 87 ---
86 Politics in India since Independence
It must have
been difficult for
(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:259)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)
world dominated by men.
Why don’t we have more
women in positions
like that?
Fourth General Elections, 1967
The year 1967 is considered a landmark year in India’s political and
electoral history. In Chapter Two you read about how the Congress
party was the dominant political force throughout the country from
1952 onwards. This trend was to undergo significant changes with
the 1967 elections.
Context of the elections
In the years leading up to the fourth general elections, the country
witnessed major changes. Two Prime Ministers had died in quick
succession, and the new Prime Minister, who was being seen as a
political novice, had been in office for less than a year. You will recall
from the discussion in Chapter Three and in the previous section of
this chapter that the period was fraught with grave economic crisis
resulting from successive failure of monsoons, widespread drought,
iaR
uhgaR
:tiderC

--- PAGE 88 ---
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 87
decline in agricultural production,
Election in a Rajasthan Village
serious food shortage, depletion of
foreign exchange reserves, drop in
This is a story about 1967
industrial production and exports,
assembly elections. In
combined with a sharp rise in
the Chomu constituency,
military expenditure and diversion
the main parties in the
of resources from planning and
fray were Congress and
economic development. One of the
the Swatantra party.
first decisions of the Indira Gandhi
But village Devisar had
government was to devaluate the
its own local political
Indian rupee, under what was seen to
dynamics and it got mixed
be pressure from the US. Earlier one
up with the competition
US dollar could be purchased for less
between the two parties.
than Rs. 5; after devaluation it cost
Sher Singh, traditionally
more than Rs. 7.
dominated village politics,
The economic situation triggered but gradually his nephew,
off price rise. People started protesting Bhim Singh was emerging
against the increase in prices of as the more popular
essential commodities, food scarcity, leader and rival. Though both were Rajputs, Bhim
growing unemployment and the Singh cultivated the support of many non-Rajputs in
overall economic condition in the the village by attending to their requirements after
country. Bandhs and hartals were becoming the panchayat Pradhan. So, he struck a new
called frequently across the country. equation the alliance of Rajputs and non-Rajputs.
The government saw the protests as
He proved to be more adept in building alliances
a law and order problem and not as
across the village by supporting candidates in other
expressions of people’s problems. This
villages for the posts of village Pradhan. In fact, he took
further increased public bitterness
an initiative and took a delegation to the State Chief
and reinforced popular unrest.
Minister and Congress leader Mohan Lal Sukhadia
The communist and socialist for pressing the name of one of his friends from a
parties launched struggles for nearby village as Congress candidate in the Assembly
greater equality. You will read in the election. When Sukhadia convinced him of some other
next chapter about how a group of name, Bhim Singh, in turn, convinced many others
communists who separated from the that they should work for the party candidate. Bhim
Communist Party of India (Marxist) Singh knew that if the party candidate won from this
to form the Communist Party of India constituency, that candidate would become a minister
(Marxist-Leninist) led armed agrarian and thus, he would have direct contacts with a minister
struggles and organised peasant for the first time
agitations. This period also witnessed
Sher Singh had no option but to work for the Swatantra
some of the worst Hindu-Muslim riots
candidate, who was a jagirdar. He kept telling people
since Independence.
that the jagirdar would help build the village school and
use his resources for the development of the locality.
Non-Congressism
At least in Devisar village, the Assembly election
This situation could not have had turned into a factional fight between uncle and
remained isolated from party politics nephew.
in the country. Opposition parties
Based on nand Cha ravarti, illage in Chomu
were in the forefront of organising
ssembly Constituency in ajasthan.
public protests and pressurising the

--- PAGE 89 ---
88 Politics in India since Independence
“
government. Parties opposed to
...in India, as the Congress realised that the
present trends continue… division of their votes kept the
Congress in power. Thus parties
maintenance of an ordered
that were entirely different and
structure of society is going
disparate in their programmes
to slip out of reach of an
and ideology got together to
ordered structure of civil
form anti-Congress fronts in
government and the army some states and entered into
will be only alternativ“e electoral adjustments of sharing
C. ataraan nna urai
source of authority seats in others. They felt that the
(19 9-19 9):Chief Minister
inexperience of Indira Gandhi
and order. …the great
of Madras (Tamil Nadu)
and the internal factionalism
experiment of developing from 1967; a journalist,
within the Congress provided
India within a democratic popular writer and orator;
them an opportunity to topple
framework has failed. initially associated with the
the Congress. The socialist
Justice Party in Madras
leader Ram Manohar Lohia
province; later joined Dravid
gave this strategy the name
Kazagham (1934); formed
of ‘non-Congressism’. He also
Neville Maxwell DMK as a political party in
produced a theoretical argument
‘India’s Disintegrating 1949; a proponent of Dravid
in its defense: Congress rule was
Democracy’ an article culture, he was opposed to
published in the London undemocratic and opposed to the
imposition of Hindi and led
Times, 1967. interests of ordinary poor people;
the anti-Hindi agitations;
therefore the coming together
supporter of greater
of the non-Congress parties
autonomy to States.
was necessary for reclaiming
democracy for the people.
a anohar
Electoral verdict
ohia (191 -19 7):
Socialist leader and It was in this context of heightened popular
thinker; freedom discontent and the polarisation of political forces
fighter and among that the fourth general elections to the Lok Sabha
the founders of the and State Assemblies were held in February 1967.
Congress Socialist The Congress was facing the electorate for the first
Party; after the time without Nehru.
split in the parent
The results jolted the Congress at both the
party, the leader of the Socialist Party
national and state levels. Many contemporary
and later the Samyukta Socialist
political observers described the election results as
Party; Member, Lok Sabha, 1963-
a ‘political earthquake’.The Congress did manage
67; founder editor of Mankind and
to get a majority in the Lok Sabha, but with its
Jan, known for original contribution
lowest tally of seats and share of votes since 1952.
to a non-European socialist theory;
Half the ministers in Indira Gandhi’s cabinet were
as political leader, best known for
defeated. The political stalwarts who lost in their
sharp attacks on Nehru, strategy
constituencies included Kamaraj in Tamil Nadu,
of non-Congressism, advocacy of
S.K. Patil in Maharashtra, Atulya Ghosh in West
reservation for backward castes and
Bengal and K. B. Sahay in Bihar.
opposition to English.

--- PAGE 90 ---
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 89
Note: This Is non-Congressism
relevant today? Can it be
illustration is not
applied against Left Front in
a map drawn to
today’s West Bengal?
scale and should
not be taken to
be an authentic
depiction of
India’s external
boundaries.

--- PAGE 91 ---
90 Politics in India since Independence
The dramatic nature of the political change would be more
apparent to you at the State level. The Congress lost majority in as
many as seven States. In two other States defections prevented it
from forming a government. These nine States where the Congress
(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71) (cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92) (cid:259) (cid:51)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:15) (cid:43)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:15) (cid:56)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:85)
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa, Madras and
Kerala. In Madras State (now called Tamil Nadu), a regional party —
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:39)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:68) (cid:48)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68) (cid:46)(cid:68)(cid:93)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:80) (cid:11)(cid:39)(cid:48)(cid:46)(cid:12) (cid:259) (cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:69)(cid:92) (cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)
a clear majority. The DMK won power after having led a massive
anti-Hindi agitation by students against the centre on the issue of
imposition of Hindi as the official language. This was the first time any
non-Congress party had secured a majority of its own in any State. In
the other eight States, coalition governments consisting of different
non-Congress parties were formed. A popular saying was that one
could take a train from Delhi to Howrah and not pass through a
single Congress ruled State. It was a strange feeling for those who
were used to seeing the Congress in power. So, was the domination
of the Congress over?
Coalitions
The elections of 1967 brought into picture the phenomenon of
coalitions. Since no single party had got majority, various non-
Congress parties came together to form joint legislative parties (called
Samyukt Vidhayak Dal in Hindi) that supported non-Congress
governments. That is why these governments came to be described
as SVD governments. In most of these cases the coalition partners
were ideologically incongruent. The SVD government in Bihar, for
(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:259)(cid:54)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:51)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:259)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)
with the CPI on the left and Jana Sangh on the right. In Punjab it
was called the ‘Popular United Front’ and comprised the two rival
(cid:36)(cid:78)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76) (cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72) (cid:259) (cid:54)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83) (cid:259) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)
(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87) (cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:259) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:38)(cid:51)(cid:44) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:38)(cid:51)(cid:44)(cid:11)(cid:48)(cid:12)(cid:15) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:54)(cid:54)(cid:51)(cid:15) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)
Republican Party and the Bharatiya Jana Sangh.
A cartoonist’s reading of Charan Singh’s attempt to build a United Front of non-communist
parties in 1974
yttuK
:tiderC
What’s
so unusual in
hung assemblies
and coalition
governments? We
see them all
the time.

--- PAGE 92 ---
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 91
Defection
Another important feature of the politics after the 1967 election was the
role played by defections in the making and unmaking of governments
in the States. Defection means an elected representative leaves the
party on whose symbol he/she was elected and joins another party.
After the 1967 general election, the breakaway Congress legislators
played an important role in installing non-Congress governments in
three States - Haryana, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. The
constant realignments and shifting political loyalties in this period
gave rise to the expression ‘Aya Ram, Gaya Ram’
The stor o a a a a a
The expression ‘aya ram, gaya ram’ became
popular in the political vocabulary in India to
describe the practice of frequent floor-crossing
by legislators. Literally translated the terms
meant, Ram came and Ram went. The expression
originated in an amazing feat of floor crossing
achieved by Gaya Lal, an MLA in Haryana, i
1967. He changed his party thrice in a fortnigh
from Congress to United Front, back to Congre
and then within nine hours to United Front again It is said that when Gaya Lal declared his
intention to quit the United Front and join the Congress, the Congress leader, Rao Birendra Singh
brought him to Chandigarh press and declared “Gaya Ram was now Aya Ram”.
Gaya Lal’s feat was immortalised in the phrase “Aya Ram, Gaya Ram” which became the subject
of numerous jokes and cartoons. Later, the Constitution was amended to prevent defections.
Split in the Congress K. Ka ra
(19 -197 ): Freedom
We saw that after the 1967 elections, the
fighter and Congress
Congress retained power at the Centre but with
President;Chief
a reduced majority and lost power in many
Minister of Madras
States. More importantly, the results proved that
(Tamil Nadu); having
the Congress could be defeated at the elections.
suffered educational
But there was no substitute as yet. Most non-
deprivation, made
Congress coalition governments in the States did
efforts to spread
not survive for long. They lost majority, and either
education in Madras
new combinations were formed or President’s
province; introduced mid-day meal
rule had to be imposed.
scheme for schoolchildren; in 1963 he
proposed that all senior Congressmen
Indira vs. the ‘Syndicate’
should resign from office to make way
The real challenge to Indira Gandhi came not for younger party workers this proposal
from the opposition but from within her own is famous as the ‘Kamraj plan.’

--- PAGE 93 ---
92 Politics in India since Independence
The Con ress n icate
Syndicate was the informal name given to a group of Congress
leaders who were in control of the party’s organisation. It was led by
K. Kamraj, former Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu and then the president
of the Congress party. It included powerful State leaders like S. K.
Patil of Bombay city (later named as Mumbai), S. Nijalingappa of
Mysore (later Karnataka), N. Sanjeeva Reddy of Andhra Pradesh
and Atulya Ghosh of West Bengal. Both Lal Bahadur Shastri and
. ialin appa
later Indira Gandhi owed their position to the support received from
(19 - ):
the Syndicate. This group had a decisive say in Indira Gandhi’s first
SeniorCongress
Council of Ministers and also in policy formulation and implementation.
leader; Member
After the Congress split the leaders of the syndicate and those owing
ofConstituent
allegiance to them stayed with the Congress (O). Since it was Indira
Assembly; member
Gandhi’s Congress (R) that won the test of popularity, all these big
of Lok Sabha; Chief
and powerful men of Indian politics lost their power and prestige
Minister of the then
after 1971.
Mysore (Karnataka)
State; regarded as
the maker of modern
party. She had to deal with Karnataka; President
So,
the ‘syndicate’, a group of ofCongress during
there is nothing
powerful and influential 1968-71.
new about State
leaders from within the
level leaders being
the king-makers at Congress. The Syndicate
the centre. I thought had played a role in the
it happened only in installation of Indira Gandhi as the Prime Minister by
the 1990s.
ensuring her election as the leader of the parliamentary
party. These leaders expected Indira Gandhi to follow their
advise. Gradually, however, Indira Gandhi attempted to
assert her position within the government and the party.
She chose her trusted group of advisers from outside
the party. Slowly and carefully, she sidelined
Karpoori Tha ur the Syndicate.
(19 4-1988):Chief Minister
Indira Gandhi thus faced two challenges.
of Bihar between December
She needed to build her independence from the
1970 and June 1971 and
Syndicate. She also needed to work towards
again between June 1977
regaining the ground that the Congress had
and April 1979; Freedom
lost in the 1967 elections. Indira Gandhi
Fighter and socialist
adopted a very bold strategy. She converted
leader; active in labour
a simple power struggle into an ideological
and peasant movements;
struggle. She launched a series of initiatives to
staunch follower of Lohia;
give the government policy a Left orientation.
participated in the movement led by JP; known
She got the Congress Working Committee to
for his decision to introduce reservations
adopt a Ten Point Programme in May 1967.
for the backward classes in Bihar during his
This programme included social control of
second Chief Ministership; strong opponent of
banks, nationalisation of General Insurance,
the use of English Language.
ceiling on urban property and income,

--- PAGE 94 ---
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 93
public distribution of food grains, land reforms and
provision of house sites to the rural poor. While the
‘syndicate’ leaders formally approved this Left-wing
programme, they had serious reservations about
the same.
Presidential election, 1969
The factional rivalry between the Syndicate and Indira
Gandhi came in the open in 1969. Following President
Zakir Hussain’s death, the post of President of the
India fell vacant that year. Despite Mrs Gandhi’s
reservations the ‘syndicate’ managed to nominate
her long time opponent and then speaker of the Lok
Sabha, N. Sanjeeva Reddy, as the official Congress
candidate for the ensuing Presidential elections.
Indira Gandhi retaliated by encouraging the then
Vice-President, V.V. Giri, to file his nomination as
an independent candidate. She also announced
several big and popular policy measures like the
nationalisation of fourteen leading private banks
and the abolition of the ‘privy purse’ or the special
privileges given to former princes. Morarji Desai was
the Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister.
“The Left Hook” was published after the victory of V.V. Giri, (the boxer with the garland)
over the nominee of the Sydicate, represented here by Nijalingappa (on his knees).
aidnI
fo
semIT
ehT
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC
V.V. iri
(1894-198 ):
President of
India from
1969 to 1974;
Congress
worker and
labour leader
from Andhra
Pradesh; Indian
HighCommissioner to Ceylon
(Sri Lanka); Labour Minister in
Union cabinet; Governor of U.P.,
Kerala, Mysore (Karnataka);
Vice-President (1967-1969) and
acting President after the death of
President Zakir Hussain; resigned
and contested presidential election
as independent candidate; received
support from Indira Gandhi for his
election as President.

--- PAGE 95 ---
94 Politics in India since Independence
“ On both the above issues serious differences emerged between him
and the Prime Minister resulting in Desai leaving the government.
History … is
Congress had seen differences of this kind in the past. But
replete with instances of this time both the parties wanted a showdown which took place
the tragedy that overtakes during the Presidential elections. The then Congress President
democracy when a leader S. Nijalingappa issued a ‘whip’ asking all the Congress MPs and MLAs
who has risen to power on to vote in favour of Sanjeeva Reddy, the official candidate of the party.
Supporters of Indira Gandhi requisitioned a special meeting of the
the crest of a popular wave
AICC (that is why this faction came to be known as ‘requisitionists’)
or with the support of a
“ but this was refused. After silently supporting V.V. Giri, the Prime
democratic organisation
Minister openly called for a ‘conscience vote’ which meant that the
becomes a victim of MPs and MLAs from the Congress should be free to vote the way they
political narcissism want. The election ultimately resulted in the victory of V.V. Giri, the
and is egged on by a independent candidate, and the defeat of Sanjeeva Reddy, the official
coterie of unscrupulous Congress candidate.
sycophants…... The defeat of the official Congress candidate formalised the split
in the party. The Congress President expelled the Prime Minister
from the party; she claimed that her group was the real Congress. By
S Nijalingappa November 1969, the Congress group led by the ‘syndicate’ came to be
Letter to Indira Gandhi referred to as the Congress (Organisation) and the group led by Indira
expelling her from the
Gandhi came to be called the Congress (Requisitionists). These two
party, 11 November
parties were also described as Old Congress and New Congress. Indira
1969.
Gandhi projected the split as an ideological divide between socialists
and conservatives, between the pro-poor and the pro-rich.
olition o ri urse
In Chapter One you have read about the integration of the Princely States. This integration was
preceded by an assurance that after the dissolution of princely rule, the then rulers’ families
would be allowed to retain certain private property, and given a grant in heredity or government
allowance, measured on the basis of the extent, revenue and potential of the merging state.
This grant was called the privy purse. At the time of accession, there was little criticism of these
privileges since integration and consolidation was the primary aim.
Yet, hereditary privileges were not consonant with the principles of equality and social and economic
justice laid down in the Constitution of India. Nehru had expressed his dissatisfaction over the
matter time and again. Following the 1967 elections, Indira Gandhi supported the demand that the
government should abolish privy purses. Morarji Desai, however, called the move morally wrong
and amounting to a ‘breach of faith with the princes’.
The government tried to bring a Constitutional amendment in 1970, but it was not passed in Rajya
Sabha. It then issued an ordinance which was struck down by the Supreme Court. Indira Gandhi
made this into a major election issue in 1971 and got a lot of public support. Following its massive
victory in the 1971 election, the Constitution was amended to remove legal obstacles for abolition
of ‘privy purse’.

--- PAGE 96 ---
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 95
A cartoonist’s impression of the implication of Indira Gandhi’s conflict with the Syndicate.
yttuK
:tiderC

--- PAGE 97 ---
96 Politics in India since Independence
The 1971 Election and Restoration of Congress
The split in the Congress reduced Indira Gandhi Government to a
minority. Yet her government continued in office with the issue-based
support of a few other parties including the Communist Party of India
and the DMK. During this period the government made conscious
attempts to project its socialist credentials. This was also a phase when
Indira Gandhi vigorously campaigned for implementing the existing
land reform laws and undertook further land ceiling legislation. In
order to end her dependence on other political parties, strengthen
her party’s position in the Parliament, and seek a popular mandate
for her programmes, Indira Gandhi’s government recommended the
dissolution of the Lok Sabha in December 1970. This was another
surprising and bold move. The fifth general election to Lok Sabha
were held in February 1971.
The contest
The electoral contest appeared to be loaded against Congress(R).
After all, the new Congress was just one faction of an already weak
party. Everyone believed that the real organisational strength of the
Congress party was under the command of Congress(O). To make
matters worse for Indira Gandhi, all the major non-communist, non-
Congress opposition parties formed an electoral alliance known as
the Grand Alliance. The SSP, PSP, Bharatiya Jana Sangh, Swatantra
Party and the Bharatiya Kranti Dal came together under this umbrella.
The ruling party had an alliance with the CPI.
Yet the new Congress had something that its big opponents
(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:259) (cid:76)(cid:87) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:71) (cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:15) (cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:68) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:17) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:42)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)
Alliance did not have a coherent political programme. Indira Gandhi
said that the opposition alliance had only one common programme:
Almost four Indira Hatao (Remove Indira). In contrast to this, she put forward
decades after giving the
a positive programme captured in the famous slogan: Garibi Hatao
slogan of Garibi Hatao, we
(Remove Poverty). She focused on the growth of the public sector,
still have much poverty
around! Was the slogan imposition of ceiling on rural land holdings and urban property,
only an election removal of disparities in income and opportunity, and abolition of
gimmick? princely privileges. Through garibi hatao Indira Gandhi tried to
generate a support base among the disadvantaged, especially among
the landless labourers, Dalits and Adivasis, minorities, women and
the unemployed youth. The slogan of garibi hatao and the programmes
that followed it were part of Indira Gandhi’s political strategy of
building an independent nationwide political support base.

--- PAGE 98 ---
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 97
The outcome and after
The results of the Lok Sabha elections of 1971, were as dramatic
as was the decision to hold these elections. The Congress(R)-CPI
alliance won more seats and votes than the Congress had ever won
in the first four general elections. The combine won 375 seats in Lok
Sabha and secured 48.4 per cent votes. Indira Gandhi’s Congress(R)
won 352 seats with about 44 per cent of the popular votes on its own.
Contrast this with the performance of the Congress(O): the party
with so many stalwarts could get less than one-fourth of the votes
secured by Indira Gandhi’s party and win merely 16 seats. With this
theCongress party led by Indira Gandhi established its claim to being
the ‘real’ Congress and restored to it the dominant position in Indian
politics. The Grand Alliance of the opposition proved a grand failure.
Their combined tally of seats was less than 40.
“The Grand Finish” is how a cartoonist interpreted the outcome of the 1971 elections.
Players on the ground are the then leading opposition figures.
aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC

--- PAGE 99 ---
98 Politics in India since Independence
Soon after the 1971 Lok Sabha
elections, a major political and military
crisis broke out in East Pakistan (now
Bangladesh). As you have read in Chapter
Four, the 1971 elections were followed by
the crisis in East Pakistan and the Indo-
Pak war leading to the establishment
of Bangladesh. These events added to
the popularity of Indira Gandhi. Even
the opposition leaders admired her
statesmanship. Her party swept through all
the State Assembly elections held in 1972.
She was seen not only as the protector of
T
t
h
h
e
a
c
t
u
c
p heers t
a
h
s
e
t r
p
o
o
n
o
g
r
n
a
a
n
t
d
io
t
n
h
a
e
l i
u
s
n
t
d
le
e
a
r
d
p
e
r
r
iv
.
i
T
le
h
g
e
e d
o
,
p
b
p
u
os
t
i
a
ti
l
o
s
n
o
to her, either within the party or outside of
it, simply did not matter.
With two successive election victories,
one at the centre and other at the State
level, the dominance of the Congress was
restored. The Congress was now in power in almost all the States. It
was also popular across different social sections. Within a span of four
years, Indira Gandhi had warded off the challenge to her leadership
and to the dominant position of the Congress party.
The new manner of choosing CMs by Indira Gandhi inspired this cartoon.
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC
yttuK
:tiderC

--- PAGE 100 ---
Challenges to and Restoration of the Congress System 99
Restoration?
But does it mean that the Congress system
was restored? What Indira Gandhi had
done was not a revival of the old Congress
party. In many ways she had re-invented
the party. The party occupied a similar
position in terms of its popularity as in
the past. But it was a different kind of a
party. It relied entirely on the popularity
of the supreme leader. It had a somewhat
weak organisational structure. This
Congress party now did not have many
factions, thus it could not accommodate
all kinds of opinions and interests. While
it won elections, it depended more on
some social groups: the poor, the women,
Dalits, Adivasis and the minorities. This
was a new Congress that had emerged.
Thus Indira Gandhi restored the Congress
system by changing the nature of the
Congress system itself.
Despite being more popular, the new
Congress did not have the kind of capacity
to absorb all tensions and conflicts that
theCongress system was known for. While
the Congress consolidated its position
and Indira Gandhi assumed a position
of unprecedented political authority,
the spaces for democratic expression
of people’s aspirations actually shrank.
The popular unrest and mobilisation
around issues of development and
economic deprivation continued to
grow. In the next chapter you will read
about how this led to a political crisis
that threatened the very existence of
constitutional democracy in the country.
That
is like
changing the top
and legs of a table
and still calling it the
old table! What was
common between the
Old and the New
Congress?
mliF
a
hctaw
s’teL
Z
ANJEER
Vijay, a young police officer is
framed in false charges and sent
to jail while fighting gangsters.
Released from jail, Vijay is
determined to take revenge. He
fights all odds and vanquishes
the villains. Even while he is
engaged in taking revenge, Vijay
is fighting the anti-social element
and gets the tacit support of many
others from within the system.
This film portrayed the erosion
of moral values and the deep
frustrations arising from that
quite forcefully. It represents the
indifference of the system and
the harsh and volcanic eruption
of protest through the anger of
Vijay. The film set the trend of
what was later to be known as
the ‘angry young man’ of the
seventies.
Year: 1973
Director: Prakash Mehra
Screenplay: Javed Akhtar
Cast: Amitabh Bachchan, Ajit,
Jaya Bhaduri, Pran

--- PAGE 101 ---
100
SESICREXE
100 Politics in India since Independence
1. Which of these statements about the 1967 elections isare correct?
(a) Congress won the Lok Sabha elections but lost the Assembly
elections in many states.
(b) Congress lost both Lok Sabha and Assembly elections.
(c) Congress lost majority in the Lok Sabha but formed a coalition
government with the support of some other parties.
(d) Congress retained power at the Centre with an increased majority.
2. Match the following:
(a) Syndicate i. An elected representative
leaving the party on whose
ticket she has been elected
(b) Defection ii. A catchy phrase that attracts
public attention
(c) Slogan iii. parties with different
ideological position coming
together to oppose Congress
and its policies
(d) Anti-Congressism iv. A group of powerful
and influential leaders
within the Congress
3. Whom would you identify with the following slogansphrases?
(a) Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan
(b) Indira Hatao
(c) Garibi Hatao
4. Which of the following statement about the Grand Alliance of 1971 is
correct?
The Grand Alliance ..
(a) was formed by non-Communist, non-Congress parties.
(b) had a clear political and ideological programme.
(c) was formed by all non-Congress parties.
5. How should a political party resolve its internal differences? Here are
some suggestions. Think of each and list out their advantages and
shortcomings.
(a) Follow the footsteps of the party president
(b) Listen to the majority group
(c) Secret ballot voting on every issue
(d) Consult the senior and experienced leaders of the party
6. State which of these were reasons for the defeat of the Congress in
1967. Give reasons for your answer.
(a) The absence of a charismatic leader in the Congress party
(b) Split within the Congress party
(c) Increased mobilisation of regional, ethnic and communal groups

--- PAGE 102 ---
CChhaalllleennggeses ttoo aanndd RResesttoorraattiioonn ofof tthhee CCoonnggrressess SSyysstteemm 110011
(d) Increasing unity among non-Congress parties
(e) Internal differences within the Congress party
7. What were the factors which led to the popularity of Indira Gandhi’s
Government in the early 1970s?
8. What does the term ‘syndicate’ mean in the context of the Congress
party of the sixties? What role did the Syndicate play in the Congress
party?
9. Discuss the major issue which led to the formal split of the Congress
Party in 1969.
10. Read the passage and answer the questions below:
…Indira andhi changed the Congress into highly cerntalised and
undemocratic party organisation, from the earlier federal, democratic
and ideological formation that ehru had led…..But this… could not
have happened had not Indira andhi changed the entire nature of
politics. his new, populist politics turned political ideology ……. into
a mere electoral discourse, use of various slogans not meant to be
translated into government policies…… uring its great electoral
victories in early s, amidst the celebration, the Congress party as a
political organisation died….. — SUDIPTA KAVIRAJ
(a) What according to the author is the difference between the
strategies of Nehru and Indira Gandhi?
(b) Why does the author say that the Congress party ‘died’ in the
seventies?
(c) In what way, did the change in the Congress party affect other
political parties also?
T T T T
(cid:129) Make a list of slogans coined by political parties.
(cid:129) Do you see any similarities between advertisements and
manifestoes, slogans and advertisements of political parties?
(cid:129) Have a discussion on how price rise affects the political fortunes of
the political parties.

--- PAGE 103 ---
In this chapter…
We have seen in the last chapter that the Congress recovered after
1971, but was not the same kind of party. The difference became
clear in a series of events between 1973 and 1975 that brought new
challenges to India’s democratic politics and the institutional balance
sought by the Constitution. These developments led to the imposition of
‘emergency’ in June 1975. Normally, we would associate ‘emergency’
with war and aggression or with natural disaster. But this ‘emergency’
was imposed because of the perceived threat of internal disturbance.
The editorial page of The Emergency ended as dramatically as it had begun, resulting in a
‘Nai Dunia’ of 27 June defeat of the Congress in the Lok Sabha elections of 1977.
1975 was like any other
day, except that the In this chapter we focus on this crucial phase in the history of democracy
space for editorial was in India and ask some questions that have remained controversial after
left blank. The editorial all these years.
was “censored” using
emergency powers. (cid:129) Why was Emergency imposed? Was it necessary?
Many other newspapers
(cid:129) What did the imposition of Emergency mean in practice?
also carried such blank
(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:259)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:86)
(cid:129) What were the consequences of Emergency on party politics?
to protest against
emergency. Later, leaving (cid:129) What are the lessons of Emergency for Indian democracy?
blank space was also
banned.

--- PAGE 104 ---
6
retpahc the crisis of
democratic order
Background to Emergency
We have already studied the changes that were taking place in Indian
politics since 1967. Indira Gandhi had emerged as a towering leader
with tremendous popularity. This was also the period when party
competition became bitter and polarised. This period also witnessed
tensions in the relationship between the government and the judiciary.
The Supreme Court found many initiatives of the government to be
violative of the Constitution. The Congress party took the position
that this stand of the Court was against principles of democracy
and parliamentary supremacy. The Congress also alleged that the
Court was a conservative institution and it was becoming an obstacle
in the way of implementing pro-poor welfare programmes. The
parties opposed to the Congress felt that politics was becoming too
personalised and that governmental authority was being converted
into personal authority. The split in the Congress had sharpened the
divisions between Indira Gandhi and her opponents.
Economic context
In the elections of 1971, Congress had given the slogan
of garibi hatao (remove poverty). However, the social and
economic condition in the country did not improve much
after 1971-72. The Bangladesh crisis had put a heavy strain
on India’s economy. About eight million people crossed over
the East Pakistan border into India. This was followed by war
with Pakistan. After the war the U.S government stopped all
aid to India. In the international market, oil prices increased
manifold during this period. This led to an all-round increase
in prices of commodities. Prices increased by 23 per cent in
1973 and 30 per cent in 1974. Such a high level of inflation
caused much hardship to the people.
Industrial growth was low and unemployment was
very high, particularly in the rural areas. In order to
reduce expenditure the government froze the salaries of
its employees. This caused further dissatisfaction among
government employees. Monsoons failed in 1972-1973. This
resulted in a sharp decline in agricultural productivity. Food
grain output declined by 8 per cent. There was a general
atmosphere of dissatisfaction with the prevailing economic
ubA
:tiderC
PM says

--- PAGE 105 ---
104 Politics in India since Independence
situation all over the country. In such a context non-Congress
opposition parties were able to organise popular protests effectively.
Instances of students’ unrests that had persisted from the late 1960s
became more pronounced in this period. There was also an increase
in the activities of Marxist groups who did not believe in parliamentary
politics. These groups had taken to arms and insurgent techniques
for the overthrow of the capitalist order and the established political
system. Known as the Marxist-Leninist (now Maoist) groups or
Poor
Naxalites, they were particularly strong in West Bengal, where the
people must have
State government took stringent measures to suppress them.
had a tough time. What
happened to the promise
ofgaribi hatao? Gujarat and Bihar movements
Students’ protests in Gujarat and Bihar, both of which were Congress
ruled States, had far reaching impact on the politics of the two States
and national politics. In January 1974 students in Gujarat started
an agitation against rising prices of food grains, cooking oil and
other essential commodities, and against corruption in high places.
The students’ protest was joined by major opposition parties and
became widespread leading to the imposition of President’s rule in the
state. The opposition parties demanded fresh elections to the state
legislature. Morarji Desai, a prominent leader of Congress (O), who
“
was the main rival of Indira Gandhi when he was in the Congress,
“
announced that he would go on an indefinite fast if fresh elections
Sampoorna Kranti
were not held in the State. Under intense pressure from students,
ab nara hai, bhavi itihas
supported by the opposition political parties, assembly elections were
hamara hai [With Total held in Gujarat in June 1975. The Congress was defeated in this
Revolution as our motto, the election.
future belongs to us]
In March 1974 students came together in Bihar to protest against
rising prices, food scarcity, unemployment and corruption. After
a point they invited Jayaprakash Narayan (JP), who had given up
active politics and was involved in social work, to lead the student
A slogan of the Bihar
movement, 1974 movement. He accepted it on the condition that the movement will
remain non-violent and will not limit itself to Bihar. Thus the students’
movement assumed a political character and had national appeal.
People from all walks of life now entered
“
the movement. Jayaprakash Narayan
demanded the dismissal of the Congress
government in Bihar and gave a call for “
total revolution in the social, economic
and political spheres in order to establish
Indira is India,
what he considered to be true democracy.
India is Indira
A series of bandhs, gehraos, and strikes
were organised in protest against the
Bihar government. The government,
however, refused to resign.
A slogan given by
D. K. Barooah, President of the
Congress, 1974

--- PAGE 106 ---
ThThee CCrriissiiss ofof DDeemmooccrraattiicc OOrrddeerr 110055
The a alite Mo e ent
In 1967 a peasant uprising took place in the Naxalbari police station area of
Darjeeling hills district in West Bengal under the leadership of the local cadres
of the Communist Party of India (Marxist). Beginning from the Naxalbari police
station, the peasant movement spread to several states of India and came to
be referred broadly as the Naxalite movement. In 1969, they broke off from the
CPI (M) and a new party, Communist Party (Marxist-Leninist) (CPI-ML), was
formed under the leadership of Charu Majumdar. It argued that democracy in
India was a sham and decided to adopt a strategy of protracted guerrilla warfare
in order to lead to a revolution.
The Naxalite movement has
used force to snatch land from
the rich landowners and give it
to the poor and the landless. Its
supporters advocated the use of
violent means to achieve their
political goals. In spite of the use
of preventive detention and other
strong measures adopted by the
West Bengal government run by
the Congress party, the Naxalite
movement did not come to an end. In later years, it spread to many other parts
of the country. The Naxalite movement has by now splintered into various
parties and organisations. Some of these parties, like the CPI – ML (Liberation)
participate in open, democratic politics.
Currently about 75 districts in nine States are affected by Naxalite violence.
Most of these are very backward areas inhabited by Adivasis. In these areas the
sharecroppers, under-tenants and
small cultivators are denied their
Charu Mau ar
basic rights with regard to security
(1918-197 ): Communist
of tenure or their share in produce,
revolutionary and the
payment of fair wages etc. Forced
leader of the Naxalbari
labour, expropriation of resources
uprising; participated in
by outsiders and exploitation by
the Tebhaga movement
moneylenders are also common
before independence; left
in these areas. These conditions
the CPI and founded the
lead to the growth of the Naxalite
Communist Party of India
movement.
(Marxist-Leninist); believed
in the Maoist path of peasant rebellion and Governments have taken stern
defended revolutionary violence; died in police measures in dealing with the
custody. Naxalite movement. Human
right activists have criticised
the government for violating
constitutional norms in dealing
with the Naxalites. Many thousand people have lost their lives in the violence by
the Naxalites and the anti-Naxalite violence by the government.

--- PAGE 107 ---
106 Politics in India since Independence
The movement was beginning to
influence national politics. Jayaprakash
o na a
Narayan wanted to spread the Bihar
a apra ash
movement to other parts of the
ara an ( )
country. Alongside the agitation led by
(19 -1979): A
Jayaprakash Narayan, the employees of
marxist in his youth;
the Railways gave a call for a nationwide
founder general
strike. This threatened to paralyse the
secretary of the
country. In 1975, JP led a peoples’
Congress Socialist
march to the Parliament. This was one
Party and the Socialist Party; a hero of the 1942
of the largest political rallies ever held
uit India movement; declined to join Nehru’s
in the capital. He was now supported
cabinet; after 1955 quit active politics; became
by the non-Congress opposition parties
a Gandhian and was involved in the Bhoodan
like the Bharatiya Jana Sangh, the
movement, negotiations with the Naga rebels,
Congress (O), the Bharatiya Lok Dal, the
peace initiative in Kashmir and ensured the
Socialist Party and others. These parties
surrender of decoits in Chambal; leader of Bihar
were projecting JP as an alternative to
movement, he became the symbol of opposition to
Indira Gandhi. However, there were many
Emergency and was the moving force behind the
criticisms about his ideas and about the
formation of Janata Party.
politics of mass agitations that he was
employing. Both the Gujarat and Bihar
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC

--- PAGE 108 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 107
agitations were seen as anti-Congress and rather than opposing the
State governments, they were seen as protests against the leadership
of Indira Gandhi. She believed that the movement was motivated by
personal opposition to her.
ail a tri e o 1974
What would happen when the railways stop running? Not for one or
two days, but for more than a week? Of course, many people would be
inconvenienced; but more than that, the economy of the country would
come to a halt because goods are transported from one part to another
by trains.
Do you know that such a thing actually happened in 1974? The National
Coordination Committee for Railwaymen’s Struggle led by George
Fernandes gave a call for nationwide strike by all employees of the Railways
for pressing their demands related to bonus and service conditions. The
government was opposed to these demands. So, the employees of India’s
largest public sector undertaking went on a strike in May 1974. The strike
by the Railway employees added to the atmosphere of labour unrest. It
also raised issues like rights of the workers and whether employees of
essential services should adopt measures like strikes.
The government declared the strike illegal. As the government refused
to concede the demands of the striking workers, arrested many of their
leaders and deployed the territorial army to protect railway tracks, the
strike had to be called off after twenty days without any settlement.
Conflict with Judiciary
This was also the period when the government and the ruling party
had many differences with the judiciary. Do you remember the
discussion about the long drawn conflict between the Parliament and
the judiciary? You have studied this last year. Three constitutional
(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:259)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:51)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:41)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:53)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:34)
The Supreme Court said it cannot. Secondly, can the Parliament
curtail the right to property by making an amendment? Again, the
Court said that Parliament cannot amend the Constitution in such
a manner that rights are curtailed. Thirdly, the Parliament amended
Put
the Constitution saying that it can abridge Fundamental Rights for
simply,
giving effect to Directive Principles. But the Supreme Court rejected committed judiciary
this provision also. This led to a crisis as far as the relations between and committed
the government and the judiciary were concerned. You may remember bureaucracy means that
that this crisis culminated in the famous Kesavananda Bharati Case. In the judges and officers
should be loyal to the
this case, the Court gave a decision that there are some basic features
ruling party. What a
of the Constitution and the Parliament cannot amend these features.
pity!
Two developments further added to the tension between the
judiciary and the executive. Immediately after the Supreme Court’s

--- PAGE 109 ---
108 Politics in India since Independence
decision in 1973 in the Kesavananda Bharati case, a vacancy arose
for the post of the Chief Justice of India. It had been a practice to
appoint the senior-most judge of the Supreme Court as the Chief
Justice. But in 1973, the government set aside the seniority of
three judges and appointed Justice A. N. Ray as the Chief Justice
of India. The appointment became politically controversial because
all the three judges who were superseded had given rulings against
the stand of the government. Thus, constitutional interpretations
and political ideologies were getting mixed up rapidly. People close
to the Prime Minister started talking of the need for a judiciary and
the bureaucracy ‘committed’ to the vision of the executive and the
legislature. The climax of the confrontation was of course the ruling
of the High Court declaring Indira Gandhi’s election invalid.
Declaration of Emergency
On 12 June 1975, Justice Jagmohan Lal Sinha of the Allahabad High
Court passed a judgment declaring Indira Gandhi’s election to the
Lok Sabha invalid. This order came on an election petition filed by Raj
Narain, a socialist leader and a candidate who had contested against
her in 1971. The petition, challenged the election of Indira Gandhi
on the ground that she had used the services of government servants
in her election campaign. The judgment of the High Court meant that
legally she was no more an MP and therefore, could not remain the
Prime Minister unless she was once again elected as an MP within six
months. On June 24, the Supreme Court granted her a partial stay on
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:43)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:259)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:15)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:81)
MP but could not take part in the proceedings of the Lok Sabha.
Crisis and response
The stage was now set for a big political confrontation. The opposition
That is like asking
political parties led by Jayaprakash Narayan pressed for Indira
the army to disobey
the government! Is Gandhi’s resignation and organised a massive demonstration in
that democratic? Delhi’s Ramlila grounds on 25 June 1975. Jayaprakash announced
a nationwide satyagraha for her resignation and asked the army, the
police and government employees not to obey “illegal and immoral
orders”. This too threatened to bring the activities of the government
to a standstill. The political mood of the country had turned against
the Congress, more than ever before.
The response of the government was to declare a state of emergency.
On 25 June 1975, the government declared that there was a threat
of internal disturbances and therefore, it invoked Article 352 of the
Constitution. Under the provision of this article the government could
declare a state of emergency on grounds of external threat or a threat
of internal disturbances. The government decided that a grave crisis
had arisen which made the proclamation of a state of emergency
necessary. Technically speaking this was within the powers of the

--- PAGE 110 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 109
This cartoon appeared few days before the declaration of Emergency and captures the sense of impending
political crisis. The man behind the chair is D. K. Barooah, the Congress President.
government, for our Constitution provides for some special powers to
the government once an emergency is declared.
Once an emergency is proclaimed, the federal distribution of powers
remains practically suspended and all the powers are concentrated in
the hands of the union government. Secondly, the government also
gets the power to curtail or restrict all or any of the Fundamental
Rights during the emergency. From the wording of the provisions of
the Constitution, it is clear that an Emergency is seen as an extra-
ordinary condition in which normal democratic politics cannot
function. Therefore, special powers are granted to the government.
On the night of 25 June 1975, the Prime Minister recommended
Should
the imposition of Emergency to President Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed. He
the President
issued the proclamation immediately. After midnight, the electricity
have declared
to all the major newspaper offices was disconnected. In the early Emergency without any
morning, a large number of leaders and workers of the opposition recommendation from the
parties were arrested. The Cabinet was informed about it at a special Cabinet?
meeting at 6 a.m. on 26 June, after all this had taken place.
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC

--- PAGE 113 ---
112 Politics in India since Independence
Consequences
This brought the agitation to an abrupt stop; strikes were banned;
many opposition leaders were put in jail; the political situation became
very quiet though tense. Deciding to use its special powers under
Emergency provisions, the government suspended the freedom of the
Press. Newspapers were asked to get prior approval for all material
to be published. This is known as press censorship. Apprehending
social and communal disharmony, the government banned Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) and Jamait-e-Islami. Protests and strikes
and public agitations were also disallowed. Most importantly, under
the provisions of Emergency, the various Fundamental Rights of
citizens stood suspended, including the right of citizens to move the
Court for restoring their Fundamental Rights.
The government made extensive use of preventive detention. Under
this provision, people are arrested and detained not because they have
committed any offence, but on the apprehension that they may commit
Now,
an offence. Using preventive detention acts, the government made
even the
Supreme Court large scale arrests during the Emergency. Arrested political workers
gave in! What could not challenge their arrest through habeas corpus petitions.
was happening to Many cases were filed in the High Courts and the Supreme Court by
everyone in those
and on behalf of arrested persons, but the government claimed that it
days?
was not even necessary to inform the arrested persons of the reasons
and grounds of their arrest. Several High Courts gave judgments that
even after the declaration of Emergency the courts could entertain a
writ of habeas corpus filed by a person challenging his/her detention.
In April 1976, the constitution bench of the Supreme Court over-ruled
the High Courts and accepted the government’s plea. It meant that
duringEmergency the government could take away the citizen’s right
to life and liberty. This judgment closed the doors of judiciary for the
citizens and is regarded as one of the most controversial judgments
of the Supreme Court.
There were many acts of dissent and resistance to the Emergency.
Many political workers who were not arrested in the first wave,
went ‘underground’ and organised protests against the government.
Newspapers like the Indian Express and the Statesman protested
against censorship by leaving blank spaces where news items had
been censored. Magazines like the Seminar and the Mainstream chose
to close down rather than submit to censorship. Many journalists
were arrested for writing against the Emergency. Many underground
newsletters and leaflets were published to bypass censorship. Kannada
writer Shivarama Karanth, awarded with Padma Bhushan, and Hindi
writer Fanishwarnath Renu, awarded with Padma Shri, returned their
awards in protest against the suspension of democracy. By and large,
though, such open acts of defiance and resistance were rare.
The Parliament also brought in many new changes to the
Constitution. In the background of the ruling of the Allahabad High

--- PAGE 114 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 113
Court in the Indira Gandhi case, an amendment was made declaring
that elections of Prime Minister, President and Vice-President could
not be challenged in the Court. The forty-second amendment was
also passed during the Emergency. You have already studied that
this amendment consisted of a series of changes in many parts of the
Constitution. Among the various changes made by this amendment,
one was that the duration of the legislatures in the country was
extended from five to six years. This change was not only for the
Emergency period, but was intended to be of a permanent nature.
Besides this, during an Emergency, elections can be postponed by Let
one year. Thus, effectively, after 1971, elections needed to be held us not
talk about the
only in 1978; instead of 1976.
few who protested.
What about the rest?
All the big officials,
Controversies regarding Emergency intellectuals, social
and religious leaders,
Emergency is one of the most controversial episodes in Indian politics. citizens… What were
One reason is that there are differing view points about the need to they doing?
declare emergency. Another reason is that using the powers given by
the Constitution, the government practically suspended the democratic
functioning. As the investigations by the Shah Commission after the
Emergency found out, there were many ‘excesses’ committed during
the Emergency. Finally, there are varying assessments of what the
lessons of Emergency are for the practice of democracy in India. Let
us look at these one by one.
Was the Emergency necessary? hah Co ission o n uir
The Constitution simply mentioned ‘internal In May 1977, the Janata Party government
disturbances’ as the reason for declaring appointed a Commission of Inquiry headed
Emergency. Before 1975, Emergency was by Justice J.C. Shah, retired Chief Justice
never proclaimed on this ground. We have of the Supreme Court of India, to inquire
noted that agitations were going on in “into several aspects of allegations of abuse
many parts of the country. Was this reason of authority, excesses and malpractices
enough for declaring Emergency? The committed and action taken in the wake
government argued that in a democracy, of the Emergency proclaimed on the 25th
the opposition parties must allow the June, 1975”. The Commission examined
elected ruling party to govern according to various kinds of evidence and called scores
its policies. It felt that frequent recourse to of witnesses to give testimonies. These
agitations, protests and collective action included Indira Gandhi who appeared before
are not good for democracy. Supporters the Commission but refused to answer any
of Indira Gandhi also held that in a questions.
democracy, you cannot continuously have
The Government of India accepted the
extra-parliamentary politics targeting
findings, observations and recommendations
the government. This leads to instability
contained in the two interim reports and third
and distracts the administration from its
and final report of the Shah Commission.
routine task of ensuring development. All
The reports were also tabled in the two
energies are diverted to maintenance of
houses of Parliament.
law and order. Indira Gandhi wrote in a

--- PAGE 115 ---
114 Politics in India since Independence
“
In the name
of democracy it has been
sought to negate the very
functioning of democracy.
Duly elected governments
have not been allowed to
function. …Agitations have
surcharged the atmosphere,
leading to violent incidents.
…Certain persons have gone
to the length of inciting
our armed forces to mutiny
and our police to rebel. The
forces of disintegration are
in full play and communal
passions are being aroused,
threatening our unity.
How can any Governm“ent letter to the Shah Commission that subversive forces were trying to
worth the name stand by obstruct the progressive programmes of the government and were
and allow the country’s attempting to dislodge her from power through extra-constitutional
means.
stability to be imperilled?
The actions of a few are Some other parties, like the CPI that continued to back the
endangering the rights of the Congress during the Emergency, also believed that there was an
international conspiracy against the unity of India. It believed that
vast majority.
in such circumstances some restrictions on agitations were justified.
Indira Gandhi
Addressing the nation on
All India Radio on
26 June 1975 e olitions in Tur an ate area elhi
Emergency witnessed large-scale displacement of people living in
Delhi’s poorer localities. The jhuggi-jhopris were forcibly relocated in
the then barren areas across the river Yamuna. One such affected
area was the colonies in Turkman gate. The jhuggis of the area
were demolished. Hundreds of people of this area were forcibly
sterilised. However, many people escaped sterilisation simply
because they were able to motivate other people to get themselves
sterilised and were rewarded by the grant of title to a piece of land.
Thus, while some people became victims of government-sponsored
actions, some people managed to victimise others in their desire to
legally secure a piece of land, which would safeguard them from
arbitrary displacement.
ource hah Commission of In uiry, Interim eport II
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC
Mrs. Gandhi’s confrontation with the Shah Commission provoked this cartoon
when the commission’s report was released.

--- PAGE 116 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 115
The CPI felt that the agitations led by JP were mainly by the middle
classes who were opposed to the radical policies of the Congress party.
After the Emergency, the CPI felt that its assessment was mistaken
and that it was an error to have supported the Emergency.
On the other hand, the critics of the Emergency argued that ever
since the freedom movement, Indian politics had a history of popular
struggles. JP and many other opposition leaders felt that in a democracy,
people had the right to publicly protest against the government. The
Bihar and Gujarat agitations were mostly peaceful and non-violent.
Those who were arrested were never tried for any anti-national activity.
No cases were registered against most of the detainees. The Home
Ministry, which is entrusted with the responsibility of monitoring the
internal situation of the country, also did not express any concern
about the law and order situation in the country. If some agitations
had over-stepped their limits, the government had enough routine
powers to deal with it. There was no need to suspend democratic
functioning and use draconian measures like the Emergency for that.
The threat was not to the unity and integrity of the country but to the
ruling party and to the Prime Minister herself. The critics say that
Indira Gandhi misused a constitutional provision meant for saving
the country to save her personal power.
What happened during emergency?
The actual implementation of the Emergency is another contentious
issue. Did the government misuse its Emergency powers? Were there
excesses and abuse of authority? The government said that it wanted
to use the Emergency to bring law and order, restore efficiency, and
above all, implement the pro-poor welfare programmes. For this
purpose, the government led by Indira Gandhi announced a twenty-
point programme and declared its determination to implement this
programme. The twenty-point programme included land reforms, land
redistribution, review of agricultural wages, workers’ participation in
management, eradication of bonded labour, etc. In the initial months
hcraes-er
s’teL
Ask your parents or other elders in the family or neighbourhood about
their experience during 1975-77. Take down notes on the following:
(cid:129) Their personal experience of the Emergency.
(cid:129) Any report of support or opposition to the Emergency in your
locality.
(cid:129) Their participation in the 1977 elections and why they voted the
way they did.
Put your notes together and make a collective report on ‘Emergency in
my cityvillage.’

--- PAGE 117 ---
116 Politics in India since Independence
after the declaration of Emergency, the urban middle classes were
generally happy over the fact that agitations came to an end and
discipline was enforced on the government employees. The poor and
rural people also expected effective implementation of the welfare
programmes that the government was promising. Thus, different
sections of society had different expectations from the emergency and
also different viewpoints about it.
Critics of Emergency point out that most of these promises by
the government remained unfulfilled, that these were simply meant
to divert attention from the excesses that were taking place. They
question the use of preventive detention on such a large scale. We have
noted that many prominent political leaders were arrested. In all, 676
opposition leaders were arrested. The Shah Commission estimated
that nearly one lakh eleven thousand people were arrested under
preventive detention laws. Severe restrictions were put on the press,
sometimes without proper legal sanctions. The Shah Commission
report mentions that the General Manager of the Delhi Power Supply
Corporation received verbal orders from the office of the Lt. Governor
of Delhi to cut electricity to all newspaper presses at 2.00 a.m. on 26
June, 1975. Electricity was restored two to three days later after the
censorship apparatus had been set up.
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC

--- PAGE 118 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 117
Custo ial eath o a an
On 1 March 1976, P. Rajan, a final year student of the Calicut
Engineering College, Kerala, was whisked away from the hostel in the
early hours along with another student, Joseph Chali. Rajan’s father,
T.V Eachara Warrior made frantic efforts to trace his son. He met
legislators, he petitioned the concerned authorities, he also sought the
help of the then Home Minister, K. Karunakaran. As the emergency was
proclaimed, issues relating to the citizen’s liberty could not be raised
in the courts. After the Emergency was lifted, Warrior filed a petition
for writ of Habeas Corpus in the Kerala High Court at Ernakulam.
From the evidence of witnesses, it became clear that from the hostel,
Rajan had been taken to the Tourist Bungalow in Calicut the next day
where he was tortured by the police. At a subsequent hearing Kerala
government told the High Court that Raian had died in “unlawful police
custody”, as a result of continuous police torture. The Division Bench
of Kerala High Court held that Karunakaran had lied to the Court.
K. Karunakaran who had by then become Chief Minister of Kerala, had
to resign because of the strictures passed by the High Court.
ource hah Commission of In uiry, Interim eport II
There were other and more serious allegations regarding the
exercise of governmental power by people who held no official“
position. Sanjay Gandhi, the Prime Minister’s younger son, did not “
hold any official position at the time. Yet, he gained control over
… death of
the administration and allegedly interfered in the functioning of the
D. E. M. O’Cracy, mourned by
government. His role in the demolitions and forced sterilisation in
his wife T. Ruth, his son
Delhi became very controversial.
L. I. Bertie, and his
Apart from the arrests of political workers and the restrictions on
daughters Faith, Hope and
the press, the Emergency directly affected lives of common people
Justice.
in many cases. Torture and custodial deaths occurred during the
Emergency; arbitrary relocation of poor people also took place; and
over-enthusiasm about population control led to cases of compulsory
An anonymous
sterilisation. These instances show what happens when the normal
advertisement in the Times
democratic process is suspended. of India, soon after the
declaration of Emergency,
1975.
Lessons of the Emergency
The Emergency at once brought out both the weaknesses and the
strengths of India’s democracy. Though there are many observers
who think that India ceased to be democratic during the Emergency,
it is noteworthy that normal democratic functioning resumed within
a short span of time. Thus, one lesson of Emergency is that it is
extremely difficult to do away with democracy in India.
Secondly, it brought out some ambiguities regarding the Emergency
provision in the Constitution that have been rectified since. Now,

--- PAGE 119 ---
118 Politics in India since Independence
‘internal’ Emergency can be proclaimed only on the grounds
“ “
of ‘armed rebellion’ and it is necessary that the advice to the
President to proclaim Emergency must be given in writing by
Today is India’s the Council of Ministers.
Independence Day…Don’t
Thirdly, the Emergency made everyone more aware of the
Let the Lights Go Out on
value of civil liberties. The Courts too, have taken an active
India’s Democracy role after the Emergency in protecting the civil liberties of the
individuals. This is a response to the inability of the judiciary
to protect civil liberties effectively during the emergency. Many
civil liberties organisations came up after this experience.
An advertisement in The
Times, London, However, the critical years of emergency brought many
15 August 1975 by issues that have not been adequately grappled with. We have
‘Free JP Campaign’.
noted in this chapter that there is a tension between routine
functioning of a democratic government and the continuous
political protests by parties and groups. What is the correct
balance between the two? Should the citizens have full freedom
to engage in protest activity or should they have no such right
at all? What are the limits to such a protest?
Secondly, the actual implementation of the Emergency rule took
place through the police and the administration. These institutions
could not function independently. They were turned into political
instruments of the ruling party and according to the Shah Commission
Report, the administration and the police became vulnerable to political
pressures. This problem did not vanish after the Emergency.
Politics after Emergency
The most valuable and lasting lesson of the Emergency was learnt as
soon as the Emergency was over and the Lok Sabha elections were
announced. The 1977 elections turned into a referendum on the
experience of the Emergency, at least in north India where the impact
of the Emergency was felt most strongly. The opposition fought the
election on the slogan of ‘save democracy’. The people’s verdict was
decisively against the Emergency. The lesson was clear and has been
(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92) (cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72) (cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79) (cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:259) (cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)
are perceived to be anti-democratic are severely punished by the voters.
In this sense the experience of 1975 -77 ended up strengthening the
foundations of democracy in India.
Lok Sabha Elections, 1977
In January 1977, after eighteen months of Emergency, the government
decided to hold elections. Accordingly, all the leaders and activists were
released from jails. Elections were held in March 1977. This left the
opposition with very little time, but political developments took place
very rapidly. The major opposition parties had already been coming
closer in the pre-Emergency period. Now they came together on the

--- PAGE 120 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 119
eve of the elections and formed a new party, known as the
Janata Party. The new party accepted the leadership of
Jayaprakash Narayan. Some leaders of the Congress who
were opposed to the Emergency also joined this new party.
Some other Congress leaders also came out and formed a
separate party under the leadership of Jagjivan Ram. This
party named as Congress for Democracy, later merged with
the Janata Party.
The Janata Party made this election into a referendum
Morari esai
on the Emergency. Its campaign was focused on the non-
(189 -199 ):Freedom
democratic character of the rule and on the various excesses
fighter; a Gandhian
that took place during this period. In the backdrop of arrests
leader; Proponenet of
of thousands of persons and the censorship of the Press,
Khadi, naturopathy and
the public opinion was against the Congress. Jayaprakash
prohibition; Chief Minister
Narayan became the popular symbol of restoration of
of Bombay State; Deputy
democracy. The formation of the Janata Party also ensured
Prime Minister (1967-
that non-Congress votes would not be divided. It was evident
1969); joined Congress
that the going was tough for the Congress.
(O) after the split in the
Yet the final results took everyone by surprise. For party; Prime Minister from
the first time since Independence, the Congress party was 1977 to 1979 first Prime
defeated in the Lok Sabha elections. The Congress could Minister belonging to a
win only 154 seats in the Lok Sabha. Its share of popular non-Congress party.
votes fell to less than 35 per cent. The Janata Party and
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC
A cartoonist’s
reading of who
won and what
was defeated in
the 1977 election.
Those standing
with the common
man include
Jagjivan Ram,
Morarji Desai,
Charan Singh
and Atal Behari
Vajpayee.

--- PAGE 121 ---
120 Politics in India since Independence
its allies won 330 out of the 542 seats in the Lok Sabha; Janata Party
itself won 295 seats and thus enjoyed a clear majority. In north India,
it was a massive electoral wave against the Congress. The Congress
lost in every constituency in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana and
the Punjab and could win only one seat each in Rajasthan and Madhya
Pradesh. Indira Gandhi was defeated from Rae Bareli, as was her son
Sanjay Gandhi from Amethi.
But if you look at the map showing the result of this election, you
will notice that Congress did not lose elections all over the country.
It retained many seats in Maharashtra, Gujarat and Orissa and
virtually swept through the southern States. There are many reasons
for this. To begin with, the impact of Emergency was not felt equally
in all the States. The forced relocation and displacements, the forced
sterilisations, were mostly concentrated in the northern States.
But more importantly, north India had experienced some long term
changes in the nature of political competition. The middle castes from
north India were beginning to move away from the Congress and the
Janata party became a platform for many of these sections to come
together. In this sense, the elections of 1977 were not merely about
the Emergency.
Janata Government
The Janata Party government that came to power after the 1977 elections
was far from cohesive. After the election, there was stiff competition
(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:259)(cid:48)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:77)(cid:76)(cid:39)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:15)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:82)
Oath taking by the first non-congress government at the centre in 1977. In the picture are
Jayaprakash Narayan, J. B. Kriplani, Morarji Desai and Atal Behari Vajpayee.

--- PAGE 122 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 121
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to
be an authentic depiction of India’s external boundaries.
How can
Read this map and identify the states where
we talk about a
(cid:259) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:15)
mandate or verdict in
(cid:259) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87) (cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:92) (cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) 1977 when the north
(cid:259) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92) and the south voted so
swept the polls. differently?
Which are the constituencies in north India that the
Congress managed to win?

--- PAGE 123 ---
122 Politics in India since Independence
Chau har
Charan in h
(19 -1987):
Prime Minister
of India between
July1979 - January
1980; freedom
fighter; active
in the politics of
Uttar Pradesh;
proponent of rural
and agricultural
development; left
Congress party
and founded
Bharatiya Kranti
Dal in 1967; twice
Chief Minister
of U.P.; later he
was one of the
founders of the
Janata Party in
1977 and became
Deputy Prime
Minister and
Home Minister
(1977-79); I got it!
Emergency
founder of
was like a
Lok Dal.
vaccination
against
dictatorship. It
was painful and
caused fever, but
strengthened
the resistance
of our
democracy.
yadoT
aidnI/yoR
unatA
:tiderC
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC
Janata Party’s faction fight inspired many cartoons at that time. Here is a selection.

--- PAGE 124 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 123
was the rival to Indira Gandhi ever since 1966-67; Charan Singh, leader
of the Bharatiya Lok Dal and a farmers’ leader from UP; and Jagjivan
Ram, who had vast experience as a senior minister in the Congress
governments. Eventually Morarji Desai became the Prime Minister but
that did not bring the power struggle within the party to an end.
The opposition to Emergency could keep the Janata Party together
only for a while. Its critics felt that the Janata Party lacked direction,
leadership, and a common programme. The Janata Party government
could not bring about a fundamental change in policies from those
pursued by the Congress. The Janata Party split and the government
which was led by Morarji Desai lost its majority in less than 18 months.
Another government headed by Charan Singh was formed on the
assurance of the support of the Congress party. But the Congress
party later decided to withdraw its support with the result that the
Charan Singh government could remain in power for just about four
months. Fresh Lok Sabha elections were held in January 1980 in
which the Janata Party suffered a comprehensive defeat, especially in
north India where it had swept the polls in 1977. Congress party
led by Indira Gandhi nearly repeated its great victory in 1971.
It won 353 seats and came back to power. The experience of
1977-79 taught another lesson in democratic politics: governments
that are seen to be unstable and quarrelsome are severely punished
by the voters.
Legacy
But was it only a case of return of Indira Gandhi? Between
the elections of 1977 and 1980 the party system had changed
a i an a
dramatically. Since 1969, the Congress party had starting
(19 8-198 ):
shedding its character as an umbrella party which accommodated
Freedom fighter and
leaders and workers of different ideological dispensations and
Congress leader from
view points. The Congress party now identified itself with a
Bihar; Deputy Prime
particular ideology, claiming to be the only socialist and pro-poor
Minister of India
party. Thus with the early nineteen seventies, the Congress’s
(1977-79); member
political success depended on attracting people on the basis of
of Constituent
sharp social and ideological divisions and the appeal of one leader,
Assembly; also
Indira Gandhi. With the change in the nature of the Congress
a Member of
party, other opposition parties relied more and more on what is
Parliament since
known in Indian politics as ‘non-Congressism’. They also realised
1952 till his death;
the need to avoid a division of non-Congress votes in the election.
Labour Minister in the
This factor played a major role in the elections of 1977.
first ministry of free
In an indirect manner the issue of welfare of the backward India; held various
castes also began to dominate politics since 1977. As we saw other ministries from
above, the results of 1977 elections were at least partly due to 1952 to 1977; a
a shift among the backward castes of north India. Following the scholar and astute
Lok Sabha elections, many states also held Assembly elections administrator.
in 1977. Again, the northern States elected non-Congress
governments in which the leaders of the backward castes played

--- PAGE 125 ---
124 Politics in India since Independence
an important role. The issue of reservations for ‘other backward
classes’ became very controversial in Bihar and following this, the
Mandal Commission was appointed by the Janata Party government
at the centre. You will read more about this and about the role of the
politics of backward castes, in the last chapter. The elections after the
Emergency set off the process of this change in the party system.
The Emergency and the period around it can be described as a period
of constitutional crisis because it had its origins in the constitutional
battle over the jurisdiction of the Parliament and the judiciary. On the
other hand, it was also a period of political crisis. The party in power
had absolute majority and yet, its leadership decided to suspend
yadoT
aidnI
:tiderC
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K
.R
:tiderC
This cartoon appeared after the election results of 1980.

--- PAGE 126 ---
The Crisis of Democratic Order 125
mliF
a
hctaw
s’teL
the democratic process. The makers
of India’s Constitution trusted that all
HAZARON KHWAISHEIN AISI
political parties would basically abide
by the democratic norm. Even during
the Emergency, when the government
would use extraordinary powers, its
use would be within the norms of
the rule of law. This expectation led
to the wide and open ended powers
given to the government in times of
Emergency. These were abused during
the Emergency. This political crisis was
more serious than the constitutional
crisis.
Another critical issue that emerged
during this period was the role and extent
of mass protests in a parliamentary
democracy. There was clearly a tension Siddharth, Vikram and Geeta
between institution-based democracy are three spirited and socially
and democracy based on spontaneous engaged students. Graduating
from Delhi, they follow different
popular participation. This tension
paths. While Siddharth is a strong
may be attributed to the inability of
supporter of the revolutionary
the party system to incorporate the
ideology of social transformation,
aspirations of the people. In the two
Vikram is in favour of achieving
chapters that follow we shall study some success in life, whatever the cost.
of the manifestations of this tension, The film narrates the story of their
in particular, popular movements and journeys towards their goals and
debates around regional identity. the underlying disappointments.
The film is set in the backdrop of the
seventies. The young characters
are products of the expectations
and idealism of that period.
Siddharth is not successful in his
ambition to stage a revolution, but
is so involved in the plight of the
poor that he begins valuing their
uplift more than revolution. On
the other hand, Vikram becomes
a typical political fixer but is
constantly ill at ease.
Year: 2005
Director: Sudhir Mishra
Screenplay: Sudhir Mishra
Ruchi Narain
Shivkumar Subramaniam
Cast: Kay Kay Menon, Shiney
Ahuja, Chitrangada Singh

--- PAGE 127 ---
126 Politics in India since Independence
SESICREXE
126 Politics in India since Independence
1. State whether the following statements regarding the Emergency are
correct or incorrect.
(a) It was declared in 1975 by Indira Gandhi.
(b) It led to the suspension of all fundamental rights.
(c) It was proclaimed due to the deteriorating economic conditions.
(d) Many Opposition leaders were arrested during the emergency.
(e) CPI supported the proclamation of the Emergency.
2. Find the odd one out in the context of proclamation of Emergency
(a) The call for ‘Total Revolution.
(b) The Railway Strike of 1974
(c) The Naxalite Movement
(d) The Allahbad High Court verdict
(e) The findings of the Shah Commission Report
3. Match the following
(a) Total Revolution i. Indira Gandhi
(b) Garibi hatao ii. Jayaprakash Narayan
(c) Students’ Protest iii. Bihar Movement
(d) Railway Strike iv. George Fernandes
4. What were the reasons which led to the mid-term elections in 1980?
5. The Shah Commission was appointed in 1977 by the Janata Party
Government. Why was it appointed and what were its findings?
6. What reasons did the Government give for declaring a National Emergency
in 1975?
7. The 1977 elections for the first time saw the Opposition coming into
power at the Centre. What would you consider as the reasons for this
development?
8. Discuss the effects of Emergency on the following aspects of our polity.
(cid:129) Effects on civil liberties for citizens.
(cid:129) Impact on relationship between the Executive and Judiciary
(cid:129) Functioning of Mass Media
(cid:129) Working of the Police and Bureaucracy.
9. In what way did the imposition of Emergency affect the party system in
India? Elaborate your answer with examples.

--- PAGE 128 ---
ThThee CCrriissiiss ofof DDeemmooccrraattiicc OOrrddeerr 112277
10. Read the passage and answer the questions below:
Indian democracy was never so close to a two-party system as it was
during the elections. owever, the ne t few years saw a complete
change. oon after its defeat, the Indian ational Congress split into
two groups……….. … … … he anata Party also went through major
convulsions….. avid Butler, sho ahiri and Prannoy oy. — PARTHA
CHATTERJEE
(a) What made the party system in India look like a two-party system in
1977?
(b) Many more than two parties existed in 1977. Why then are the
authors describing this period as close to a two-party system?
(c) What caused splits in Congress and the Janata parties?

--- PAGE 129 ---
h
g
n
iS
n
a
w
a
h
B
:t
id
e
r
C
In this chapter…
Three decades after Independence, the people were beginning to
get impatient. Their unease expressed itself in various forms. In the
previous chapter, we have already gone through the story of electoral
upheavals and political crisis. Yet that was not the only form in which
popular discontent expressed itself. In the 1970s, diverse social groups
like women, students, Dalits and farmers felt that democratic politics did
not address their needs and demands. Therefore, they came together
under the banner of various social organisations to voice their demands.
These assertions marked the rise of popular movements or new social
movements in Indian politics.
In this chapter we trace the journey of some of the popular movements
that developed after the 1970s in order to understand:
Photograph on this
(cid:129) what are popular movements?
and the facing page
are of the participants
(cid:129) which sections of Indian society have they mobilised?
and leaders of the
Chipko Movement, (cid:129) what is the main agenda of these movements?
recognised as one of
the first environmental (cid:129) what role do they play in a democratic set up like ours?
movements in the
country.

--- PAGE 130 ---
7
retpahc rise of popular
movements
Nature of popular movements
Take a look at the opening image of this chapter. What do you see
there? Villagers have literally embraced the trees. Are they playing
some game? Or participating in some ritual or festival? Not really. The
image here depicts a very unusual form of collective action in which
men and women from a village in what is now Uttarakhand were
engaged in early 1973. These villagers were protesting against the
practices of commercial logging that the government had permitted.
(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:92) (cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:68) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79) (cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:85) (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87) (cid:259) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:86)
to prevent them from being cut down. These protests marked the
beginning of a world-famous environmental movement in our country
(cid:259) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:78)(cid:82) (cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:17)
Chipko movement
The movement began in two or three villages of Uttarakhand when the
forest department refused permission to the villagers to fell ash trees
Fascinating!
for making agricultural tools. However, the forest department allotted
But I wonder how it
the same patch of land to a sports manufacturer for commercial
relates to the history of
use. This enraged the villagers and they protested against the move
politics.
of the government. The struggle soon spread across many parts of
the Uttarakhand region. Larger issues of ecological and economic
exploitation of the region were raised. The villagers demanded that
no forest-exploiting contracts should be given to outsiders and local
communities should have effective control over natural resources
like land, water and forests. They wanted the government to provide
low cost materials to small industries and ensure development of
Two historic
pictures of the a
r
h
early Chipko s
movement in
Mi
m
Chamoli,
a
Uttarakhand. u p
n
A
dit:
e
r
C

--- PAGE 131 ---
130 Politics in India since Independence
the region without disturbing the ecological balance. The movement
took up economic issues of landless forest workers and asked for
guarantees of minimum wage.
Women’s active participation in the Chipko agitation was a very
novel aspect of the movement. The forest contractors of the region
usually doubled up as suppliers of alcohol to men. Women held
sustained agitations against the habit of alcoholism and broadened the
agenda of the movement to cover other social issues. The movement
achieved a victory when the government issued a ban on felling of
trees in the Himalayan regions for fifteen years, until the green cover
was fully restored. But more than that, the Chipko movement, which
started over a single issue, became a symbol of many such popular
movements emerging in different parts of the country during the 1970s
and later. In this chapter we shall study some of these movements.
Party based movements
Popular movements may take the form of social movements or political
movements and there is often an overlap between the two. The
nationalist movement, for example, was mainly a political movement.
But we also know that deliberations on social and economic issues
during the colonial period gave rise to independent social movements
like the anti-caste movement, the kisan sabhas and the trade union
movement in early twentieth century. These movements raised issues
related to some underlying social conflicts.
Some of these movements continued in the post-independence
period as well. Trade union movement had a strong presence among
industrial workers in major cities like Mumbai, Kolkata and Kanpur.
All major political parties established their own trade unions for
mobilising these sections of workers. Peasants in the Telangana
region of Andhra Pradesh organised massive agitations under the
leadership of Communist parties in the early years of independence
and demanded redistribution of land to cultivators. Peasants and
agricultural labourers in parts of Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal,
Bihar and adjoining areas continued their agitations under
the leadership of the Marxist-Leninist workers; who were
known as the Naxalites (you have already read about the
Naxalite movement in the last chapter). The peasants’
and the workers’ movements mainly focussed on issues of
economic injustice and inequality.
These movements did not participate in elections
formally. And yet they retained connections with political
parties, as many participants in these movements, as
I don’t get it. How can you do individuals and as organisations, were actively associated
politics without a party? with parties. These links ensured a better representation of
the demands of diverse social sections in party politics.

--- PAGE 132 ---
Rise of Popular Movements 131
Non-party movements
In the 1970s and 1980s, many sections of the society became
disillusioned with the functioning of political parties. Failure of
the Janata experiment and the resulting political instability were
the immediate causes. But in the long run the disillusionment
was also about economic policies of the state. The model of
planned development that we adopted after Independence
was based on twin goals of growth and distribution. You have
read about it in Chapter Three. In spite of the impressive
growth in many sectors of economy in the first twenty years
of independence, poverty and inequalities persisted on a large
scale. Benefits of economic growth did not reach evenly to all
sections of society. Existing social inequalities like caste and
gender sharpened and complicated the issues of poverty in many
ways. There also existed a gulf between the urban-industrial
sector and the rural agrarian sector. A sense of injustice and
deprivation grew among different groups.
Many of the politically active groups lost faith in existing
democratic institutions and electoral politics. They therefore
chose to step outside of party politics and engage in mass
mobilisation for registering their protests. Students and young
political activists from various sections of the society were in
the forefront in organising the marginalised sections such as
Dalits and Adivasis. The middle class young activists launched
service organisations and constructive programmes among
rural poor. Because of the voluntary nature of their social work,
many of these organisations came to be known as voluntary
organisations or voluntary sector organisations.
These voluntary organisations chose to remain outside
party politics. They did not contest elections at the local or
regional level nor did they support any one political party. Most
of these groups believed in politics and wanted to participate in
it, but not through political parties. Hence, these organisations
were called ‘non-party political formations’. They hoped that
direct and active participation by local groups of citizens would
be more effective in resolving local issues than political parties.
It was also hoped that direct participation by people will reform
the nature of democratic government.
Such voluntary sector organisations still continue their
work in rural and urban areas. However, their nature has
changed. Of late many of these organisations are funded by
external agencies including international service agencies. The
ideal of local initiatives is weakened as a result of availability of
external funds on a large scale to these organisations.
Popular movements have inspired artistic production like these posters.
The three posters (from Top to Bottom) are from a campaign against a Coca
Cola plant, agitation against a highway and Save Periyar river movement.
elpoeP
dna
ngiseD
:tiderC

--- PAGE 133 ---
132 Politics in India since Independence
a eo hasal
Turning their backs to the sun, they journeyed through centuries.
Now, now we must refuse to be pilgrims of darkness.
That one, our father, carrying, carrying the darkness is now bent;
Now, now we must lift the burden from his back.
Our blood was spilled for this glorious city
And what we got was the right to eat stones
Now, now we must explode the building that kisses the sky
After a thousand years we were blessed with sunflower giving fakir;
Now, now, we must like sunflowers turn our faces to the sun.
nglish translation by ayant arve and leanor elliot of amdeo hasals
arathi poem in olpitha.
Dalit Panthers
Read this poem by well-known Marathi poet Namdeo Dhasal. Do you
know who these ‘pilgrims of darkness’ in this poem are and who the
‘sunflower-giving fakir’ was that blessed them? The pilgrims were the
Dalit communities who had experienced brutal caste injustices for a
long time in our society and the poet is referring to Dr. Ambedkar as
their liberator. Dalit poets in Maharashtra wrote many such poems
during the decade of seventies. These poems were expressions of
anguish that the Dalit masses continued to face even after twenty
years of independence. But they were also full of hope for the future, a
future that Dalit groups wished to shape for themselves. You are aware
of Dr. Ambedkar’s vision of socio-economic change and his relentless
struggle for a dignified future for Dalits outside the Hindu caste-based
social structure. It is not surprising that Dr. Ambedkar remains an
iconic and inspirational figure in much of Dalit liberation writings.
Origins
By the early nineteen seventies, the first generation Dalit graduates,
especially those living in city slums began to assert themselves from
various platforms. Dalit Panthers, a militant organisation of the Dalit
youth, was formed in Maharashtra in 1972 as a part of these assertions.
Has the
condition of In the post-Independence period, Dalit groups were mainly fighting
Dalits changed much against the perpetual caste based inequalities and material injustices
since that time? I keep that the Dalits faced in spite of constitutional guarantees of equality
reading about atrocities and justice. Effective implementation of reservations and other such
against Dalits. Did these
policies of social justice was one of their prominent demands.
movements fail? Or is it
the failure of the entire You know that the Indian Constitution abolished the practice of
society?
untouchability. The government passed laws to that effect in the 1960s
and 1970s. And yet, social discrimination and violence against the

--- PAGE 134 ---
Rise of Popular Movements 133
ex-untouchable groups continued in various
ways. Dalit settlements in villages continued
to be set apart from the main village. They were
denied access to common source of drinking
water. Dalit women were dishonoured and
abused and worst of all, Dalits faced collective
atrocities over minor, symbolic issues of caste
pride. Legal mechanisms proved inadequate
to stop the economic and social oppression
of Dalits. On the other hand, political parties
supported by the Dalits, like the Republican
Party of India, were not successful in electoral
politics. These parties always remained
marginal; had to ally with some other party
in order to win elections and faced constant
splits. Therefore the Dalit Panthers resorted
to mass action for assertion of Dalits’ rights.
Activities
Activities of Dalit Panthers mostly centred
around fighting increasing atrocities on
Dalits in various parts of the State. As a
result of sustained agitations on the part of
Dalit Panthers along with other like minded organisations over the issue of atrocities
against Dalits, the government passed a
comprehensive law in 1989 that provided
for rigorous punishment for such acts. The
larger ideological agenda of the Panthers
was to destroy the caste system and to build
an organisation of all oppressed sections
like the landless poor peasants and urban
industrial workers along with Dalits.
The movement provided a platform for
Dalit educated youth to use their creativity
as a protest activity. Dalit writers protested
against the brutalities of the caste system in
their numerous autobiographies and other
literary works published during this period.
These works portraying the life experiences
of the most downtrodden social sections of
Indian society sent shock waves in Marathi
literary world, made literature more broad
based and representative of different social
sections and initiated contestations in the
cultural realm. In the post-Emergency
period, Dalit Panthers got involved in
electoral compromises; it also underwent
RHDCN
dna
dahnA
:tiderC
RHDCN
dna
dahnA
:tiderC

--- PAGE 135 ---
134 Politics in India since Independence
many splits, which led to its decline. Organisations like the Backward
and Minority Communities’ Employees Federation (BAMCEF) took
over this space.
Bharatiya Kisan Union
The social discontent in Indian society since the seventies was
manifold. Even those sections that partially benefited in the process
of development had many complaints against the state and political
parties. Agrarian struggles of the eighties is one such example where
better off farmers protested against the policies of the state.
Growth
In January 1988, around twenty thousand farmers had gathered in
the city of Meerut, Uttar Pradesh. They were protesting against the
government decision to increase electricity rates. The farmers camped
for about three weeks outside the district collector’s office until their
demands were fulfilled. It was a very disciplined agitation of the farmers
and all those days they received regular food supply from the nearby
villages. The Meerut agitation was seen as a great show of rural power
(cid:259) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:17) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)
of the Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU), an organisation of farmers from
western Uttar Pradesh and Haryana regions. The BKU was one of the
leading organisations in the farmers’ movement of the eighties.
We have noted in Chapter Three that farmers of Haryana, Punjab
and western Uttar Pradesh had benefited in the late 1960s from the
state policies of ‘green revolution’. Sugar and wheat became the main
cash crops in the region since then. The cash crop market faced a crisis
in mid-eighties due to the beginning of the process of liberalisation of
Indian economy. The BKU demanded higher government floor prices
for sugarcane and wheat, abolition of
A Bhartiya Kisan Union Rally in Punjab.
semiT
natsudniH
:tiderC
restrictions on the inter-state movement
of farm produce, guaranteed supply of
electricity at reasonable rates, waiving
of repayments due on loans to farmers
and the provision of a government
pension for farmers.
Similar demands were made by other
farmers’ organisations in the country.
Shetkari Sanghatana of Maharashtra
declared the farmers’ movement as
a war of Bharat (symbolising rural,
agrarian sector) against forces of India
(urban industrial sector). You have
already studied in Chapter Three
that the debate between industry and

--- PAGE 136 ---
Rise of Popular Movements 135
agriculture has been one of the prominent issues in India’s model of
development. The same debate came alive once again in the eighties I have
never met anyone
when the agricultural sector came under threat due to economic
who says he wishes
policies of liberalisation.
to be a farmer. Don’t
we need farmers in
Characteristics the country?
Activities conducted by the BKU to pressurise the state for accepting
its demands included rallies, demonstrations, sit-ins, and jail bharo
(courting imprisonment) agitations. These protests involved tens of
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86) (cid:259) (cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:68) (cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:75) (cid:259) (cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80) (cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86) (cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:86)
in western Uttar Pradesh and adjoining regions. Throughout the
decade of eighties, the BKU organised massive rallies of these farmers
in many district headquarters of the State and also at the national
capital. Another novel aspect of these mobilisations was the use of
caste linkages of farmers. Most of the BKU members belonged to a
single community. The organisation used traditional caste panchayats
of these communities in bringing them together over economic issues.
In spite of lack of any formal organisation, the BKU could sustain
itself for a long time because it was based on clan networks among
its members. Funds, resources and activities of BKU were mobilised
through these networks.
Until the early nineties, the BKU distanced itself from all political
parties. It operated as a pressure group in politics with its strength
of sheer numbers. The organisation, along with the other farmers’
organisations across States, did manage to get some of their economic
demands accepted. The farmers’ movement became one of the most
successful social movements of the ’eighties in this respect. The
success of the movement was an outcome of political bargaining
powers that its members possessed. The movement was active mainly
in the prosperous States of the country. Unlike most of the Indian
farmers who engage in agriculture for subsistence, members of the
organisations like the
BKU grew cash crops Kisan union wants agriculture out of WTO purview
for the market. Like
the BKU, farmers’ By Our Staff Correspondent of the union, Mahendra The leaders said a farmers’
organisations across Singh Tikait, and its na- rally will be taken out in
States recruited MYSORE, FEB. 15. The tional coordinating com- New Delhi on March 17
their members from Bharatiya Kisan Union has mittee convener, M. Yudh- to pressure the Govern-
communities that warned of socio-economic veer Singh, warned of the ment to keep agriculture
dominated regional upheavals in the country if impending dangers if In- out of the purview of the
dia goes ahead and agrees WTO. More than five lakh
electoral politics. India does not bargain to
to the stipulations of the farmers from all over India
Shetkari Sanghatana keep agriculture out of the
WTO in the next round of are expected to attend the
of Maharashtra purview of the World Trade
meeting scheduled to be rally. Subsequently, the
and Rayata Sangha Organisation (WTO).
held in Hong Kong in No- agitation will be intensi-
of Karnataka, are Addressing a press confer-
vember. fied across the country.
prominent examples ence here today, the chief
of such organisations
The Hindu, Feb 16, 2005
of the farmers.

--- PAGE 137 ---
ational ish or ers oru
Do you know that the Indian fishers constitute the second largest fishing population in
the world? Both in the eastern and the western coastal areas of our country hundreds
of thousands of families, mainly belonging to the indigenous fishermen communities,
are engaged in the occupation of fishing. These fish workers’ lives were threatened
in a major way when the government permitted entry to mechanised trawlers and
technologies like bottom trawling for large-scale harvest of fish in the Indian seas.
Throughout the seventies and eighties, local fish workers’ organisations fought with
the State governments over the issues of their livelihood. Fisheries being a State
subject, the fish workers were mostly mobilised at the regional level.
With the coming of policies of economic liberalisation in and around the mid ’eighties,
these organisations were compelled to come together on a national level platform-
the NFF or National Fishworkers’ Forum. Fish workers from Kerala took the main
responsibility of mobilising fellow workers, including women workers from other
States. Work of the NFF consolidated when in 1991 it fought its first legal battle with
the Union government successfully. This was about the government’s deep sea
fishing policy that opened up India’s waters to large commercial vessels including
those of the multinational fishing companies. Throughout the nineties the NFF
fought various legal and public battles with the government. It worked to protect the
interests of those who rely on fishing for subsistence rather than those who invest
in the sector for profit. In July 2002, NFF called for a nationwide strike to oppose the
move of the government to issue licenses to foreign trawlers. The NFF joined hands
with organisations all over the world for protecting ecology and for protecting lives
of the fish workers.
udniH
:tiderC
136

--- PAGE 138 ---
Rise of Popular Movements 137
n
a
b
u
Z
Anti-Arrack Movement di
t:
e
r
C
When the BKU was mobilising the farmers of the
north, an altogether different kind of mobilisation in
the rural areas was taking shape in the southern State
of Andhra Pradesh. It was a spontaneous mobilisation
of women demanding a ban on the sale of alcohol in
their neighbourhoods.
Liquor Mafia take to Heels as Women Hit Back
The women of village when the village arrack prevented the sale of arrack
Gundlur in Kalikari vendor informed the were assaulted by arrack
mandal of Chittoor district contractor about this, contractor’s goondas with
assembled and resolved the contractor sent him a iron rods and other lethal
to put an end to the sale gang of men to help him weapons. But when the
of arrack in their village. resume sales. Women of women resisted the assault
They conveyed this the village were adamant unitedly, the hired mafia
resolution to the village and opposed this move. took to their heels. The
arrack vendor. They The contractor called in women later destroyed
turned back the jeep that the police but even they three jeeps full of arrack.
n
brought arrack packets had to beat a retreat. A a
b
to the village. However, week later, women who u
Z
:t
Based on a report in Eenadu, id
e
October 29, 1992. r
C
Stories of this kind
appeared in the Telugu press
almost daily during the two
months of September and
October 1992. The name of
the village would change in
each case but the story was
the same. Rural women in
remote villages from the State
of Andhra Pradesh fought a
battle against alcoholism,
against mafias and against We
the government during this hear all
these nice
period. These agitations
stories, but they
shaped what was known as
never tell us how
the anti-arrack movement in
these ended. Did
the State. this movement put
an end to drinking?
Or did the men go
back to it after
some time?

--- PAGE 139 ---
138 Politics in India since Independence
Origins
In a village in the interior of Dubagunta in Nellore district of Andhra
Pradesh, women had enrolled in the Adult Literacy Drive on a large
scale in the early nineteen nineties. It is during the discussion in
the class that women complained of increased consumption of a
(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:79) (cid:259) (cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78) (cid:259) (cid:69)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:85) (cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:17) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:87)
of alcoholism had taken deep roots among the village people and was
ruining their physical and mental health. It affected the rural economy
of the region a great deal. Indebtedness grew with increasing scales of
consumption of alcohol, men remained absent from their jobs and the
contractors of alcohol engaged in crime for securing their monopoly
over the arrack trade. Women were the worst sufferers of these ill-
effects of alcohol as it resulted in the collapse of the family economy
and women had to bear the brunt of violence from the male family
members, particularly the husband.
Women in Nellore came together
in spontaneous local initiatives to
protest against arrack and forced
closure of the wine shop. The news
spread fast and women of about 5000
villages got inspired and met together
in meetings, passed resolutions for
imposing prohibition and sent them
to the District Collector. The arrack
auctions in Nellore district were
postponed 17 times. This movement in
Nellore District slowly spread all over
the State.
Women taking out Linkages
procession in Hyderabad
in 1992, protesting The slogan of the anti-arrack movement was simple — prohibition on
against the selling of the sale of arrack. But this simple demand touched upon larger social,
arrack.
economic and political issues of the region that affected women’s life.
A close nexus between crime and politics was established around the
business of arrack. The State government collected huge revenues
by way of taxes imposed on the sale of arrack and was therefore not
willing to impose a ban. Groups of local women tried to address these
complex issues in their agitation against arrack. They also openly
discussed the issue of domestic violence. Their movement, for the
first time, provided a platform to discuss private issues of domestic
violence. Thus, the anti-arrack movement also became part of the
women’s movement.
Earlier, women’s groups working on issues of domestic violence,
the custom of dowry, sexual abuse at work and public places were
active mainly among urban middle class women in different parts of
the country. Their work led to a realisation that issues of injustice
udniH
ehT
:tiderC

--- PAGE 140 ---
Rise of Popular Movements 139
to women and of gender inequalities
were complicated in nature. During
the decade of the eighties women’s
movement focused on issues of sexual
(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87) (cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81) (cid:259) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)
family and outside. These groups ran a
campaign against the system of dowry
and demanded personal and property
laws based on the norms of gender
equality.
These campaigns contributed a
great deal in increasing overall social
awareness about women’s questions.
Focus of the women’s movement gradually
shifted from legal reforms to open social
confrontations like the one we discussed
above. As a result the movement made
demands of equal representation to
women in politics during the nineties. We
know that 73rd and 74th amendments
have granted reservations to women in
local level political offices. Demands for
extending similar reservations in State
and Central legislatures have also been
made. A constitution amendment bill to
this effect has been proposed but has
not received enough support from the
Parliament yet. Main opposition to the
bill has come from groups, including
some women’s groups, who are insisting
on a separate quota for Dalit and OBC
women within the proposed women’s
quota in higher political offices.
mliF
a
hctaw
s’teL
A
AKROSH
The lawyer Bhaskar Kulkarni
is assigned a legal aid case to
represent Bhiku Lahanya, an
Adivasi who is charged with
murdering his wife. The lawyer
tries hard to find out the cause
of the killing but the accused is
determinedly silent and so is his
family. The lawyer’s perseverance
leads to an attack on him and also
a tip off by a social worker about
what had happened.
But the social worker disappears
and Bhiku’s father dies. Bhiku is
permitted to attend the funeral
of his father. It is here that Bhiku
breaks down and the ‘Aakrosh’
(screaming cry) erupts .This
hard hitting film depicts the sub-
human life of the oppressed
and the uphill task facing any
intervention against dominant
social powers.
Year: 1980
Director: Govind Nihlani
Story: Vijay Tendulkar
Screenplay: Satyadev Dubey
Actors: Naseeruddin Shah, Om
Puri, Smita Patil, Nana Patekar,
Women’s demonstration in favour of anti-dowry act. Mahesh Elkunchwar
yadoT
aidnI
:tiderC

--- PAGE 141 ---
140 Politics in India since Independence
Narmada Bachao Aandolan
Social movements that we discussed so far raised various
about the model of economic development that India
opted at the time of Independence. Chipko movement
ht out the issue of ecological depletion whereas
armers complained of neglect of agricultural sector.
al and material conditions of Dalits led to their mass
ggles whereas the anti-arrack movement focused on
negative fallouts of what was considered development.
issue implicit in all these movements was made
plicit by the movements against displacement caused
huge developmental projects.
ardar Sarovar Project
n ambitious developmental project was launched
n the Narmada valley of central India in early
eighties. The project consisted of 30 big dams, 135
e
lp medium sized and around 3,000 small dams to be
o
e constructed on the Narmada and its tributaries
P
d that flow across three states of Madhya Pradesh,
n
a
n Gujarat and Maharashtra. Sardar Sarovar Project
g
is in Gujarat and the Narmada Sagar Project in
e
D Madhya Pradesh were two of the most important
:tid
and biggest, multi-purpose dams planned under
e
r C ect. Narmada Bachao Aandolan, a movement to save
ed the construction of these dams and questioned
the nature of ongoing developmental projects in the country.
A poster in support
ofNarmada Bachao Sardar Sarovar Project is a multipurpose mega-scale dam. Its
Andolan. advocates say that it would benefit huge areas of Gujarat and the
three adjoining states in terms of availability of drinking water
and water for irrigation, generation of electricity and increase in
agricultural production. Many more subsidiary benefits like effective
flood and drought control in the region were linked to the success of
this dam. In the process of construction of the dam 245 villages from
these States were expected to get submerged. It required relocation
of around two and a half lakh people from these villages. Issues of
relocation and proper rehabilitation of the project-affected people were
first raised by local activist groups. It was around 1988-89 that the
(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:49)(cid:37)(cid:36) (cid:259) (cid:68) (cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73)
local voluntary organisations.
Debates and struggles
Since its inception the NBA linked its opposition to the Sardar
Sarovar Project with larger issues concerning the nature of ongoing
developmental projects, efficacy of the model of development that

--- PAGE 142 ---
Rise of Popular Movements 141
e country followed and
bout what constituted public I have
never heard of
nterest in a democracy. It
posh colonies and
emanded that there should be
cities being demolished
a cost-benefit analysis of the
for any developmental
major developmental projects project. Why is it always
completed in the country so the Adivasis and the
far. The movement argued poor who are asked
to leave their
that larger social costs of
homes?
the developmental projects
A
B must be calculated in such
N
:tid
e in
a
c
n
lu d
a
ed
n a
f
l
o
y
r
s
c
is
e
.
d r
T
es
h
e
e
t tle
s
m
oc
e
i
n
a
t
l
r
C
of the project-affected people, a serious loss of
their means of livelihood and culture and depletion of ecological
resources.
Initially the movement demanded proper and just rehabilitation
of all those who were directly or indirectly affected by the project. The
movement also questioned the nature of decision-making processes
that go in the making of mega scale developmental projects. The NBA
insisted that local communities must have a say in such decisions
and they should also have effective control over natural resources Top:
like water, land and forests. The movement also asked why, in a NBA leader Medha
democracy, should some people be made to sacrifice for benefiting Patkar and other
activists in Jalsamadhi
others. All these considerations led the NBA to shift from its initial
(protesting in rising
demand for rehabilitation to its position of total opposition to the
waters) in 2002.
dam.
Bottom:
Arguments and agitations of the movement met vociferous opposition
A boat ralley organised
in the States benefiting from the project, especially in Gujarat. At the
by NBA.
same time, the point about
right to rehabilitation ha
been now recognised by th
government and the judiciary
A comprehensive National
Rehabilitation Policy formed
by the government in 2003
can be seen as an achievement
of the movements like the
NBA. However, its demand
to stop the construction
of the dam was severely
criticised by many as
obstructing the process
of development, denying
access to water and to A
B
economic development N
for many. The Supreme
dit:
e
r
C

--- PAGE 143 ---
142 Politics in India since Independence
Court upheld the government’s decision to go ahead with the
construction of the dam while also instructing to ensure proper
rehabilitation.
Narmada Bachao Aandolan continued a sustained agitation for
more than twenty years. It used every available democratic strategy
to put forward its demands. These included appeals to the judiciary,
mobilisation of support at the international level, public rallies
in support of the movement and a revival of forms of Satyagraha
to convince people about the movement’s position. However, the
movement could not garner much support among the mainstream
(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:259)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:77)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:92)
of the Narmada Bachao Aandolan depicted a gradual process of
disjunction between political parties and social movements in Indian
politics. By the end of the ’nineties, however, the NBA was not alone.
There emerged many local groups and movements that challenged the
logic of large scale developmental projects in their areas. Around this
time, the NBA became part of a larger alliance of people’s movements
that are involved in struggles for similar issues in different regions of
the country.
Lessons from popular movements
The history of these popular movements helps us to understand
better the nature of democratic politics. We have seen that these
non-party movements are neither sporadic in nature nor are these a
problem. These movements came up to rectify some problems in the
functioning of party politics and should be seen as integral part of
our democratic politics. They represented new social groups whose
economic and social grievances were not redressed in the realm of
electoral politics. Popular movements ensured effective representation
of diverse groups and their demands. This reduced the possibility of
deep social conflict and disaffection of these groups from democracy.
Popular movements suggested new forms of active participation and
thus broadened the idea of participation in Indian democracy.
Critics of these movements often argue that collective actions like
strikes, sit-ins and rallies disrupt the functioning of the government,
delay decision making and destabilise the routines of democracy.
Such an argument invites a deeper question: why do these movements
Can
resort to such assertive forms of action? We have seen in this chapter
we say that
that popular movements have raised legitimate demands of the people
movements are
like laboratories and have involved large scale participation of citizens. It should
of politics? New be noted that the groups mobilised by these movements are poor,
experiments are socially and economically disadvantaged sections of the society from
carried out here and
marginal social groups. The frequency and the methods used by the
the successful ones
movements suggest that the routine functioning of democracy did
are taken up by
not have enough space for the voices of these social groups. That
parties.

--- PAGE 144 ---
Rise of Popular Movements 143
Popular movements have produced a wide range of litrature,
often in the form of small magazines. Here is a selcetion.

--- PAGE 145 ---
144 Politics in India since Independence
Mo e ent or i ht to n or ation
The movement for Right to Information (RTI) is
one of the few recent examples of a movement
that did succeed in getting the state to accept
its major demand. The movement started in
1990, when a mass based organisation called
the Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan (MKSS) in
Rajasthan took the initiative in demanding records
of famine relief work and accounts of labourers.
The demand was first raised in Bhim Tehsil in a
very backward region of Rajasthan. The villagers
asserted their right to information by asking for
copies of bills and vouchers and names of persons
on the muster rolls who have been paid wages on
the construction of schools, dispensaries, small
dams and community centres. On paper such
development projects were all completed, but it
was common knowledge of the villagers that there
was gross misappropriation of funds. In 1994 and
1996, the MKSS organised Jan Sunwais or Public
Hearings, where the administration was asked to
“Ghotala Rathyatra”, a popular explain its stand in public.
theatre form evolved by MKSS.
The movement had a small success when they
could force an amendment in the Rajasthan Panchayati Raj Act to permit the
public to procure certified copies of documents held by the Panchayats. The
Panchayats were also required to publish on a board and in newspapers the budget,
accounts, expenditure, policies and beneficiaries. In 1996 MKSS formed National
Council for People’s
Right to Information in
Delhi to raise RTI to
the status of a national
campaign. Prior to that,
the Consumer Education
and Research Center,
the Press Council and
the Shourie committee
had proposed a draft
RTI law. In 2002, a weak
Freedom of Information
Act was legislated but
never came into force. In
2004 RTI Bill was tabled
and received presidential
assent in June 2005.
rakhsuP
jaknaP
:tiderC
noissimmoC
gninnalP
dna
PDNU/gnaliaT
rihduS
:tiderC

--- PAGE 146 ---
Rise of Popular Movements 145
is perhaps why these groups turned to mass actions and mobilisations
outside the electoral arena.
This can be seen in the recent case of the new economic policies. As you
will read in Chapter Nine, there is a growing consensus among political
parties over the implementation of these policies. It follows that those
marginal social groups who may be adversely affected by these policies
get less and less attention from political parties as well as the media.
Therefore, any effective protest against these policies involves assertive
forms of action that are taken up by the popular movements outside the
framework of political parties.
Movements are not only about collective assertions or only about
rallies and protests. They involve a gradual process of coming together of
people with similar problems, similar demands and similar expectations.
But then movements are also about making people aware of their rights
and the expectations that they can have from democratic institutions.
Social movements in India have been involved in these educative tasks for
a long time and have thus contributed to expansion of democracy rather
than causing disruptions. The struggle for the right to information is a
case in point.
Yet the real life impact of these movements on the nature of public
policies seems to be very limited. This is partly because most of the
contemporary movements focus on a single issue and represent the
interest of one section of society. Thus it becomes possible to ignore
their reasonable demands. Democratic politics requires a broad alliance
of various disadvantaged social groups. Such an alliance does not seem
to be shaping under the leadership of these movements. Political parties
are required to bring together different sectional interests, but they also
seem to be unable to do so. Parties do not seem to be taking up issues of
marginal social groups. The movements that take up these issues operate
in a very restrictive manner. The relationship between popular movements
and political parties has grown weaker over the years, creating a vacuum
in politics. In the recent years, this has become a major problem in Indian
politics.
hcraes-er
s’teL
Identify at least one popular movement in your city or district in the last
25 years. Collect the following information about that movement.
(cid:129) When did it start? How long did it last?
(cid:129) Who were the main leaders? Which social groups supported
the movement?
(cid:129) What were the main issues or demands of the movement?
(cid:129) Did it succeed? What was the long term effect of the movement
in your area?

--- PAGE 147 ---
146 Politics in India since Independence
1. Which of these statements are incorrect
The Chipko Movement
(a) was an environmental movement to prevent cutting down of
trees.
(b) raised questions of ecological and economic exploitation.
(c) was a movement against alcoholism started by the women
(d) demanded that local communities should have control over their
natural resources
2. Some of the statements below are incorrect. Identify the incorrect
statements and rewrite those with necessary correction:
(a) Social movements are hampering the functioning of India’s
democracy.
(b) The main strength of social movements lies in their mass base
across social sections.
(c) Social movements in India emerged because there were many
issues that political parties did not address.
3. Identify the reasons which led to the Chipko Movement in U.P in early
1970s. What was the impact of this movement?
4. The Bharatiya Kisan Union is a leading organisation highlighting the
plight of farmers. What were the issues addressed by it in the nineties
and to what extent were they successful?
5. The anti-arrack movement in Andhra Pradesh drew the attention of the
country to some serious issues. What were these issues?
6. Would you consider the anti-arrack movement as a women’s movement?
Why?
7. Why did the Narmada Bachao Aandolan oppose the dam projects in the
Narmada Valley?
8. Do movements and protests in a country strengthen democracy? Justify
your answer with examples.
9. What issues did the Dalit Panthers address?
10. Read the passage and answer questions below:
…., nearly all new social movements have emerged as corrective to
new maladies environmental degradation, violation of the status of
women, destruction of tribal cultures and the undermining of human
rights none of which are in and by themselves transformative of the
social order. hey are in that way uite different from revolutionary
ideologies of the past. But their wea ness lies in their being so heavily
fragmented. …… …. …….a large part of the space occupied by the new
SESICREXE
146 Politics in India since Independence

--- PAGE 148 ---
RRiissee ofof PPooppuullaarr MMoovveemmeennttss 114477
social movements seem to be suffering from .. various characteristics
which have prevented them from being relevant to the truly oppressed
and the poor in the form of a solid unified movement of the people. hey
are too fragmented, reactive, ad hocish, providing no comprehensive
framewor of basic social change. heir being anti-this or that anti-
West, anti-capitalist, anti-development, etc does not ma e them any
more coherent, any more relevant to oppressed and peripherali ed
communities. — RAJNI KOTHARI
(a) What is the difference between new social movements and
revolutionary ideologies?
(b) What according to the author are the limitations of social
movements?
(c) If social movements address specific issues, would you say that
they are ‘fragmented’ or that they are more focused? Give reasons
for your answer by giving examples.
T T T T
Trace newspaper reports for a week and identify any three news stories
you would classify as ‘Popular Movement’. Find out the core demands
of these movements; the methods used by them to pursue their demands
and the response of political parties to these demands.

--- PAGE 149 ---
In this chapter…
In the first chapter of this book we studied the
process of ‘nation-building’ in the first decade
after Independence. But nation-building is
not something that can be accomplished
once and for all times to come. In the course
of time new challenges came up. Some of the
old problems had never been fully resolved.
As democratic experiment unfolded, people
from different regions began to express
their aspirations for autonomy. Sometimes
these aspirations were expressed outside
the framework of the Indian union. These
involved long struggles and often aggressive
and armed assertions by the people.
This new challenge came to the fore in the
1980s, as the Janata experiment came to an
end and there was some political stability at
the centre. This decade will be remembered
for some major conflicts and accords in the
various regions of the country, especially
in Assam, the Punjab, Mizoram and the
developments in Jammu and Kashmir. In
this chapter we study these cases so as to
Regional aspirations ask some general questions.
are usually expressed
in the language of the (cid:129) Which factors contribute to the tensions
region and addressed arising out of regional aspirations?
to the local population
or the rulers. This (cid:129) How has the Indian state responded to
unusual poster from these tensions and challenges?
Uttarakhand movement
appeals to all the (cid:129) What kind of difficulties are faced in
Indian citizens in seven balancing democratic rights and national
different languages unity?
and thus underscores
the compatibility of the (cid:129) What are the lessons here for achieving
regional aspirations with unity with diversity in a democracy?
nationalist sentiments.

--- PAGE 150 ---
8
retpahc regional
aspirations
Region and the Nation
1980s may be seen as a period of rising regional aspirations for
autonomy, often outside the framework of the Indian Union. These
movements frequently involved armed assertions by the people,
their repression by the government, and a collapse of the political
and electoral processes. It is also not surprising that most of these
struggles were long drawn and concluded in negotiated settlements
or accords between the central government and the groups leading
the movement for autonomy. The accords were reached after a
process of dialogue that aimed to settle contentious issues within the
constitutional framework. Yet the journey to the accord was always
tumultuous and often violent.
Indian approach
In studying the Indian Constitution and the process of nation-building
we have repeatedly come across one basic principle of the Indian
(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92) (cid:259) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81) (cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87) (cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:73)
different regions and linguistic groups to retain their own culture. We
decided to live a united social life without losing the distinctiveness of
the numerous cultures that constituted it. Indian nationalism sought
to balance the principles of unity and diversity. The nation would not
mean the negation of the region. In this sense the Indian approach
Does it mean
was very different from the one adopted in many European countries
that regionalism is
where they saw cultural diversity as a threat to the nation. not as dangerous as
communalism? Or may
India adopted a democratic approach to the question of diversity.
be, not dangerous at
Democracy allows the political expressions of regional aspirations and
all?
does not look upon them as anti-national. Besides,
democratic politics allows parties and groups to address
the people on the basis of their regional identity,
aspiration and specific regional problems. Thus, in the
course of democratic politics, regional aspirations get
strengthened. At the same time, democratic politics
also means that regional issues and problems will
receive adequate attention and accommodation in the
policy making process.
Such an arrangement may sometimes lead to
tensions and problems. Sometimes, the concern for
national unity may overshadow the regional needs

--- PAGE 151 ---
150 Politics in India since Independence
and aspirations. At other times a concern for region alone may
blind us to the larger needs of the nation. Therefore, political
conflicts over issues of power of the regions, their rights and
their separate existence are common to nations that want to
respect diversity while trying to forge and retain unity.
Areas of tension
In the first chapter you have seen how immediately after
Independence our nation had to cope with many difficult issues
like Partition, displacement, integration of Princely States,
reorganisation of states and so on. Many observers, both within
the country and from outside, had predicted that India as one
unified country cannot last long. Soon after Independence,
the issue of Jammu and Kashmir came up. It was not only a
conflict between India and Pakistan. More than that, it was a
question of the political aspirations of the people of Kashmir
valley. Similarly, in some parts of the north-east, there was no
consensus about being a part of India. First Nagaland and then
Mizoram witnessed strong movements demanding separation
from India. In the south, some groups from the Dravid movement
briefly toyed with the idea of a separate country.
These events were followed by mass agitations in many parts
for the formation of linguistic States. Today’s Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Gujarat were among the regions
affected by these agitations. In some parts of southern India,
particularly Tamil Nadu, there were protests against making
Hindi the official national language of the country. In the north,
there were strong pro-Hindi agitations demanding that Hindi be
Why does the
made the official language immediately. From the late 1950s,
challenge always
people speaking the Punjabi language started agitating for a
come from the border
States? separate State for themselves. This demand was finally accepted
and the States of Punjab and Haryana were created in 1966.
Later, the States of Chhatisgarh, Jharkhand and Uttaranchal
(now Uttarakhand) were created. Thus the challenge of diversity
was met by redrawing the internal boundaries of the country.
Yet this did not lead to resolution of all problems and for
all times. In some regions, like Kashmir and Nagaland, the
challenge was so complex that it could not be resolved in the
first phase of nation-building. Besides, new challenges came
up in States like Punjab, Assam and Mizoram. Let us study
these cases in some detail. In this process let us also go back
to some of the earlier instances of difficulties of nation building.
The successes and failures in these cases are instructive not
merely for a study of our past, but also for an understanding
of India’s future.

--- PAGE 152 ---
Regional Aspirations 151
Jammu and Kashmir
You may have heard about the
violence in Jammu and Kashmir
(J&K). This has resulted in
the loss of many lives and the
displacement of many families.
The ‘Kashmir issue’ is always
seen as a major issue between
India and Pakistan. But the
political situation in the State
has many dimensions.
Jammu and Kashmir
comprises three social and
political regions: Jammu,
Kashmir and Ladakh. The heart
of the Kashmir region is the
Kashmir valley; the people are
Kashmiri speaking and mostly
Muslim with a small Kashmiri
speaking Hindu minority.
Jammu region is a mix of foothills
and plains, of Hindus, Muslims
and Sikhs and speakers of various languages. The Ladakh region Note: This illustration
is mountainous, has very little population which is equally divided is not a map drawn to
between Buddhists and Muslims. scale and should not be
taken to be an authentic
The ‘Kashmir issue’ is not just a dispute between India and Pakistan. depiction of India’s
This issue has external and internal dimensions. It involves the issue external boundaries.
of Kashmiri identity known as Kashmiriyat and the aspirations of the
people of J&K for political autonomy.
Roots of the problem
In that
Before 1947, Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) was a Princely State. Its
case, why don’t
Hindu ruler, Hari Singh, did not want to merge with India and tried to they rename the
negotiate with India and Pakistan to have an independent status for State as “Jammu,
his state. The Pakistani leaders thought the Kashmir region ‘belonged’ Kashmir and Ladakh”?
to Pakistan, since majority population of the State was Muslim. Besides, JKL makes
for an easy
(cid:37)(cid:88)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86) (cid:76)(cid:86) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87) (cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:90) (cid:76)(cid:87) (cid:259) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:73)
abbreviation!
themselves as Kashmiris above all. The popular movement in the
State, led by Sheikh Abdullah of the National Conference, wanted to
get rid of the Maharaja, but was against joining Pakistan. The National
Conference was a secular organisation and had a long association
with the Congress. Sheikh Abdullah was a personal friend of some of
the leading nationalist leaders including Nehru.
In October 1947, Pakistan sent tribal infiltrators from its side
to capture Kashmir. This forced the Maharaja to ask for Indian
military help. India extended the military support and drove back

--- PAGE 153 ---
152
ra i ian o e ent
.V.
‘ ada u aa h irathu her u haei irathu’
a asa i
The north thrives even as the south decays.
aic er
This popular slogan sums up the dominant
(1879-197 ):
sentiments of one of India’s most effective
Known as
regional movements, the Dravidian movement,
Periyar (the
at one point of time. This was one of the first
respected);
regional movements in Indian politics. Though
strong
some sections of this movement had ambitions
supporter of atheism; famous
of creating a Dravid nation, the movement did
for his anti-caste struggle
not take to arms. It used democratic means
and rediscovery of Dravid
like public debates and the electoral platform
identity; initially a worker of
to achieve its ends. This strategy paid off as
the Congress party; started
the movement acquired political power in
the self-respect movement
the State and also became influential at the
(1925); led the anti-Brahmin
national level.
movement; worked for the
Justice party and later founded The Dravidian movement led to the formation of
Dravid Kazhagam; opposed Dravida Kazhagam DK under the leadership
to Hindi and domination of of Tamil social reformer E.V. Ramasami
north India; propounded the ‘Periyar’. The organisation strongly opposed
thesis that north Indians and the Brahmins’ dominance and affirmed
Brahmins are Aryans. regional pride against the political, economic
and cultural domination of the North. Initially,
the Dravidian movement spoke in terms of
the whole of south India; however lack of support from other States limited the
movement to Tamil Nadu.
u
d
The DK split and the n iH
movement was transferred e
h
Munnetra Kazhagam T
(DMK). The DMK made
:t
id
its entry into politics e r
C
with a three pronged
agitation in 1953-54.
First, it demanded the
restoration of the original
name of Kallakudi railway
station which had been
renamed Dalmiapuram
after an industrial house
from the North. This deman
brought out its opposition
the North Indian econom
and cultural symbols. T
second agitation was
Anti-Hindi
agitation in
Tamil
Nadu,
1965

--- PAGE 154 ---
153
ng Tamil cultural history
ater importance in
hool curricula. The third
itation was against
e craft education
cheme of the State
overnment, which it
alleged was linked
to the Brahmanical
social outlook. It also
ated against making
official language. The
of 1965 added to the
DMKs popularity.
Sustained political agitations brought the DMK to power in the
Assembly elections of 1967. Since then, the Dravidian parties have
dominated the politics of Tamil Nadu. Though the DMK split after the
death of its leader, C. Annadurai, the influence of Dravidian parties in
Tamil politics actually increased. After the split there were two parties
– the DMK and the All India Anna DMK (AIADMK) – that claimed
Dravidian legacy. Both these parties have dominated politics in Tamil
Nadu for the last four decades. Since 1996, one of these parties has
been a part of the ruling coalition at the Centre. In the 1990s, many
other Dravidian parties have emerged. These include Marumalarchchi
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (MDMK), Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK)
and Desiya Murpok
(DMDK). All these
parties have kept
alive the issue
of regional pride
in the politics of
Tamil Nadu. Initially
seen as a threat to
Indian nationalism,
regional politics
in Tamil Nadu is a
good example o
the compatibility
of regionalism an
nationalism.

--- PAGE 155 ---
154 Politics in India since Independence
hei h
the infiltrators from Kashmir valley, but only after the
Moha a
Maharaja had signed an ‘Instrument of Accession’ with
ullah
the Government of India. It was also agreed that once the
(19 -198 ):
situation normalised, the views of the people of J&K will
Leader of Jammu
be ascertained about their future. Sheikh Abdullah took
and Kashmir;
over as the Prime Minister of the State of J&K (the head
proponent of
of the government in the State was then called Prime
autonomy and
Minister) in March 1948. India agreed to maintain the
secularism for
autonomy of Jammu and Kashmir.
Jammu and Kashmir; led the
popular struggle against princely
External and internal disputes
rule; opposed to Pakistan due to
its non-secular character; leader Since then, the politics of Jammu and Kashmir always
of the National Conference; Prime remained controversial and conflict ridden both for
Minister of J K immediately external and internal reasons. Externally, Pakistan has
after its accession with India in always claimed that Kashmir valley should be part of
1947; dismissed and jailed by Pakistan. As we noted above, Pakistan sponsored a tribal
Government of India from 1953 to invasion of the State in 1947, as a consequence of which
1964 and again from 1965 to 1968; one part of the State came under Pakistani control. India
became Chief Minister of the State claims that this area is under illegal occupation. Pakistan
after an agreement with Indira describes this area as ‘Azad Kashmir’. Ever since 1947,
Gandhi in 1974.
semiT
natsudniH
:tiderC

--- PAGE 156 ---
Regional Aspirations 155
Kashmir has remained a major issue of
conflict between India and Pakistan.
Internally, there is a dispute about
the status of Kashmir within the Indian
union. You know that Kashmir was given
a special status by Article 370 in our
Constitution. You have studied about the
special provisions under Articles 370 and
371 last year in Indian Constitution at
Work. Article 370 gives greater autonomy
to Jammu and Kashmir compared to
other States of India. The State has its
own Constitution. All provisions of the
Indian Constitution are not applicable to
the State. Laws passed by the Parliament
apply to J&K only if the State agrees.
This special status has provoked two
opposite reactions. There is a section
of people outside of J&K that believes
that the special status of the State
conferred by Article 370 does not allow
full integration of the State with India.
This section feels that Article 370 should
therefore be revoked and J&K should be
like any other State in India.
Another section, mostly Kashmiris,
believe that the autonomy conferred by
Article 370 is not enough. A section of
Kashmiris have expressed at least three
major grievances. First, the promise that
Accession would be referred to the people
of the State after the situation created
by tribal invasion was normalised, has
not been fulfilled. This has generated
the demand for a ‘Plebiscite’. Secondly,
there is a feeling that the special federal
status guaranteed by Article 370, has
been eroded in practice. This has led to
the demand for restoration of autonomy
or ‘Greater State Autonomy’. Thirdly, it
is felt that democracy which is practiced
in the rest of India has not been similarly
institutionalised in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.
mliF
a
hctaw
s’teL
R
OJA
Tamil film depicting the travails
of Roja, a newly wed and doting
wife when her husband, Rishi, is
abducted by militants. Rishi is a
cryptologist who is assigned duty
in Kashmir to decode the enemy
messages. As love blossoms
between the husband and the
wife, the husband is kidnapped.
The kidnappers demand that
their jailed leader, be set free in
exchange of Rishi.
Roja’s world is shattered and she
is seen knocking at the doors of
officials and politicians. Since the
film has the background of Indo-
Pakistan dispute, it made instant
appeal. The film was dubbed
in Hindi and many other Indian
languages.
Year: 1992
Director: Maniratnam
Screenplay: Maniratnam
Cast (Hindi version): Madhu,
Arvind Swamy, Pankaj Kapoor,
Janagaraj

--- PAGE 157 ---
156 Politics in India since Independence
Politics since 1948
After taking over as the Prime Minister, Sheikh Abdullah initiated
major land reforms and other policies which benefited ordinary
people. But there was a growing difference between him and the
central government about his position on Kashmir’s status. He was
dismissed in 1953 and kept in detention for a number of years.
The leadership that succeeded him did not enjoy as much popular
support and was able to rule the State mainly due to the support of
So, Nehru
kept his personal the Centre. There were serious allegations of malpractices and rigging
friend in jail for such in various elections.
a long period! How did
During most of the period between 1953 and 1974, the Congress
they feel about it?
party exercised a lot of influence on the politics of the State. A
truncated National Conference (minus Sheikh Abdullah) remained in
power with the active support of Congress for some time but later it
merged with the Congress. Thus the Congress gained direct control
over the government in the State. In the meanwhile, there were several
attempts to reach an agreement between Sheikh Abdullah and the
Government of India. Finally, in 1974 Indira Gandhi reached an
agreement with Sheikh Abdullah and he became the Chief Minister of
the State. He revived the National Conference which was elected with
aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
:tiderC

--- PAGE 158 ---
Regional Aspirations 157
a majority in the assembly elections held in 1977.
Sheikh Abdullah died in 1982 and the leadership
of the National Conference went to his son, Farooq
Abdullah, who became the Chief Minister. But
he was soon dismissed by the Governor and a
breakaway faction of the National Conference
came to power for a brief period.
The dismissal of Farooq Abdullah’s government
due to the intervention of the Centre generated a
feeling of resentment in Kashmir. The confidence
that Kashmiris had developed in the democratic
processes after the accord between Indira Gandhi
and Sheikh Abdullah, received a set-back. The
feeling that the Centre was intervening in politics
of the State was further strengthened when the A cartoonist’s take on the Sheikh Abdullah
National Conference in 1986 agreed to have an (cid:259) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:68) (cid:42)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:75)(cid:76) (cid:36)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75) (cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)
becoming the Chief Minister.
electoral alliance with the Congress, the ruling
party in the Centre.
“
Insurgency and after
The Kash“miris
It was in this environment that the 1987 Assembly election took
were convinced now at
place. The official results showed a massive victory for the National
the second dethronement
(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:259)(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:41)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:84)(cid:36)(cid:69)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:38)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:73)
Minister. But it was widely believed that the results did not reflect of their elected leader [in
popular choice, and that the entire election process was rigged. A 1984] that India would
popular resentment had already been brewing in the State against the never permit them to rule
inefficient administration since early 1980s. This was now augmented
themselves.
by the commonly prevailing feeling that democratic processes were
being undermined at the behest of the Centre. This generated a political
crisis in Kashmir which became severe with the rise of insurgency. B. K. Nehru
Governor of J&K before
By 1989, the State had come in the grip of a militant movement the dismissal of Farooq
mobilised around the cause of a separate Kashmiri nation. The Abdullah’s government.
insurgents got moral, material and military support from Pakistan. For
a number of years the State was under President’s rule and effectively
under the control of the armed forces. Throughout the period from
1990, Jammu and Kashmir experienced violence at the hands of the
insurgents and through army action. Assembly elections in the State
were held only in 1996 in which the National Conference led by Farooq
Abdullah came to power with a demand for regional autonomy for
Jammu and Kashmir. J&K experienced a very fair election in 2002.
The National Conference failed to win a majority and was replaced by
People’s Democratic Party (PDP) and Congress coalition government.
Separatism and beyond
Separatist politics which surfaced in Kashmir from 1989 has taken
different forms and is made up of various strands. There is one strand
yttuK
:tiderC

--- PAGE 159 ---
158 Politics in India since Independence
of separatists who want a separate Kashmiri nation, independent
This of India and Pakistan. Then there are groups that want Kashmir to
is all about
merge with Pakistan. Besides these, there is a third strand which
governments, officials,
wants greater autonomy for the people of the State within the
leaders, terrorists… but
what about the people in Indian union. The idea of autonomy attracts the people of Jammu
Kashmir? In a democracy and Ladakh regions in a different way. They often complain of
we must go by what they neglect and backwardness. Therefore, the demand for intra-State
want, shouldn’t we? autonomy is as strong as the demand for the State autonomy.
The initial period of popular support to militancy has now given
way to the urge for peace. The Centre has started negotiations with
various separatist groups. Instead of demanding a separate nation,
most of the separatists in dialogue are trying to re-negotiate a
relationship of the State with India.
Jammu and Kashmir is one of the living examples of plural
society and politics. Not only are there diversities of all kind
(religious, cultural, linguistic, ethnic, tribal) but there are also
divergent political aspirations. However, despite all these diversities
and divergence on the one hand, and the continued situation of
conflict on the other, the plural and secular culture of the State
has remained largely intact.
Punjab
The decade of 1980s also witnessed major developments in the
State of Punjab. The social composition of the State changed first
Master Tara in h with Partition and later on after the carving out of Haryana and
(188 -19 7): HimachalPradesh. While the rest of the country was reorganised
Prominent Sikh on linguistic lines in 1950s, Punjab had to wait till 1966 for the
religious and political creation of a Punjabi speaking State. The Akali Dal, which was
leader; one of the formed in 1920 as the political wing of the Sikhs, had led the
early leaders of the movement for the formation of a ‘Punjabi suba’. The Sikhs were
Shiromani Gurudwara now a majority in the truncated State of Punjab.
Prabandhak
Committee (SGPC); Political context
leader of the Akali
After the reorganisation, the Akalis came to power in 1967
movement; supporter
and then in 1977. On both the occasions it was a coalition
of the freedom
government. The Akalis discovered that despite the redrawing
movement but
of the boundaries, their political position remained precarious.
opposed to Congress’
Firstly, their government was dismissed by the Centre mid-way
policy of negotiating
through its term. Secondly, they did not enjoy strong support
only with the Muslims;
among the Hindus. Thirdly, the Sikh community, like all other
afterIndependence,
religious communities, was internally differentiated on caste and
he was the senior
class lines. The Congress got more support among the Dalits,
most advocate of
whether Hindu or Sikh, than the Akalis.
formation of separate
Punjab State. It was in this context that during the 1970s a section of Akalis
began to demand political autonomy for the region. This was

--- PAGE 160 ---
Regional Aspirations 159
reflected in a resolution passed at their conference at Anandpur
Sahib in 1973. The Anandpur Sahib Resolution asserted regional
autonomy and wanted to redefine centre-state relationship in the
country. The resolution also spoke of the aspirations of the Sikh
qaum (community or nation) and declared its goal as attaining the
bolbala (dominance or hegemony) of the Sikhs. The Resolution was
a plea for strengthening federalism, but it could also be interpreted
as a plea for a separate Sikh nation.
The Resolution had a limited appeal among the Sikh masses. A
few years later, after the Akali government had been dismissed in
ant archan
1980, the Akali Dal launched a movement on the question of the
in h on o al
distribution of water between Punjab and its neighbouring States.
(19 -198 ):
A section of the religious leaders raised the question of autonomous
Sikh political
Sikh identity. The more extreme elements started advocating
and religious
secession from India and the creation of ‘Khalistan’.
leader; began his
political career
Cycle of violence
in mid-sixties as
an Akali leader;
Soon, the leadership of the movement passed from the moderate
became president
Akalis to the extremist elements and took the form of armed
of Akali Dal in
insurgency. These militants made their headquarters inside the
1980; reached an
Sikh holy shrine, the Golden Temple in Amritsar, and turned it into
agreement with
an armed fortress. In June 1984, the Government of India carried
Prime Minister
out ‘Operation Blue Star’, code name for army action in the Golden
Rajiv Gandhi on
Temple. In this operation, the Government could successfully flush
key demands
out the militants, but it also damaged the historic temple and
of Akalis;
deeply hurt the sentiments of the Sikhs. A large proportion of Sikhs
assassinated by
in India and abroad saw the military operation as an attack on
unidentified Sikh
their faith and this gave further impetus to militant and extremist
youth.
groups.
Still more tragic turn of events complicated the Punjab problem
further. Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was assassinated on
31 October 1984 outside her residence by her
bodyguards. Both
the assassins were
Sikhs and wanted
to take revenge for
Operation Bluestar.
While the entire
country was shocked
by this development,
in Delhi and in many
parts of northern
India violence broke
out against the
Sikh community.
The violence against
the Sikhs continued

--- PAGE 161 ---
160 Politics in India since Independence
“
There is also
evidence to show that on
31-10-84 either meetings
ia
were held or persons who R
u
could organise attacks h
g
a
were contacted and R
were given instructions
:
t
for almost a week. More than two id
to kill Sikhs and loot e
thousand Sikhs were killed in the r
C
their houses and shops. national capital, the area worst
The attacks were made affected by this violence. Hundreds
in a systematic manner of Sikhs were killed in other parts of
and without m“uch fear the country, especially in places like
Kanpur, Bokaro and Chas. Many Sikh
of the police, almost
families lost their male members and
suggesting that they were
thus suffered great emotional and
assured that they would
heavy financial loss. What hurt the
not be harmed while Sikhs most was that the government
committing those acts or took a long time in restoring normalcy
even after. and that the perpetrators of this violence
were not effectively punished. Twenty
years later, speaking in the Parliament
Justice Nanavati in 2005, Prime Minister Manmohan
Commission of Inquiry,
Report, Vol. I, 2005 S k th i i l n e li g n a h n g s ti - a e S x n i p d k r h e a s p v s i o o e l d l o e g n is c r e e e d . g r t e o t th o e v n er a tio t n h e f s o e r d W ep o i m ct e i n n g l o I o n k d i i n ra g G at a a n d w h a i l ’s l p a a s i s n a t s in si g n ation.

--- PAGE 162 ---
Regional Aspirations 161
“
I have
no hesitation in
apologising not only to
The Times of the Sikh community
India brought but the whole Indian
out a special
nation because what
mid-day
edition on the took place in 1984 is
day Indira
the negation of the
Gandhi was
concept of nationhood
assassinated.
and what is enshrined
Road to peace
in our Constitution.
After coming to power following the election in 1984, the new Prime So, I am not standing
Minister Rajiv Gandhi initiated a dialogue with moderate Akali on any false prestige.
leaders. In July 1985, he reached an agreement with Harchand On behalf of our
Singh Longowal, then the President of the Akali Dal. This agreement,
Government, on behalf
known as the Rajiv Gandhi - Longowal Accord or the Punjab Accord,
of the entire people of
was a step towards bringing normalcy to Punjab. It was agreed that
this country, I bow my
Chandigarh would be transferred to Punjab, a separate commission
would be appointed to resolve the border dispute between Punjab head in shame that
and Haryana, and a tribunal would be set up to decide the sharing such thing took place.
of Ravi-Beas river water among Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The But, Sir, there are ebbs,
agreement also provided for compensation to and better treatment of there are tides in the
those affected by the militancy in Punjab and the withdrawal of the
affairs of nations. The
application of Armed Forces Special Powers Act in Punjab.
past is with us. We
However, peace did not come easily or immediately. The cycle cannot rewr“ite the
of violence continued nearly for a decade. Militancy and counter
past. But as human
insurgency violence led to excesses by the police and violations of
beings, we have the
human rights. Politically, it led to fragmentation of the Akali Dal. The
willpower and we have
central government had to impose President’s rule in the State and
the ability to write
the normal electoral and political process was suspended. It was not
easy to restore the political process in the atmosphere of suspicion better future for all
and violence. When elections were held in Punjab in 1992, only 24 of us.
per cent of the electors tuned out to vote.
Militancy was eventually eradicated by the security forces. But
Prime Minister
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:69)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:51)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:68)(cid:69) (cid:259) (cid:54)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:75)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:43)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:78)(cid:72) Dr. Manmohan Singh
(cid:259) (cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:17) (cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:51)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:68)(cid:69) (cid:69)(cid:92) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:86)(cid:17) intervening in Rajya
Sabha debate on
The alliance of Akali Dal (Badal) and the BJP scored a major victory
11 August 2005
in1997, in the first normal elections in the State in the post-militancy
era. The State is once again preoccupied with questions of economic
development and social change. Though religious identities continue
to be important for the people, politics has gradually moved back
along secular lines.
aidnI
fo
semiT
:
tiderC

--- PAGE 163 ---
162 Politics in India since Independence
The North-East
In the North-East, regional aspirations reached a turning point in
1980s. This region now consists of seven States, also referred to as
the ‘seven sisters’. The region has only 4 per cent of the country’s
population but about twice as much share of its area. A small corridor
of about 22 kilometers connects the region to the rest of the country.
Otherwise the region shares boundaries with China, Myanmar and
Bangladesh and serves as India’s gateway to South East Asia.
The region has witnessed a lot of change since 1947. Tripura,
Manipur and Khasi Hills of Meghalaya were erstwhile Princely States
which merged with India after Independence. The entire region of
North-East has undergone considerable political reorganisation.
Nagaland State was created in 1960; Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura
in 1972 while Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram became separate
States only in 1986. The Partition of India in 1947 had reduced the
North-East to a land locked region and affected its economy. Cut off
from the rest of India, the region suffered neglect in developmental
terms. Its politics too remained insulated. At the same time, most
Note:This illustration States in this region underwent major demographic changes due to
is not a map drawn to influx of migrants from neighbouring States and countries.
scale and should not be
The isolation of the region, its complex social character and
taken to be an authentic
depiction of India’s its backwardness compared to other parts of the country have all
external boundaries. resulted in the complicated set of demands from different states of the
North-East. The vast international
border and weak communication
between the North-East and the
rest of India have further added
to the delicate nature of politics
there. Three issues dominate the
politics of North-East: demands
for autonomy, movements for
secession, and opposition to
‘outsiders’. Major initiatives on the
first issue in the 1970s set the stage
for some dramatic developments
on the second and the third in the
1980s.
Demands for autonomy
At independence the entire region
except Manipur and Tripura
comprised the State of Assam.
Demands for political autonomy
arose when the non-Assamese
felt that the Assam government
was imposing Assamese language

--- PAGE 164 ---
Regional Aspirations 163
on them. There were opposition and protest riots throughout the
State. Leaders of the major tribal communities wanted to separate My friend
from Assam. They formed the Eastern India Tribal Union which Chon said that
people in Delhi know
later transformed into a more comprehensive All Party Hill Leaders
more about the map of
Conference in 1960. They demanded a tribal State to be carved out of
Europe than about the
Assam. Finally instead of one tribal State, several States got carved North-East in our country.
out of Assam. At different points of time the Central Government had I think she is right at least
to create Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh out of Assam. about my schoolmates.
Tripura and Manipur were upgraded into States too.
The reorganisation of the North-East was completed by 1972. But
this was not the end of autonomy demands in this region. In Assam,
for example, communities like the Bodos, Karbis and Dimasas wanted
separate States. They worked for this demand by mobilising public
opinion and popular movement as well as through insurgency. Often
the same area was claimed by more than one community. It was not
possible to go on making smaller and yet smaller States. Therefore,
some other provisions of our federal set up were used to satisfy their
autonomy demands while remaining in Assam. Karbis and Dimasas
have been granted autonomy under District Councils while Bodos
were recently granted Autonomous Council.
Secessionist movements
Demands for autonomy were easier to respond to, for these involved
using the various provisions in the Constitution for accommodation of
diversities. It was much more difficult when some groups demanded
al en a
a separate country, not in momentary anger but consistently as a
(19 7-199 ):
principled position. The country’s leadership faced this problem for a
Founder and
very long time in at least two States in the North-East. A comparison
leader of the
of these two cases offers us a lesson in democratic politics.
Mizo National
AfterIndependence, the Mizo Hills area was made an autonomous Front; turned into
district within Assam. Some Mizos believed that they were never a a rebel after the
part of British India and therefore did not belong to the Indian union. experience of the
But the movement for secession gained popular support after the famine in 1959;
Assam government failed to respond adequately to the great famine led an armed
of 1959 in Mizo hills. The Mizos’ anger led to the formation of the Mizo struggle against
National Front (MNF) under the leadership of Laldenga. India for two
decades; reached
In 1966 the MNF started an armed campaign for independence.
a settlement
Thus, started a two decade long battle between Mizo insurgents and
and signed an
the Indian army. The MNF fought a guerilla war, got support from
agreement with
Pakistani government and secured shelter in the then East Pakistan.
Prime Minister
The Indian security forces countered it with a series of repressive
Rajiv Gandhi in
measures of which the common people were the victims. At one point
1986; became the
even Air Force was used. These measures caused more anger and
ChiefMinister of
alienation among the people.
the newly created
At the end of two decades of insurgency everyone was a loser. State of Mizoram.
This is where maturity of the political leadership at both ends made

--- PAGE 165 ---
164 Politics in India since Independence
a difference. Laldenga came back from exile in Pakistan and started
negotiations with the Indian government. Rajiv Gandhi steered these
negotiations to a positive conclusion. In 1986 a peace agreement
was signed between Rajiv Gandhi and Laldenga. As per this accord
Mizoram was granted full-fledged statehood with special powers and
the MNF agreed to give up secessionist
gle. Laldenga took over as the
f Minister. This accord proved
urning point in the history of
oram. Today, Mizoram is one of
most peaceful places in the region
d has taken big strides in literacy
d development.
The story of Nagaland is similar
o Mizoram, except that it started
much earlier and has not yet had
such a happy ending. Led by
Angami Zaphu Phizo, a section of
the Nagas declared independence
from India way back in 1951.
Phizo turned down many offers of
negotiated settlement. The Naga
National Council launched an
armed struggle for sovereignty
of Nagas. After a period of
violent insurgency a section of
the Nagas signed an agreement
with the Government of India
aidnI
fo
semiT
:
tiderC
Declaration of cease fire by
MNF

--- PAGE 166 ---
Regional Aspirations 165
but this was not acceptable to other rebels. The problem in Nagaland
still awaits a final resolution.
Movements against outsiders
The large scale migration into the North-East gave rise to a special
kind of problem that pitted the ‘local’ communities against people
who were seen as ‘outsiders’ or migrants. These latecomers, either
from India or abroad are seen as encroachers on scarce resources
like land and potential competitors to employment opportunities and
political power. This issue has taken political and sometimes violent
form in many States of the North-East.
The Assam Movement from 1979 to 1985 is the best example
of such movements against ‘outsiders’. The Assamese suspected
that there were huge numbers of illegal Bengali Muslim settlers
from Bangladesh. They felt that unless these foreign nationals are
detected and deported they would reduce the indigenous Assamese
into a minority. There were other economic issues too. There was
widespread poverty and unemployment in Assam despite the
existence of natural resources like oil, tea and coal. It was felt that
these were drained out of the State without any commensurate
benefit to the people.
In 1979 the All Assam Students’ Union (AASU), a students’
group not affiliated to any party, led an anti-foreigner movement.
The movement was against illegal migrations, against domination
of Bengalis and other outsiders, and against faulty voters’ register
that included the names of lakhs of immigrants. The movement
demanded that all outsiders who had entered the State after 1951
should be sent back. The agitation followed many novel methods and
mobilised all sections of Assamese people, drawing support across
the State. It also involved many tragic and violent incidents leading
to loss of property and human lives. The movement also tried to
blockade the movement of trains and the supply of oil from Assam
to refineries in Bihar.
Eventually after six years of turmoil, the Rajiv Gandhi-led
government entered into negotiations with the AASU leaders,
leading to the signing of an accord in 1985. According to this
agreement those foreigners who migrated into Assam during and
after Bangladesh war and since, were to be identified and deported.
With the successful completion of the movement, the AASU and the
Asom Gana Sangram Parishad organised themselves as a regional
political party called Asom Gana Parishad (AGP). It came to power
in 1985 with the promise of resolving the foreign national problem
as well as to build a ‘Golden Assam’.
Assam accord brought peace and changed the face of politics in
Assam, but it did not solve the problem of immigration. The issue of
the ‘outsiders’ continues to be a live issue in the politics of Assam

--- PAGE 167 ---
166 Politics in India since Independence
and many other places in the
North-East. This problem
is particularly acute, for
example, in Tripura as the
original inhabitants have
been reduced to being a
minority in their own land.
The same feeling informs
the hostility of the local
population to Chakma
refugees in Mizoram and
Arunachal Pradesh.
r
u
h
ta
M
u
b
a
b
m
a
R
n
o
o
tr
a
C
fo
k
o
o
b
T
H
:tid
T a P o c u t e i n v n j i a d ti b e t , s h D e o a f n r t e j e e w r e o s l r i , n i h s g t e , s r D e in e i s l t h h a i, e l M o fo o i u z k o r a r r a t e m t g h io e n s... e r C

--- PAGE 168 ---
Regional Aspirations 167
i i s er er
At the time of Independence, Sikkim was a ‘protectorate’ of
India. It meant that while it was not a part of India, it was also
not a fully sovereign country. Sikkim’s defence and foreign
relations were looked after by India, while the power of internal
administration was with the Chogyal, Sikkim’s monarch. This
arrangement ran into difficulty as the Chogyal was unable to deal
with the democratic aspirations of the people. An overwhelming
Ka i hen up ori
majority of Sikkim’s population was Nepali. But the Chogyal was
Khan sarpa (19 4):
seen as perpetuating the rule of a small elite from the minority
Leader of democracy
Lepcha-Bhutia community. The anti-Chogyal leaders of both the
movement in Sikkim;
communities sought and got support from the Government of
founder of Sikkim Praja
India.
Mandal and later leader of
The first democratic elections to Sikkim assembly in 1974 were the Sikkim State Congress;
swept by Sikkim Congress which stood for greater integration in 1962 founded the Sikkim
with India. The assembly first sought the status of ‘associate National Congress; after an
state’ and then in April 1975 passed a resolution asking for electoral victory, he led the
full integration with India. This was followed by a hurriedly movement for integration
organised referendum that put a stamp of popular approval on of Sikkim with India; after
the assembly’s request. The Indian Parliament accepted this the integration, Sikkim
request immediately and Sikkim became the 22nd State of Congress merged with the
the Indian union. Chogyal did not accept this merger and his Indian National Congress.
supporters accused the Government of India of foul play and
use of force. Yet the merger enjoyed popular support and did not
become a divisive issue in Sikkim’s politics.
Accommodation and National Integration
These cases have shown us that even after six decades of Independence,
some of the issues of national integration are not fully resolved. We
have seen that regional aspirations ranging from demands of statehood
and economic development to autonomy and separation keep coming
up. The period since 1980 accentuated these tensions and tested
the capacity of democratic politics to accommodate the demands of
diverse sections of the society. What lessons can we draw from these
examples?
First and the most elementary lesson is that regional aspirations
are very much a part of democratic politics. Expression of regional
issues is not an aberration or an abnormal phenomenon. Even
in smaller countries like the United Kingdom there are regional
aspirations in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Spain faces
secessionist movement from the Basques and so does Sri Lanka from
the Tamils. A large and diverse democracy like India must deal with
regional aspirations on a regular basis. Nation building is an ongoing
process.

--- PAGE 169 ---
168 Politics in India since Independence
The second lesson is that the best way to respond to regional
aspirations is through democratic negotiations rather than
(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75) (cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17) (cid:47)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:259)
militancy had erupted in Punjab; problems were persisting in the
North-East; students in Assam were agitating; Kashmir valley
was on the boil. Instead of treating these as simple law and order
problems, the Government of India reached negotiated settlement
with regional movements. This produced a reconciliation which
reduced the tensions existing in many regions. The example of
Mizoram shows how political settlement can resolve the problem
of separatism effectively.
ai an hi The third lesson is about the significance of power sharing. It
(1944-1991):Prime is not sufficient to have a formal democratic structure. Besides
Minister of India that, groups and parties from the region need to be given share
between 1984 and in power at the State level. Similarly, it is not sufficient to say
1989; son of Indira that the states or the regions have autonomy in their matters.
Gandhi; joined active The regions together form the nation. So, the regions must have
politics after 1980; a share in deciding the destiny of the nation. If regions are not
reached agreements given a share in the national level decision making, the feeling of
with militants in injustice and alienation can spread.
Punjab, Mizoram and
The fourth lesson is that regional imbalance in economic
the students’ union in
development contributes to the feeling of regional discrimination.
Assam; pressed for a
Regional imbalance is a fact of India’s development experience.
more open economy
Naturally, the backward states or backward regions in some
and computer
states feel that their backwardness should be addressed on
technology; sent
priority basis and that the policies of the Indian government have
Indian Army
caused this imbalance. If some states remain poor and others
contingent on
develop rapidly, it leads to regional imbalances and inter-regional
the request
migrations.
of Sri Lankan
government, to sort Finally, these cases make us appreciate the farsightedness
out the Simhala- of the makers of our Constitution in dealing with questions
Tamil conflict; of diversity. The federal system adopted by India is a flexible
assassinated by arrangement. While most of the states have equal powers, there
suspected LTTE are special provisions for some states like J&K and the states in
suicide bomber. the North-East. The Sixth Schedule of the Constitution allows
different tribes complete autonomy of preserving their practices
and customary laws. These provisions proved crucial in resolving
some very complex political problems in the North-East.
What distinguishes India from many other countries that face
similar challenges is that the constitutional framework in India
is much more flexible and accommodative. Therefore, regional
aspirations are not encouraged to espouse separatism. Thus,
politics in India has succeeded in accepting regionalism as part
and parcel of democratic politics.

--- PAGE 170 ---
1 69
oa s li eration
Although the British empire in India came to an end in 1947, Portugal refused to withdraw from
the territories of Goa, Diu and Daman which were under its colonial rule since the sixteenth
century. During their long rule, the Portuguese suppressed the people of Goa, denied them
civil rights, and carried out forced religious conversions. After India’s Independence, the Indian
government tried very patiently to persuade the Portuguese government to withdraw. There
was also a strong popular movement within Goa for freedom. They were strengthened by
socialist satyagrahis from Maharashtra. Finally, in December 1961, the Government of India
sent the army which liberated these territories after barely two days of action. Goa, Diu and
Daman became Union Territory.
Another complication arose soon. Led by the Maharashtrawadi Gomanatak Party (MGP)
one section desired that Goa, as a Marathi speaking area should merge with Maharashtra.
However, many Goans were keen to retain a separate Goan identity and culture, particularly
the Konkani language. They were led by the United Goan Party (UGP). In January 1967, the
Central Government held a special ‘opinion poll’ in Goa asking people to decide if they wanted
to be part of Maharashtra or remain separate. This was the only time in independent India
that a referendum-like procedure was used to ascertain people’s wishes on a subject. The
majority voted in favour of remaining outside of Maharashtra. Thus, Goa continued as a Union
Territory. Finally, in 1987, Goa became a State of the Indian Union.

--- PAGE 171 ---
170 Politics in India since Independence
SESICREXE
170 Politics in India since Independence
1. Match the following.
A B
ature o re ional aspirations tates
(a) Socio-religious identity i. Nagaland Mizoram
leading to statehood
(b) Linguistic identity and ii. Jharkhand Chattisgarh
tensions with Centre
(c) Regional imbalance leading iii. Punjab
to demand for Statehood
(d) Secessionist demands on iv. Tamil Nadu
account of tribal identity
2. Regional aspirations of the people of North-East get expressed
in different ways. These include movements against outsiders,
movement for greater autonomy and movement for separate national
existence. On the map of the North-East, using different shades for
these three, show the States where these expressions are prominently
found.
3. What were the main provisions of the Punjab accord? In what way
can they be the basis for further tensions between the Punjab and its
neighbouring States?
4. Why did the Anandpur Sahib Resolution become controversial?
5. Explain the internal divisions of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and
describe how these lead to multiple regional aspirations in that State.
6. What are the various positions on the issue of regional autonomy for
Kashmir? Which of these do you think are justifiable? Give reasons for
your answer.
7. The Assam movement was a combination of cultural pride and economic
backwardness. Explain.
8. All regional movements need not lead to separatist demands. Explain
by giving examples from this chapter.
9. Regional demands from different parts of India exemplify the principle
of unity with diversity. Do you agree? Give reasons.
10. Read the passage and answer the questions below:
ne of a ari as songs.. … dwells on the unity theme the seven
states of north-eastern India become seven sisters born of the same
mother. …. eghalaya went own way…., runachal too separated

--- PAGE 172 ---
RReeggiioonnaall AAssppiirraattiioonnss 117711
and i oram appeared in ssams gateway as a groom to marry
another daughter. ….. …. .. he song ends with a determination to
eep the unity of the ssamese with other smaller nationalities that
are left in the present-day ssam the arbis and the ising brothers
and sisters are our dear ones. — SANJIBBARUAH
(a) Which unity is the poet talking about?
(b) Why were the States of North-East created separately out of
the erstwhile State of Assam?
(c) Do you think that the same theme of unity could apply to all the
regions of India? Why?

--- PAGE 173 ---
In this chapter…
In this last chapter we take a synoptic view of the last two decades of
politics in India. These developments are complex, for various kinds of
factors came together to produce unanticipated outcomes in this period.
The new era in politics was impossible to foresee; it is still very difficult to
understand. These developments are also controversial, for these involve
deep conflicts and we are still too close to the events. Yet we can ask
some questions central to the political change in this period.
(cid:129) What are the implications of the rise of coalition politics for our
democracy?
(cid:129) What is Mandalisation all about? In which ways will it change the
nature of political representation?
Ups and downs of
(cid:129) What is the legacy of the Ramjanambhoomi movement and the
various political parties
Ayodhya demolition for the nature of political mobilisation?
in the 1990s appeared
to many, like this
(cid:129) What does the rise of a new policy consensus do to the nature of
cartoon drawn in 1990,
political choices?
as a roller coaster ride.
Riding the roller coaster
The chapter does not answer these questions. It simply gives you the
are Rajiv Gandhi, V.
necessary information and some tools so that you can ask and answer
P. Singh, L. K. Advani,
these questions when you are through with this book. We cannot avoid
Chandrashekhar, Jyoti
Basu, N. T. Rama Rao, asking these questions just because they are politically sensitive, for the
Devi Lal, P. K. Mahanta whole point of studying the history of politics in India since Independence
and K. Karunanidhi. is to make sense of our present.

--- PAGE 174 ---
9
retpahc recent
developments in
indian politics
Context of the 1990s
You have read in the last chapter that Rajiv Gandhi became the Prime
Minister after the assassination of Indira Gandhi. He led the Congress
to a massive victory in the Lok Sabha elections held immediately
thereafter in 1984. As the decade of the eighties came to a close, the
country witnessed five developments that were to make a long-lasting
impact on our politics.
First the most crucial development of this period was the defeat
of the Congress party in the elections held in 1989. The party
that had won as many as 415 seats in the Lok Sabha in 1984
was reduced to only 197 in this election. The Congress improved
its performance and came back to power soon after the mid-term
elections held in 1991. But the elections of 1989 marked the end of
what political scientists have called the ‘Congress system’. To be sure,
the Congress remained an important party and ruled the country
more than any other party even in this period since 1989. But it lost
the kind of centrality it earlier enjoyed in the party system.
I wish to find
out if the Congress
can still bounce back
to its old glory.
Congress leader Sitaram Kesri withdrew the crutches of support from Devegowda’s
United Front Goverment.
Second development was the rise of the ‘Mandal issue’ in national
politics. This followed the decision by the new National Front
government in 1990, to implement the recommendation of
the Mandal Commission that jobs in central government should be
reserved for the Other Backward Classes. This led to violent ‘anti-
Mandal’ protests in different parts of the country. This dispute between
the supporters and opponents of OBC reservations was known as the
‘Mandal issue’ and was to play an important role in shaping politics
since 1989.

--- PAGE 175 ---
174 Politics in India since Independence
w i o f I u t w l h d i i s s h h a p v t h o e e b a n e o l o m s n u e g r n - e o t e n r m A r T eaction h i t r o d M , a t n h d e a l e is c a o t n io o n m . ic policy followed by the various governments
effect.
took a radically different turn. This is known as the initiation
of the structural adjustment programme or the new economic
reforms. Started by Rajiv Gandhi, these changes first became very
visible in 1991 and radically changed the direction that the Indian
economy had pursued since Independence. These policies have been
widely criticised by various movements and organisations. But the
various governments that came to power in this period have continued
to follow these.
esp d e i t c f i h f f i e e a t r I h l s e l a y i a n s m m c i f w e e n e i t l v o p o l e t o m r p c l y i o a l c o e l k y n i a t e . e r i c a h s , a s
Manmohan Singh, the then Finance Minister, with Prime Minister Narsimha Rao, in
the initial phase of the ‘New Economic Policy’.
aidnI
fo
semiT
eht
ni
namxaL
.K .R :tiderC

--- PAGE 176 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 175
Fourth, a number of events culminated in the demolition of
the disputed structure at Ayodhya (known as Babri Masjid) in
December 1992. This event symbolised and triggered various
changes in the politics of the country and intensified debates about
the nature of Indian nationalism and secularism. These developments
are associated with the rise of the BJP and the politics of ‘Hindutva’.
ot t I h h w e is r i s a t h h f f a t e o w n c t e c s t l h h l p . e e a c B r k t J i i e P f s a s
A reaction to rising communalism.
Finally, the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi in May 1991 led to a
change in leadership of the Congress party. He was assassinated
by a Sri Lankan Tamil linked to the LTTE when he was on
an election campaign tour in Tamil Nadu. In the elections of 1991,
Congress emerged as the single largest party. Following Rajiv Gandhi’s
death, the party chose Narsimha Rao as the Prime Minister.
1 May 1996 25 October 1995 20 August 2001 25 October 2004
Leadership in Congress made many headlines.

--- PAGE 177 ---
176 Politics in India since Independence
Era of Coalitions
Elections in 1989 led to the defeat of the Congress party but did not
result in a majority for any other party. Though the Congress was the
largest party in the Lok Sabha, it did not have a clear majority and
therefore, it decided to sit in the opposition. The National Front (which
itself was an alliance of Janata Dal and some other regional parties)
received support from two diametrically opposite political groups: the
BJP and the Left Front. On this basis, the National Front formed a
coalition government, but the BJP and the Left Front did not join in
this government.
The National
Front
Government
lead by V. P.
Singh was
supported
by the Left
(represented
here by Jyoti
Basu) as well
as the BJP
(represented by
L. K. Advani)
Decline of Congress
The defeat of the Congress party marked the end of Congress
dominance over the Indian party system. Do you remember the
discussion in Chapter Five about the restoration of the Congress
system? Way back in the late sixties, the dominance of the Congress
party was challenged; but the Congress under the leadership of Indira
Gandhi, managed to re-establish its predominant position in politics.
The nineties saw yet another challenge to the predominant position of
the Congress. It did not, however, mean the emergence of any other
single party to fill in its place.
snootraC
fo
kooB
TH/
gnaliaT
rihduS
:tiderC

--- PAGE 178 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 177
Thus, began an era of multi-party system. To be sure, a large
number of political parties always contested elections in our country.
Our Parliament always had representatives from several political
parties. What happened after 1989 was the emergence of several
parties in such a way that one or two parties did not get most of the
votes or seats. This also meant that no single party secured a clear
majority of seats in any Lok Sabha election held since 1989. This
development initiated an era of coalition governments at the Centre,
in which regional parties played a crucial role in forming ruling
alliances.
hcraes-er
s’teL
Talk to your parents about their memories of the 1990s. Ask them what
they felt were the most significant events of the period. Sit together
in groups and draw a comprehensive list of the events reported by
your parents, see which events get cited most, and compare them
with what the chapter suggests were the most significant. You can
also discuss why some events are more important for some and not
for others.
Alliance politics
The nineties also saw the emergence of powerful parties and movements
that represented the Dalit and backward castes (Other Backward
Classes or OBC). Many of these parties represented powerful regional
assertion as well. These parties played an important role in the
United Front government that came to power in 1996. The United
Front was similar to the National Front of 1989 for it included Janata
Dal and several regional parties. This time the BJP did not support
the government. The United Front government was supported by the
Congress. This shows how unstable the political equations were. In
1989, both Left and BJP supported the National Front Government
because they wanted to keep the Congress out of power. In 1996, the
Left continued to support the non-Congress government but this time
the Congress, supported it, as both the Congress and the Left wanted
to keep the BJP out of power.
They did not succeed for long, as the BJP continued to
consolidate its position in the elections of 1991 and 1996. It
emerged as the largest party in the 1996 election and was invited
to form the government. But most other parties were opposed to
its policies and therefore, the BJP government could not secure
a majority in the Lok Sabha. It finally came to power by leading

--- PAGE 179 ---
178 Politics in India since Independence
a coalition government from May 1998 to June 1999 and was
re-elected in October 1999. Atal Behari Vajpayee was the Prime
Minister during both these NDA governments and his government
formed in 1999 completed its full term.
A cartoonist’s depiction of the change from one-party dominance to a multi-party
alliance system.
Thus, with the elections of 1989, a long phase of coalition politics
began in India. Since then, there have been nine governments at
the Centre, all of which have either been coalition governments or
minority governments supported by other parties, which did not join
the government. In this new phase, any government could be formed
only with the participation or support of many regional parties. This
applied to the National Front in 1989, the United Front in 1996 and
1997, the NDA in 1997, BJP-led coalition in 1998, NDA in 1999 and
the UPA in 2004.
Let us connect this development with what we have learnt so far.
The era of coalition governments may be seen as a long-term trend
resulting from relatively silent changes that were taking place over
the last few decades.
We saw in Chapter Two that in earlier times, it was the Congress
party itself that was a ‘coalition’ of different interests and different social
strata and groups. This gave rise to the term ‘Congress system’.
yadoT
aidnI/naniN
tijA
:tiderC

--- PAGE 180 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 179

--- PAGE 181 ---
180 Politics in India since Independence
We also saw in Chapter Five that, especially since the late 1960s,
various sections had been leaving the Congress fold and forming
separate political parties of their own. We also noted the rise of many
regional parties in the period after 1977. While these developments
weakened the Congress party, they did not enable any single party to
replace the Congress.
OK, coalitions
I am
are the logic of
not worried
democratic politics in
about whether
our kind of society. Does
it is a single
that mean that we will
party or coalition
always have coalitions? Or
government. I am
can the national parties
more worried about
consolidate their
what they do. Does a
positions again?
coalition government
involve more
compromises? Can
we not have bold and
imaginative policies
in a coalition?
Political Rise of Other Backward Classes
One long-term development of this period was the rise of Other
Backward Classes as a political force. You have already come across
this term ‘OBC’. This refers to the administrative category ‘Other
Backward Classes’. These are communities other than SC and ST
who suffer from educational and social backwardness. These are also
referred to as ‘backward castes’. We have already noted in Chapter
Six that the support for the Congress among many sections of the
‘backward castes’ had declined. This created a space for non-Congress
parties that drew more support from these communities. You would
recall that the rise of these parties first found political expression
at the national level in the form of the Janata Party government in
1977. Many of the constituents of the Janata Party, like the Bharatiya
Kranti Dal and the Samyukta Socialist Party, had a powerful rural
base among some sections of the OBC.
‘Mandal’ implemented
In the 1980s, the Janata Dal brought together a similar combination
of political groups with strong support among the OBCs. The decision
of the National Front government to implement the recommendations

--- PAGE 182 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 181
of the Mandal Commission further helped in shaping the politics of
‘OtherBackwardClasses’. The intense national debate for and against
reservation in jobs made people from the OBC communities more
aware of this identity. Thus, it helped those who wanted to mobilise
these groups in politics. This period saw the emergence of many
parties that sought better opportunities for OBCs in education and
employment and also raised the question of the share of power enjoyed
by the OBCs. These parties claimed that since OBCs constituted a
large segment of Indian society, it was only democratic that the OBCs
should get adequate representation in administration and have their
due share of political power.
Implementation of Mandal Commission report sparked off agitations and political upheavals.

--- PAGE 183 ---
118822
The Man al Co ission
Reservations for the OBC were in existence in southern States since the 1960s,
if not earlier. But this policy was not operative in north Indian States. It was
during the tenure of Janata Party government in 1977-79 that the demand for
reservations for backward castes in north India and at the national level was
strongly raised. Karpoori Thakur, the then ChiefMinister of Bihar, was a pioneer
in this direction. His government had introduced a new policy of reservations for
OBCs in Bihar. Following this, the central government appointed a Commission
in 1978 to look into and recommend ways to improve the conditions of the
backward classes. This was the second time since Independence that the
government had appointed such a commission. Therefore, this commission
was officially known as the Second Backward Classes Commission. Popularly,
the commission is known as the Mandal Commission, after the name of its
Chairperson, Bindeshwari Prasad Mandal.
The Mandal Commission was set up to
investigate the extent of educational and social
backwardness among various sections of Indian
society and recommend ways of identifying these
‘backward classes’. It was also expected to give
its recommendations on the ways in which this
backwardness could be ended. The Commission
gave its recommendations in 1980. By then the
Janata government had fallen. The Commission
advised that ‘backward classes’ should be understood
to mean ‘backward castes’, since many castes,
. . Man al
other than the Scheduled Castes, were also treated
(1918-198 ):M.P. from
as low in the caste hierarchy. The Commission did
Bihar for 1967-1970
a survey and found that these backward castes had
and 1977-1979; chaired
a very low presence in both educational institutions
the Second Backward
and in employment in public services. It therefore
Classes Commission
recommended reserving 27 per cent of seats in
that recommended
educational institutions and government jobs for
reservations for Other
these groups. The Mandal Commission also made
Backward Classes; a
many other recommendations, like, land reform, to
socialist leader from Bihar;
improve the conditions of the OBCs.
Chief Minister of Bihar for
just a month and a half in In August 1990, the National Front government
1968; joined the Janata decided to implement one of the recommendations
Party in 1977. of Mandal Commission pertaining to reservations
for OBCs in jobs in the central government and its
undertakings. This decision sparked agitations and
violent protests in many cities of north India. The
decision was also challenged in the Supreme Court and came to be known
as the ‘Indira Sawhney case’, after the name of one of the petitioners. In
November 1992, the Supreme Court gave a ruling upholding the decision of
the government. There were some differences among political parties about
the manner of implementation of this decision. But now the policy of reservation
for OBCs has support of all the major political parties of the country.

--- PAGE 184 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 183
Political fallouts
The 1980s also saw the rise of political organisation of the
Dalits. In 1978 the Backward and Minority Classes Employees
Federation (BAMCEF) was formed. This organisation was not an
ordinary trade union of government employees. It took a strong
(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85) (cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:181)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:77)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:182) (cid:259) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:54)(cid:38)(cid:15) (cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:15)
OBC and minorities. It was out of this that the subsequent Dalit
Shoshit Samaj Sangharsh Samiti and later the Bahujan Samaj
Party (BSP) emerged under the leadership of Kanshi Ram. The
BSP began as a small party supported largely by Dalit voters in
Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh. But in 1989 and the 1991
elections, it achieved a breakthrough in Uttar Pradesh. This was
the first time in independent India that a political party supported
mainly by Dalit voters had achieved this kind of political success.
In fact, the BSP, under Kanshi Ram’s leadership was envisaged
as an organisation based on pragmatic politics. It derived
confidence from the fact that the Bahujans (SC, ST, OBC and
religious minorities) constituted the majority of the population,
and were a formidable political force on the strength of their
numbers. Since then the BSP has emerged as a major political
player in the State and has been in government on more than one
occasion. Its strongest support still comes from Dalit voters, but
it has expanded its support now to various other social groups. In
many parts of India, Dalit politics and OBC politics have developed
independently and often in competition with each other. Kanshi a
(19 4- ):
Proponent
of Bahujan
Will
this benefit empowerment and
leaders of all the founder of Bahujan
backward and Dalit Samaj Party (BSP);
communities? Or will the left his central
gains be monopolised by some
government job for
powerful castes and families
social and political
within these groups?
work; founder of
BAMCEF, DS-4
and finally the
BSP in 1984;
The real point
astute political
is not the leaders but
the people! Will this lead strategist, he
to better policies and effective regarded political
implementation for the really power as master
deprived people? Or will it remain
key to attaining
just a political game?
social equality;
credited with Dalit
resurgence in north
Indian States.

--- PAGE 185 ---
184 Politics in India since Independence
Communalism, Secularism, Democracy
The other long-term development during this period was the rise of
politics based on religious identity, leading to a debate about secularism
and democracy. We noted in Chapter Six that in the aftermath of the
Emergency, the Bharatiya Jana Sangh had merged into the Janata
Party. After the fall of the Janata Party and its break-up, the supporters
of erstwhile Jana Sangh formed the Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP) in
1980. Initially, the BJP adopted a broader political platform than that
of the Jana Sangh. It embraced ‘Gandhian Socialism’ as its ideology.
But it did not get much success in the elections held in 1980 and 1984.
After 1986, the party began to emphasise the Hindu nationalist element
in its ideology. The BJP pursued the politics of ‘Hindutva’ and adopted
the strategy of mobilising the Hindus.
Hindutva literally means ‘Hinduness’ and was defined by its
originator, V. D. Savarkar, as the basis of Indian (in his language
also Hindu) nationhood. It basically meant that to be members of the
Indian nation, everyone must not only accept India as their ‘fatherland’
(pitrubhu) but also as their holy land (punyabhu). Believers of ‘Hindutva’
argue that a strong nation can be built only on the basis of a strong and
united national culture. They also believe that in the case of India the
Hindu culture alone can provide this base.
Two developments around 1986 became central to the politics of
BJP as a ‘Hindutva’ party. The first was the Shah Bano case in 1985.
In this case a 62-year old divorced Muslim woman, had filed a case for
maintenance from her former husband. The Supreme Court ruled in
her favour. The orthodox Muslims saw the Supreme Court’s order as an
interference in Muslim Personal Law. On the demand of some Muslim
leaders, the government passed the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights
on Divorce) Act, 1986 that nullified the Supreme Court’s judgment. This
action of the government was opposed by many women’s organisations,
many Muslim groups and most of the intellectuals. The BJP criticised
this action of the Congress government as an unnecessary concession
and ‘appeasement’ of the minority community.
Ayodhya dispute
The second development was the order by the Faizabad district court
in February 1986. The court ordered that the Babri Masjid premises
be unlocked so that Hindus could offer prayers at the site which they
considered as a temple. A dispute had been going on for many decades
over the mosque known as Babri Masjid at Ayodhya. The Babri Masjid
(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86) (cid:68) (cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:92) (cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72) (cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:36)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:75)(cid:92)(cid:68) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86) (cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:87) (cid:69)(cid:92) (cid:48)(cid:76)(cid:85) (cid:37)(cid:68)(cid:84)(cid:76) (cid:259)
Mughal emperor Babur’s General. Some Hindus believe that it was built
after demolishing a temple for Lord Rama in what is believed to be his
birthplace. The dispute took the form of a court case and has continued
for many decades. In the late 1940s the mosque was locked up as the
matter was with the court.

--- PAGE 186 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 185
As soon as the locks of the Babri Masjid were opened, mobilisation
began on both sides. Many Hindu and Muslim organisations tried
to mobilise their communities on this question. Suddenly this local
dispute became a major national question and led to communal
tensions. The BJP made this issue its major electoral and political
plank. Along with many other organisations like the RSS and the
Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP), it convened a series of symbolic
and mobilisational programmes. This large scale mobilisation led to
surcharged atmosphere and many instances of communal violence.
The BJP, in order to generate public support, took out a massive march
called the Rathyatra from Somnath in Gujarat to Ayodhya in UP.
Demolition and after
In December 1992, the organisations supporting the construction of
the temple had organised a Karseva, meaning voluntary service by the
devotees, for building the Ram temple. The situation had become tense
all over the country and especially at Ayodhya. The Supreme Court had
ordered the State government to take care that the disputed site will
not be endangered. However, thousands of people gathered from all
over the country at Ayodhya on 6 December 1992 and demolished
the mosque. This news led to clashes between the Hindus and
Muslims in many parts of the country. The violence in Mumbai
erupted again in January 1993 and continued
for over two weeks.

--- PAGE 187 ---
186 Politics in India since Independence
C T a r h n e e d d i P T t i h o (C n e l e o S e c t r k a , t w T e i h s s m e e ) a P : n io . n eer l T e h d e
T
to S
h
t
e
a a t s e
e
e
v
r g
e
i o e
n
v s
t
e
s
r o n f m
a
o
t
t e h n e
A
t r ,
y o
d w
d
e i
h
v th e
y
l
a
o t p h m e e B n J t P s. as the ruling
party, was dismissed by the Centre. Along with that, other States
where the BJP was in power, were also put under President’s rule.
A case against the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh was registered
in the Supreme Court for contempt of court since he had given
an undertaking that the disputed structure will be protected. The
BJP officially expressed regret over the happenings at Ayodhya.
The central government appointed a commission to investigate into
the circumstances leading to the demolition of the mosque. Most
political parties condemned the demolition and declared that this
was against the principles of secularism. This led to a serious debate
over secularism and posed the kind of questions our country faced
immediately after P(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:259) (cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:86) (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68) (cid:74)(cid:82)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:82) (cid:69)(cid:72) (cid:68) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92) (cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)
the majority religious community dominated over the minorities?
Or would India continue to offer equal protection of law and equal
citizenship rights to all Indians irrespective of their religion?
During this time, there has also been a debate about using
religious sentiments for electoral purposes. India’s democratic
politics is based on the premise that all religious communities enjoy
the freedom that they may join any party and that there will not be

--- PAGE 188 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 187
community-based political parties. This democratic atmosphere of
communal amity has faced many challenges since 1984. As we have
read in ChapterEight, this happened in 1984 in the form of anti-Sikh
riots. In February-March 2002, similar violence broke out against the
Muslims in Gujarat. Such violence against the minority community
and violence between two communities is a threat to democracy.
“
These proceedings have the echo of the disastrous event that ended in the demolition on the 6th December,
1992 of the disputed structure of ‘Ram Janam Bhoomi-Babri Masjid’ in Ayodhya. Thousands of innocent lives of
citizens were lost, extensive damage to property caused and more than all a damage to the image of this great land
“
as one fostering great traditions of tolerance, faith, brotherhood amongst the various communities inhabiting the
land was impaired in the international scene.
It is unhappy that a leader of a political party and the Chief Minister has to be convicted of an offence of Contempt
of Court. But it has to be done to uphold the majesty of law. We convict him of the offence of contempt of Court.
Since the contempt raises larger issues which affect the very foundation of the secular fabric of our nation, we also
sentence him to a token imprisonment of one day.
Chief Justice Venkatachaliah and Justice G.N. Ray of Supreme Court
Observations in a judgement on the failure of the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh to keep the promise that he
had made before the National Integration Council to protect the ‘Ram Janam Bhumi Babri Masjid’ structure,
Mohd. Aslam v. Union of India, 24 October 1994
Anti-Muslim riots in Gujarat
In February-March 2002, large-scale
violence against Muslims took place in
Gujarat. The immediate provocation for this
violence was an incident that took place at
a station called Godhra. A bogey of a train
that was returning from Ayodhya and was
full of Karsevaks was set on fire. Fifty-
seven people died in that fire. Suspecting
the hand of the Muslims in setting fire
to the bogey, large-scale violence against
Muslims began in many parts of Gujarat
from the next day. This violence continued
for almost a whole month. Nearly 1100
persons, mostly Muslims, were killed
in this violence. The National Human
Rights Commission criticised the Gujarat
government’s role in failing to control
violence, provide relief to the victims and
prosecute the perpetrators of this violence.
The Election Commission of India ordered
the assembly elections to be postponed.
As in the case of anti-Sikh riots of 1984,

--- PAGE 189 ---
188 Politics in India since Independence
“
On 27 February1947,
at the very first meeting of
the Advisory Committee of
the Constituent Assembly on
Fundamental Rights, Minorities
and Tribals and Excluded Areas,
Sardar Patel asserted:
“It is for us to prove that it is a
bogus claim, a false claim, and
that nobody can be more interested
than us, in India, in the protectio
of our minorities. Our mission is
to satisfy every one of them. Let
us prove we can rule ourselves
and we have no ambition to rule
others”.
“The tragic events in Gujarat,
starting with the Godhra inciden
and continuing with the violence
that rocked the state for over two
months, have greatly saddened
the nation. There is no doubt, in
the opinion of the Commission,
that there was a comprehensive
failure on the part of the state
government to control the
persistent violation of the rights
to life, liberty, equality and dignity
of the people of the state. It is,
of course, essential to heal the
wounds and to look to a “future
of peace and harmony. But the
pursuit of these high objectives
who plan, execute
must be based on justice and
and support such
upholding of the values of the
massacres are brought
constitution of the republic and to the book? Or at
least punished
the laws of the land.
politically?
Is this going
to continue to be our
National Human Rights
future? Is there no way we
Commission, Annual Report
can make all this a matter of
2001 2002.
past?

--- PAGE 190 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 189
“
Gujarat riots show that the governmental machinery also becomes
susceptible to sectarian passions. Instances, like in Gujarat, alert
My one message
us to the dangers involved in using religious sentiments for political
to the ChiefMinister [of“
purposes. This poses a threat to democratic politics.
Gujarat] is that he should
follow ‘raj dharma’. A
Emergence of a new consensus ruler should not make any
discrimination between his
The period after 1989 is seen sometimes as the period of decline of
subjects on the basis of caste,
Congress and rise of BJP. If you want to understand the complex
creed and religion.
nature of political competition in this period, you have to compare the
electoral performances of the Congress and the BJP.
Prime Minister Atal Behari
Vajpayee, Ahmedabad,
4 April 2002.
Now let us try to understand the meaning of the information given in
the figure.
(cid:262) (cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:88) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:37)(cid:45)(cid:51) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:76)(cid:81) (cid:68) (cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:74)(cid:75)
competition in this period. What is the difference between

--- PAGE 191 ---
190 Politics in India since Independence
their electoral fortunes if you compare these with the 1984
elections?
(cid:17)(cid:262) (cid:60)(cid:82)(cid:88) (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) (cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:27)(cid:28) (cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:15) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:89)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:69)(cid:92)
the two parties, Congress and the BJP do not add up to more than
fifty per cent. The seats won by them too, do not add up to more
than half the seats in the Lok Sabha. So, where did the rest of the
votes and seats go?
(cid:262) (cid:47)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:78) (cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:86) (cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86) (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71) (cid:45)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:68) (cid:181)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:182) (cid:82)(cid:73)
parties. Which among the parties that exist today are neither part
of Congress family of parties nor part of Janata family of parties?
(cid:262) (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:76)(cid:86) (cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)
the coalition led by BJP and the coalition led by the Congress.
Can you list the parties that are not part of any of these two
coalitions?
Lok Sabha Elections 2004
In the elections of 2004, the Congress party too entered into coalitions
in a big way. The NDA was defeated and a new coalition government
led by the Congress, known as the United Progressive Alliance came to
power. This government received support from the Left Front parties.
The elections of 2004 also witnessed the partial revival of Congress
party. It could increase its seats for the first time since 1991. However,
in the 2004 elections, there was a negligible difference between the
votes polled by the Congress and its allies and the BJP and its allies.
Thus, the party system has now changed almost dramatically from
what it was till the seventies.
The political processes that are unfolding around us after the
(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:86) (cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:79)(cid:92) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85) (cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:259) (cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)
that are in coalition with the Congress; parties that are in alliance
with the BJP; Left Front parties; and other parties who are not part of
any of these three. The situation suggests that political competition
will be multi-cornered. By implication the situation also assumes a
divergence of political ideologies.
Growing consensus
However, on many crucial issues, a broad agreement has emerged
among most parties. In the midst of severe competition and many
conflicts, a consensus appears to have emerged among most parties.
This consensus consists of four elements.
F(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:15) (cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90) (cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:259) (cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72) (cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92) (cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:86)
are opposed to the new economic policies, most political parties
are in support of the new economic policies. Most parties believe
that these policies would lead the country to prosperity and a status
of economic power in the world.

--- PAGE 192 ---
Recent Developments in Indian Politics 191
Note: This illustration is not a map drawn to scale and should not be taken to be an authentic
depiction of India’s external boundaries.
Second, acceptance of the political and social claims of the
(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71) (cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:259) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79) (cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:89)(cid:72) (cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)
social and political claims of the backward castes need to be
accepted. As a result, all political parties now support reservation
of seats for the ‘backward classes’ in education and employment.
Political parties are also willing to ensure that the OBCs get adequate
share of power.

--- PAGE 193 ---
192 Politics in India since Independence
Third, acceptance of the role of State level parties in governance
(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:259)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)
level parties is fast becoming less important. As we saw in this
chapter, State level parties are sharing power at the national level
and have played a central role in the country’s politics of last twenty
years or so.
Fourth, emphasis on pragmatic considerations rather than
ideological positions and political alliances without ideological
(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87) (cid:259) (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86) (cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:86) (cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72) (cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:86) (cid:82)(cid:73) (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)
parties from ideological differences to power sharing arrangements.
Thus, most parties of the NDA did not agree with the ‘Hindutva’
ideology of the BJP. Yet, they came together to form a government
and remained in power for a full term.
All these are momentous changes and are going to shape politics
in the near future. We started this study of politics in India with the
discussion of how the Congress emerged as a dominant party. From
that situation, we have now arrived at a more competitive politics,
but politics that is based on a certain implicit agreement among
the main political actors. Thus, even as political parties act within
the sphere of this consenus, popular movements and organisations
are simultaneously identifying new forms, visions and pathways of
development. Issues like poverty, displacement, minimum wages,
livelihood and social security are being put on the political agenda
by peoples’ movements, reminding the state of its responsibility.
Similarly, issues of justice and democracy are being voiced by the
people in terms of class, caste, gender and regions. We cannot predict
That
the future of democracy. All we know is that democratic politics is
is my
(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:259)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79) here to stay in India and that it will unfold through a continuous
democracy churning of some of the factors mentioned in this chapter.
survive?
Or may be
the real question
(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:259)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:92)
offer meaningful
political choices?
yadoT
aidnI/raknahsivaR
:tiderC
1990: Will V. P. 1990: Will 1990: Will Rao 1990: Will
Singh survive? Shekhar survive? Gowda survive?
survive?
1990: Will 1990: Will Vajpayee
Gujral survive? survive?
2000:
Will India
survive?

--- PAGE 194 ---
RRececeenntt DDeevveellooppmmeennttss iinn IInnddiiaann PPoolliittiiccss 119933
1. Unscramble a bunch of disarranged press clipping file of Unni-Munni
and arrange the file chronologically.
(a) Mandal Recommendations and Anti Reservation Stir
(b) Formation of the Janata Dal
(c) The demolition of Babri Masjid
(d) Assassination of Indira Gandhi
(e) The formation of NDA government
(f) Godhra incident and its fallout
(g) Formation of the UPA government
2. Match the following.
(a) Politics of Consensus i. Shah Bano case
(b) Caste based parties ii. Rise of OBCs
(c) Personal Law and iii. Coalition government
Gender Justice
(d) Growing strength of iv. Agreement on Economic
Regional parties policies
3. State the main issues in Indian politics in the period after 1989. What
different configurations of political parties these differences lead to?
4. “In the new era of coalition politics, political parties are not aligning or re-
aligning on the basis of ideology.” What arguments would you put forward
to support or oppose this statement?
5. Trace the emergence of BJP as a significant force in post-Emergency
politics.
6. In spite of the decline of Congress dominance the Congress party continues
to influence politics in the country. Do you agree? Give reasons.
7. Many people think that a two-party system is required for successful
democracy. Drawing from India’s experience of last twenty years, write
an essay on what advantages the present party system in India has.
8. Read the passage and answer the questions below:
Party politics in India has confronted numerous challenges. ot only
has the Congress system destroyed itself, but the fragmentation of the
Congress coalition has triggered a new emphasis on self-representation
which raises uestions about the party system and its capacity to
accommodate diverse interests, …. . n important test facing the polity is
to evolve a party system or political parties that can effectively articulate
and aggregate a variety of interests. — ZOYA HASAN
SESICREXE

--- PAGE 195 ---
119944 PPoolliittiiccss iinn IInnddiiaa ssiinnccee IInnddeeppeennddeennccee
(a) Write a short note on what the author calls challenges of the
party system in the light of what you have read in this chapter.
(b) Given an example from this chapter of the lack of accomodation
and aggrigation mentioned in this passage.
(c) Why is it necessary for parties to accommodate and aggregate
variety of interests?