--- PAGE 2 ---
Contents
Foreword iii
Preface v
Chapter 1
The Cold War Era 1
Chapter 2
The End of Bipolarity 17
Chapter 3
US Hegemony in World Politics 31
Chapter 4
Alternative Centres of Power 51
Chapter 5
Contemporary South Asia 65
Chapter 6
International Organisations 81
Chapter 7
Security in the Contemporary World 99
Chapter 8
Environment and Natural Resources 117
Chapter 9
Globalisation 135

--- PAGE 3 ---
Chapter 1
The Cold War Era
O
VERVIEW
This chapter provides a backdrop
to the entire book. The end of the
Cold War is usually seen as the
beginning of the contemporary era
in world politics which is the
subject matter of this book. It is,
therefore, appropriate that we
begin the story with a discussion
of the Cold War. The chapter shows
how the dominance of two
superpowers, the United States of
America and the Soviet Union,
was central to the Cold War. It
tracks the various arenas of the
Cold War in different parts of the
world. The chapter views the Non-
Aligned Movement (NAM) as a
challenge to the dominance of the
two superpowers and describes
the attempts by the non-aligned
countries to establish a New
International Economic Order
(NIEO) as a means of attaining The end of the Second World War led to the rise of two major
economic development and centres of power. The two pictures above symbolise the
victory of the US and the USSR in the Second World War.
political independence. It
1. American soldiers raising the US flag during the Battle of
concludes with an assessment of
Iwo Jima, Japan, on 23 February 1945
India’s role in NAM and asks how Credit: Raising the Flag on Iwo Jima,
successful the policy of non- Photograph by Joe Rosenthal/The Associated Press
2. Soviet soldiers raising the USSR flag on the Reichstag
alignment has been in protecting
building in Berlin, Germany, in May 1945
India’s interests.
Credit: Reichstag flag, Photograph by Yevgeny Khaldei/TASS

--- PAGE 4 ---
2 Contemporary World Politics
C M C
UBAN ISSILE RISIS
In April 1961, the leaders of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
(USSR) were worried that the
United States of America (USA)
would invade communist-ruled
Cuba and overthrow Fidel Castro,
the president of the small island
nation off the coast of the United
States. Cuba was an ally of the
Soviet Union and received both
We are on a world tour! Will meet you in different countries. Feels good diplomatic and financial aid from
to be around where events have happened. it. Nikita Khrushchev, the leader
of the Soviet Union, decided to
convert Cuba into a Russian base.
In 1962, he placed nuclear missiles
in Cuba. The installation of these
weapons put the US, for the first
time, under fire from close range
and nearly doubled the number of
bases or cities in the American
mainland which could be
threatened by the USSR.
Three weeks after the Soviet
Union had placed the nuclear
weapons in Cuba, the Americans
became aware of it. The US
President, John F. Kennedy, and
his advisers were reluctant to do
anything that might lead to
full-scale nuclear war between
the two countries, but they were
determined to get Khrushchev to
remove the missiles and nuclear
weapons from Cuba. Kennedy
ordered American warships to
intercept any Soviet ships
heading to Cuba as a way of
warning the USSR of his
seriousness. A clash seemed
Map showing the range of the nuclear missiles under construction imminent in what came to be
in Cuba, used during the secret meetings on the Cuban missile crisis known as the Cuban Missile
Source: John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum Crisis. The prospects of this

--- PAGE 5 ---
The Cold War Era 3
clash made the whole world W C W ?
HAT IS THE OLD AR
nervous, for it would have been
no ordinary war. Eventually, to The end of the Second World War
the world’s great relief, both is a landmark in contemporary
sides decided to avoid war. The world politics. In 1945, the Allied
Soviet ships slowed down and Forces, led by the US, Soviet
turned back. Union, Britain and France
defeated the Axis Powers led by
The Cuban Missile Crisis was
Germany, Italy and Japan, ending
a high point of what came to be
the Second World War (1939-
known as the Cold War. The Cold
1945). The war had involved
War referred to the competition,
almost all the major powers of the
the tensions and a series of
world and spread out to regions
confrontations between the
outside Europe including
United States and Soviet Union,
Southeast Asia, China, Burma
backed by their respective allies.
(now Myanmar) and parts of
Fortunately, however, it never
India’s northeast. The war
escalated into a ‘hot war’, that is,
devastated the world in terms of
a full-scale war between these two
loss of human lives and civilian
powers. There were wars in
property. The First World War had
various regions, with the two
earlier shaken the world between
powers and their allies involved
1914 and 1918.
in warfare and in supporting
regional allies, but at least the The end of the Second World
world avoided another global war. War was also the beginning of the
Cold War. The world war ended
The Cold War was not
when the United States dropped
simply a matter of power
two atomic bombs on the
rivalries, of military alliances,
Japanese cities of Hiroshima and
and of the balance of power.
Nagasaki in August 1945, causing
These were accompanied by a
Japan to surrender. Critics of the
real ideological conflict as well,
US decision to drop the bombs
a difference over the best and
have argued that the US knew that
the most appropriate way of
Japan was about to surrender and
organising political, economic,
that it was unnecessary to drop
and social life all over the world.
the bombs. They suggest that the
The western alliance, headed by
US action was intended to stop the
the US, represented the
Soviet Union from making military
ideology of liberal democracy
and political gains in Asia and So near yet so far!
and capitalism while the
elsewhere and to show Moscow I can't believe that
eastern alliance, headed by the
Cuba survived as a
that the United States was
Soviet Union, was committed to
communist country
supreme. US supporters have
the ideology of socialism and for so long despite
argued that the dropping of the
communism. You have already being located so
studied these ideologies in atomic bombs was necessary to close to the US. Just
Class XI. end the war quickly and to stop look at the map.

--- PAGE 6 ---
4 Contemporary World Politics
further loss of American and Allied weapons capable of inflicting death
lives. Whatever the motives, the and destruction unacceptable to
consequence of the end of the each other, a full-fledged war is
Second World War was the rise of unlikely. In spite of provocations,
two new powers on the global stage. neither side would want to risk war
With the defeat of Germany and since no political gains would
Japan, the devastation of Europe justify the destruction of their
and in many other parts of the societies.
world, the United States and the
In the event of a nuclear war,
Soviet Union became the greatest
both sides will be so badly harmed
powers in the world with the ability
that it will be impossible to declare
to influence events anywhere on
one side or the other as the winner.
earth.
Even if one of them tries to attack
While the Cold War was an and disable the nuclear weapons
outcome of the emergence of the of its rival, the other would still be
US and the USSR as two left with enough nuclear weapons
superpowers rival to each other, to inflict unacceptable destruction.
it was also rooted in the This is called the logic of
understanding that the destruction ‘deterrence’: both sides have the
caused by the use of atom bombs capacity to retaliate against an
is too costly for any country to attack and to cause so much
bear. The logic is simple yet destruction that neither can afford
powerful. When two rival powers to initiate war. Thus, the Cold War
are in possession of nuclear — in spite of being an intense form
of rivalry between great powers —
These pictures depict the destruction remained a ‘cold’ and not hot or
caused by the bombs dropped by the
shooting war. The deterrence
US on Hiroshima (the bomb was code-
relationship prevents war but not
named ‘Little Boy’) and Nagasaki
(code-named ‘Fat Man’). Yet, these the rivalry between powers.
bombs were very small in their
Note the main military
destructive capacity (measured in
terms of kiloton yield) as compared to features of the Cold War. The two
the nuclear bombs that were to be superpowers and the countries in
available in the stockpiles assembled by the rival blocs led by the
the superpowers. The yield of Little Boy
superpowers were expected to
and Fat Man were 15 and 21 kilotons
behave as rational and
respectively. By the early 1950s the US
and the USSR were already making responsible actors. They were to
thermonuclear weapons that had a be rational and responsible in the
yield between 10 and 15 thousand
sense that they understood the
kilotons. In other words, these bombs
risks in fighting wars that might
were a thousand times more destructive
than the bombs used in Hiroshima and involve the two superpowers.
Nagasaki. During much of the Cold War, When two superpowers and the
both the superpowers possessed
blocs led by them are in a
thousands of such weapons. Just
deterrence relationship, fighting
imagine the extent of destruction that
these could cause all over the globe. wars will be massively destructive.

--- PAGE 7 ---
The Cold War Era 5
Responsibility, therefore, meant The smaller states in the
being restrained and avoiding the alliances used the link to the
1. Identify three
risk of another world war. In this superpowers for their own countries from each
sense the Cold War managed to purposes. They got the promise of of the rival blocs.
ensure human survival. protection, weapons, and 2. Look at the map
economic aid against their local of the European
rivals, mostly regional neighbours Union in Chapter 4
T E
HE MERGENCE OF and identify four
with whom they had rivalries. The
countries that were
T WO P OWER B LOCS alliance systems led by the part of the Warsaw
two superpowers, therefore, Pact and now
The two superpowers were keen threatened to divide the entire belong to the EU.
on expanding their spheres of world into two camps. This 3. By comparing this
influence in different parts of the division happened first in Europe. map with that of
the European Union
world. In a world sharply divided Most countries of western Europe
map, identify three
between the two alliance systems, sided with the US and those of
new countries that
a state was supposed to remain eastern Europe joined the Soviet came up in the
tied to its protective superpower camp. That is why these were also post-Cold War
period.
to limit the influence of the other called the ‘western’ and the
superpower and its allies. ‘eastern’ alliances.
NATO Members NORWAY FINLAND
Warsaw Pact Members Helsinki
Other Communist Nations Oslo Stockholm
Others
SWEDEN
North
Sea
IRELAND DENMARK
Moscow
Dublin
Copenhagen
BRITAIN NETH.
USSR
London Berlin
ATLANTIC
OCEAN The Hague Warsaw
Brussels EAST
BELG. Bonn GERMANY
POLAND
LUX.
FRA
P
N
a
C
ris
E Bern
GE
W
RM
ES
A
T
NY
V
C
i
Z
e
E
n
C
n
P H
a
ra O g S u L e OVAKIA
SWITZ. AUSTRIA Budapest
HUNGARY ROMANIA
PORTUGAL Bucharest Yalta
Belgrade
SPAIN Black Sea
Lisbon ITALY YUGOSLAVIA BULGARIA
Madrid Rome Sofia
ALBANIA Ankara
Tirana
TURKEY
GREECE
Map showing the way Europe was divided into rival alliances during the Cold War

--- PAGE 8 ---
6 Contemporary World Politics
FIRST WORLD
SECOND WORLD
THIRD WORLD
The western alliance was respective alliances. Soviet
formalised into an organisation, intervention in east Europe
the North Atlantic Treaty provides an example. The Soviet
Organisation (NATO), which came Union used its influence in
into existence in April 1949. It was eastern Europe, backed by the
In the following an association of twelve states very large presence of its armies
column, write which declared that armed attack in the countries of the region, to
the names of
on any one of them in Europe or ensure that the eastern half of
three countries,
North America would be regarded Europe remained within its
which belong to:
as an attack on all of them. Each sphere of influence. In East and
Capitalist Bloc of these states would be obliged Southeast Asia and in West Asia
to help the other. The eastern (Middle East), the United States
________________
alliance, known as the Warsaw built an alliance system called —
________________
Pact, was led by the Soviet Union. the Southeast Asian Treaty
________________
It was created in 1955 and its Organisation (SEATO) and the
principal function was to counter Central Treaty Organisation
Communist Bloc
NATO’s forces in Europe. (CENTO). The Soviet Union and
________________
communist China responded by
International alliances during
________________ having close relations with
the Cold War era were determined
________________ regional countries such as North
by the requirements of the
Vietnam, North Korea and Iraq.
superpowers and the calculations
Non-Aligned
of the smaller states. As noted The Cold War threatened to
Movement above, Europe became the main divide the world into two alliances.
________________ arena of conflict between the Under these circumstances, many
________________ superpowers. In some cases, the of the newly independent
________________ superpowers used their military countries, after gaining their
power to bring countries into their independence from the colonial

--- PAGE 9 ---
The Cold War Era 7
powers such as Britain and democracy and capitalism were
France, were worried that they better than socialism and
would lose their freedom as soon communism, or vice versa.
as they gained formal
independence. Cracks and splits
A C W
RENAS OF THE OLD AR
within the alliances were quick to
appear. Communist China
The Cuban Missile Crisis that we
quarrelled with the USSR towards
began this chapter with was only
the late 1950s, and, in 1969, they
one of the several crises that
fought a brief war over a territorial
occurred during the Cold War.
dispute. The other important
The Cold War also led to several
development was the Non-Aligned
shooting wars, but it is important
Movement (NAM), which gave the
to note that these crises and wars
newly independent countries a
did not lead to another world war.
way of staying out of the alliances. How come there are
The two superpowers were poised
still two Koreas while
You may ask why the for direct confrontations in Korea
the other divisions
superpowers needed any allies at (1950 - 53), Berlin (1958 - 62), the created by the Cold
all. After all, with their nuclear Congo (the early 1960s), and in War have ended?
weapons and regular armies, they several other places. Crises Do the people of
were so powerful that the combined deepened, as neither of the parties Korea want the
division to continue?
power of most of the smaller states involved was willing to back down.
in Asia and Africa, and even in When we talk about arenas of the
Europe, was no match to that of Cold War, we refer, therefore, to
the superpowers. Yet, the smaller areas where crisis and war
states were helpful for the occurred or threatened to occur
superpowers in gaining access to between the alliance systems but
did not cross certain limits. A
(i) vital resources, such as oil
great many lives were lost in some
and minerals,
of these arenas like Korea,
(ii) territory, from where the Vietnam and Afghanistan, but the
superpowers could launch world was spared a nuclear war
their weapons and troops, and global hostilities. In some
cases, huge military build-ups
(iii) locations from where they
were reported. In many cases,
could spy on each other, and
diplomatic communication
(iv) economic support, in that between the superpowers could
many small allies together not be sustained and contributed
could help pay for military to the misunderstandings.
Locate the
expenses.
Sometimes, countries outside flashpoints
They were also important for the two blocs, for example, the of the Cold
ideological reasons. The loyalty of non-aligned countries, played a War on a
allies suggested that the role in reducing Cold War conflicts world map.
superpowers were winning the and averting some grave crises.
war of ideas as well, that liberal Jawaharlal Nehru — one of the key

--- PAGE 10 ---
8 Contemporary World Politics
leaders of the NAM — played a
THE COLD WAR TIMELINE crucial role in mediating between
the two Koreas. In the Congo
crisis, the UN Secretary-General
1947 American President Harry Truman’s Doctrine played a key mediatory role. By
about the containment of communism
and large, it was the realisation
1947 - 52 Marshall Plan: US aid for the reconstruction of on a superpower’s part that war
the Western Europe by all means should be avoided
that made them exercise restraint
1948 - 49Berlin blockade by the Soviet Union and the
and behave more responsibly in
airlift of supplies to the citizens of West Berlin
international affairs. As the Cold
by the US and its allies
War rolled from one arena to
1950 - 53Korean War; division of Korea along the 38th
another, the logic of restraint was
Parallel
increasingly evident.
1954 Defeat of the French by the Vietnamese at
However, since the Cold War
Dien Bien Phu
did not eliminate rivalries between
Signing of the Geneva Accords
the two alliances, mutual
Division of Vietnam along the 17th Parallel
Formation of SEATO suspicions led them to arm
themselves to the teeth and to
1954 - 75American intervention in Vietnam
constantly prepare for war. Huge
1955 Signing of the Baghdad Pact, later CENTO stocks of arms were considered
necessary to prevent wars from
1956 Soviet intervention in Hungary
taking place.
1961 US-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba
The two sides understood that
Construction of the Berlin Wall
war might occur in spite of
1962 Cuban Missile Crisis restraint. Either side might
miscalculate the number of
1965 American intervention in the Dominican
weapons in the possession of the
Republic
other side. They might
1968 Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia misunderstand the intentions of
the other side. Besides, what if
1972 US President Richard Nixon’s visit to China
there was a nuclear accident?
1978 - 89Vietnamese intervention in Cambodia What would happen if someone
fired off a nuclear weapon by
1979 - 89Soviet intervention in Afghanistan
mistake or if a soldier
1985 Gorbachev becomes the President of the mischievously shot off a weapon
USSR; begins the reform process deliberately to start a war? What
if an accident occurred with a
1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall; mass protests against
governments in eastern Europe nuclear weapon? How would the
leaders of that country know it
1990 Unification of Germany
was an accident and not an act of
sabotage by the enemy or that a
1991 Disintegration of the Soviet Union
End of the Cold War era missile had not landed from the
other side?

--- PAGE 11 ---
The Cold War Era 9
Drawn by well-
known Indian
cartoonist Kutty,
these two
cartoons depict
an Indian view
of the Cold War.
The first cartoon
was drawn when
the US entered
into a secret
understanding
with China,
keeping the
USSR in the dark.
Find out more
about the
characters in the
cartoon. The
second cartoon
depicts the
American
misadventure in
Vietnam. Find
out more about
the Vietnam
War. POLITICAL SPRING China makes overtures to the USA.
FOOD FOR THOUGHT President Johnson is in more troubles over Vietnam.

--- PAGE 12 ---
10 Contemporary World Politics
In time, therefore, the US and (i) cooperation among these five
USSR decided to collaborate in countries,
limiting or eliminating certain
(ii) growing Cold War tensions
kinds of nuclear and non-nuclear
FOUNDER and its widening arenas, and
weapons. A stable balance of
FIGURES
weapons, they decided, could be (iii) the dramatic entry of many
OF NAM
maintained through ‘arms newly decolonised African
control’. Starting in the 1960s, the countries into the inter-
two sides signed three national arena. By 1960,
significant agreements within a there were 16 new African
decade. These were the Limited members in the UN.
Test Ban Treaty, Nuclear Non-
The first summit was attended
Proliferation Treaty and the
by 25 member states. Over the
Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.
Josip Broz Tito years, the membership of NAM
(1892-1980) Thereafter, the superpowers held has expanded. The latest meeting,
President of several rounds of arms limitation
the 14th summit, was held in
Yugoslavia (1945- talks and signed several more
Havana in 2006. It included 116
80); fought against
treaties to limit their arms.
member states and 15 observer
Germany in World
War II; communist; countries.
maintained some C B
HALLENGE TO IPOLARITY As non-alignment grew into a
distance from the
popular international movement,
Soviet Union;
We have already seen how the
forged unity in countries of various different
Cold War tended to divide the
Yugoslavia. political systems and interests
world into two rival alliances. It
joined it. This made the movement
was in this context that non-
less homogeneous and also made
alignment offered the newly
it more difficult to define in very
decolonised countries of Asia,
neat and precise terms: what did
Africa and Latin America a third
it really stand for? Increasingly,
option—not to join either alliance.
NAM was easier to define in terms
The roots of NAM went back of what it was not. It was not about
to the friendship between three being a member of an alliance.
Jawaharlal Nehru
leaders — Yugoslavia’s Josip Broz
(1889-1964) The policy of staying away
Tito, India’s Jawaharlal Nehru,
First Prime Minister from alliances should not
of India (1947-64); and Egypt’s leader Gamal Abdel be considered isolationism or
made efforts for Nasser — who held a meeting in
neutrality. Non-alignment is not
Asian unity, 1956. Indonesia’s Sukarno and
isolationism since isolationism
decolonisation,
Ghana’s Kwame Nkrumah
means remaining aloof from world
nuclear
disarmament; strongly supported them. These affairs. Isolationism sums up the
advocated five leaders came to be known as foreign policy of the US from the
peaceful the five founders of NAM. The first American War of Independence in
coexistence for non-aligned summit was held in 1787 up to the beginning of the
securing world Belgrade in 1961. This was the First World War. In comparison,
peace.
culmination of at least three the non-aligned countries,
factors: including India, played an active

--- PAGE 13 ---
The Cold War Era 11
role in mediating between the two The idea of a New Inter-
rival alliances in the cause of national Economic Order (NIEO)
peace and stability. Their strength originated with this realisation.
was based on their unity and their The United Nations Conference
FOUNDER
resolve to remain non-aligned on Trade and Development
FIGURES
despite the attempt by the two (UNCTAD) brought out a report
OF NAM
superpowers to bring them into in 1972 entitled Towards a New
their alliances. Trade Policy for Development.
The report proposed a reform of
Non-alignment is also not
the global trading system so
neutrality. Neutrality refers
as to:
principally to a policy of staying
out of war. States practising (i) give the LDCs control over
neutrality are not required to help their natural resources
end a war. They do not get exploited by the developed Gamal Abdel
involved in wars and do not Western countries, Nasser (1918-70)
Ruled Egypt from
take any position on the (ii) obtain access to Western 1952 to 1970;
appropriateness or morality of a markets so that the LDCs espoused the
war. Non-aligned states, including could sell their products and, causes of Arab
India, were actually involved in therefore, make trade more nationalism,
wars for various reasons. They beneficial for the poorer socialism and
anti-imperialism;
also worked to prevent war countries,
nationalised the
between others and tried to end
(iii) reduce the cost of technology Suez Canal,
wars that had broken out.
leading to an
from the Western countries, and
international
(iv) provide the LDCs with a conflict in 1956.
N I
EW NTERNATIONAL greater role in international
E O economic institutions.
CONOMIC RDER
Gradually, the nature of non-
The non-aligned countries were alignment changed to give greater
more than merely mediators during importance to economic issues.
the Cold War. The challenge for most In 1961, at the first summit in
of the non-aligned countries — a Belgrade, economic issues had
majority of them were categorised not been very important. By the Sukarno (1901-70)
as the Least Developed Countries mid-1970s, they had become the First President of
(LDCs) — was to be more developed most important issues. As a Indonesia (1945-
economically and to lift their people result, NAM became an economic 65); led the
freedom struggle;
out of poverty. Economic pressure group. By the late
espoused the
development was also vital for the 1980s, however, the NIEO
causes of
independence of the new countries. initiative had faded, mainly socialism and
Without sustained development, a because of the stiff opposition anti-imperialism;
country could not be truly free. It from the developed countries who organised the
Bandung
would remain dependent on the acted as a united group while the
Conference;
richer countries including the non-aligned countries struggled overthrown in a
colonial powers from which political to maintain their unity in the face military coup.
freedom had been achieved. of this opposition.

--- PAGE 14 ---
12 Contemporary World Politics
I C W cause which had little to do with
NDIA AND THE OLD AR
India’s real interests. A non-aligned
As a leader of NAM, India’s posture also served India’s interests
FOUNDER response to the ongoing Cold War very directly, in at least two ways:
FIGURES was two-fold: At one level, it took First, non-alignment allowed
OF NAM particular care in staying away India to take international
from the two alliances. Second, it
decisions and stances that
raised its voice against the newly
served its interests rather than
decolonised countries becoming
the interests of the super-
part of these alliances.
powers and their allies.
India’s policy was neither
Second, India was often able
negative nor passive. As Nehru
to balance one superpower
reminded the world, non-
against the other. If India felt
alignment was not a policy of
ignored or unduly pressurised
Kwame Nkrumah
‘fleeing away’. On the contrary,
(1909-72) by one superpower, it could tilt
India was in favour of actively
First Prime Minister towards the other. Neither
intervening in world affairs to
of Ghana (1952- alliance system could take
66); led the soften Cold War rivalries. India
India for granted or bully it.
freedom tried to reduce the differences
movement; between the alliances and thereby India’s policy of non-alignment
advocated the prevent differences from was criticised on a number of
causes of
escalating into a full-scale war. counts. Here we may refer to only
socialism and
Indian diplomats and leaders were two criticisms:
African unity;
opposed neo- often used to communicate and First, India’s non-alignment
colonialism; mediate between Cold War rivals
was said to be ‘unprincipled’.
removed in a such as in the Korea War in the
In the name of pursuing its
military coup.
early 1950s.
national interest, India, it was
It is important to remember said, often refused to take a
that India chose to involve other firm stand on crucial
members of the non-aligned group international issues.
in this mission. During the Cold
Second, it is suggested that
War, India repeatedly tried to
So, NIEO was just an India was inconsistent and
activate those regional and
idea that never took contradictory postures.
international organisations, which
became an order. Having criticised others for
Right? were not a part of the alliances led
joining alliances, India signed
by the US and USSR. Nehru
the Treaty of Friendship in
Name any five
reposed great faith in ‘a genuine
August 1971 with the USSR
countries,
commonwealth of free and
which were for 20 years. This was
cooperating nations’ that would
decolonised regarded, particularly by
play a positive role in softening, if
following the outside observers, as
not ending, the Cold War.
end of the virtually joining the Soviet
Second World Non-alignment was not, as alliance system. The Indian
War. some suggest, a noble international government’s view was that

--- PAGE 15 ---
The Cold War Era 13
India needed diplomatic and
possibly military support
during the Bangladesh crisis
and that in any case the
treaty did not stop India from
having good relations with
other countries including
the US.
Non-alignment as a strategy
evolved in the Cold War context.
As we will see in Chapter 2, with
the disintegration of the USSR and
the end of the Cold War in 1991,
non-alignment, both as an
international movement and as
STEPS
the core of India’s foreign policy,
lost some of its earlier relevance (cid:139) Divide the classroom into three groups of even
and effectiveness. However, non-
number. Each group is to represent three
alignment contained some core
different worlds - first world/capitalist world,
values and enduring ideas. It was
second world/communist world and the third
based on a recognition that
world/non-aligned world.
decolonised states share a
(cid:139) The teacher is to select any two critical issues
historical affiliation and can
which posed a threat to world peace and
become a powerful force if they
security during the Cold War days. ( The Korean
come together. It meant that the
and Vietnam Wars would be good examples).
poor and often very small
countries of the world need not (cid:139) Assign each group to work on developing an
become followers of any of the big ‘event profile’. They have to develop, from the
powers, that they could pursue an vantage point of the bloc they represent, a
independent foreign policy. It was presentation that contains a timeline of the
also based on a resolve to event, its causes, their preferred course of action
democratise the international to solve the problem.
system by thinking about an
(cid:139) Each group is to present their event profile
alternative world order to redress
before the class.
existing inequities. These core
Ideas for the Teacher
ideas remain relevant even after
(cid:13) Draw students’ attention to the repercussions these crises had
the Cold War has ended.
on the rest of the world and on the respective countries.
Connect to the present situation in these countries.
(cid:13) Highlight the role played by the leaders of the Third World
(India’s stand and contribution in Korea and Vietnam could
be taken up for reference) and the UN to bring back peace in
these regions.
(cid:13) Open a debate on ‘how we could avert these kind of crises’
in the post-Cold War world.

--- PAGE 16 ---
14 Contemporary World Politics
ARMS CONTROL TREATIES
LIMITED TEST BAN TREATY (LTBT)
Banned nuclear weapon tests in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water.
Signed by the US, UK and USSR in Moscow on 5 August 1963.
Entered into force on 10 October 1963.
NUCLEAR NON-PROLIFERATION TREATY (NPT)
Allows only the nuclear weapon states to have nuclear weapons and stops others from
aquiring them. For the purposes of the NPT, a nuclear weapon state is one which has
manufactured and exploded a nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device prior to 1
January 1967. So there are five nuclear weapon states: US, USSR (later Russia), Britain, France
and China. Signed in Washington, London, and Moscow on 1 July 1968.
Entered into force on 5 March 1970. Extended indefinitely in 1995.
STRATEGIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS I (SALT-I)
The first round of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks began in November 1969. The Soviet
leader Leonid Brezhnev and the US President Richard Nixon signed the following in Moscow
on 26 May 1972 – a) Treaty on the limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile Systems (ABM Treaty); and
b) Interim Agreement on the limitation of strategic offensive arms.
Entered into force on 3 October 1972.
STRATEGIC ARMS LIMITATION TALKS II (SALT-II)
The second round started in November 1972. The US President Jimmy Carter and the Soviet
leader Leonid Brezhnev signed the Treaty on the limitation of strategic offensive arms in Vienna
on 18 June 1979.
STRATEGIC ARMS REDUCTION TREATY I (START-I)
Treaty signed by the USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and the US President George Bush (Senior)
on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms in Moscow on 31 July 1991.
STRATEGIC ARMS REDUCTION TREATY II (START-II)
Treaty signed by the Russian President Boris Yeltsin and the US President George Bush (Senior)
on the reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms in Moscow on 3 January 1993.

--- PAGE 17 ---
The Cold War Era 15
1. Which among the following statements about the Cold War is
wrong?
a) It was a competition between the US and Soviet Union and
their respective allies.
E
b) It was an ideological war between the superpowers.
c) It triggered off an arms race.
d) the US and USSR were engaged in direct wars.
2. Which among the following statements does not reflect the x
objectives of NAM
a) Enabling newly decolonised countries to pursue independent
policies
b) No to joining any military alliances e
c) Following a policy of ‘neutrality’ on global issues
d) Focus on elimination of global economic inequalities
3. Mark correct or wrong against each of the following statements
r
that describe the features of the military alliances formed by the
superpowers.
a) Member countries of the alliance are to provide bases in their
respective lands for the superpowers.
c
b) Member countries to support the superpower both in terms of
ideology and military strategy.
c) When a nation attacks any member country, it is considered
as an attack on all the member countries.
i
d) Superpowers assist all the member countries to develop their
own nuclear weapons.
4. Here is a list of countries. Write against each of these the bloc they
s
belonged to during the Cold War.
a) Poland
b) France
c) Japan e
d) Nigeria
e) North Korea
f) Sri Lanka
s
5. The Cold War produced an arms race as well as arms control. What
were the reasons for both these developments?
6. Why did the superpowers have military alliances with smaller
countries? Give three reasons.

--- PAGE 18 ---
16 Contemporary World Politics
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E
7. Sometimes it is said that the Cold War was a simple struggle for
power and that ideology had nothing to do with it. Do you agree
with this? Give one example to support your position.
8. What was India’s foreign policy towards the US and USSR during
the Cold War era? Do you think that this policy helped India’s
interests?
9. NAM was considered a ‘third option’ by Third World countries. How
did this option benefit their growth during the peak of the Cold
War?
10. What do you think about the statement that NAM has become
irrelevant today. Give reasons to support your opinion.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Chapter 2
The End of Bipolarity
O
VERVIEW
The Berlin Wall, which had been
built at the height of the Cold War
and was its greatest symbol, was
toppled by the people in 1989.
This dramatic event was followed
by an equally dramatic and
historic chain of events that led
to the collapse of the ‘second
world’ and the end of the Cold War.
Germany, divided after the Second
World War, was unified. One after
another, the eight East European
countries that were part of the
Soviet bloc replaced their
communist governments in
response to mass demonstrations.
The Soviet Union stood by as the
Cold War began to end, not by The Berlin Wall
military means but as a result of symbolised the division
mass actions by ordinary men and between the capitalist
and the communist
women. Eventually the Soviet
world. Built in 1961 to
Union itself disintegrated. In this
separate East Berlin from West Berlin, this more than 150
chapter, we discuss the meaning, kilometre long wall stood for 28 years and was finally broken
the causes and the consequences by the people on 9 November 1989. This marked the
unification of the two parts of Germany and the beginning
of the disintegration of the ‘second
of the end of the communist bloc. The pictures here depict:
world’. We also discuss what
1. People making a tiny hole in the wall
happened to that part of the world 2. A section of the wall opened to allow free movement
after the collapse of communist 3. The Berlin Wall as it stood before 1989
regimes and how India relates to Credit: 1. and 2. Frederik Ramm,
www.remote.org/frederik/culture/berlin
these countries now.
3. www.cs.utah.edu

--- PAGE 20 ---
18 Contemporary World Politics
W S machinery production, and a
HAT WAS THE OVIET
transport sector that connected its
S ?
YSTEM remotest areas with efficiency. It
had a domestic consumer
LEADERS OF THE The Union of Soviet Socialist
industry that produced everything
SOVIET UNION Republics (USSR) came into being
from pins to cars, though their
after the socialist revolution in
quality did not match that of the
Russia in 1917. The revolution was
Western capitalist countries. The
inspired by the ideals of socialism,
Soviet state ensured a minimum
as opposed to capitalism, and the
standard of living for all citizens,
need for an egalitarian society. This
and the government subsidised
was perhaps the biggest attempt
basic necessities including health,
in human history to abolish the
education, childcare and other
institution of private property and
welfare schemes. There was no
Vladimir Lenin
consciously design a society based
unemployment. State ownership
(1870-1924)
on principles of equality. In doing
Founder of the was the dominant form of
so, the makers of the Soviet system
Bolshevik ownership: land and productive
Communist party; gave primacy to the state and the assets were owned and controlled
leader of the institution of the party. The Soviet
by the Soviet state.
Russian Revolution political system centred around
of 1917 and the the communist party, and no other The Soviet system, however,
founder-head of political party or opposition was became very bureaucratic and
the USSR during
allowed. The economy was planned authoritarian, making life very
the most difficult
period following and controlled by the state. difficult for its citizens. Lack of
democracy and the absence of
the revolution
After the Second World War,
(1917-1924); an freedom of speech stifled people who
the east European countries that
outstanding often expressed their dissent in
theoretician and the Soviet army had liberated from jokes and cartoons. Most of the
practitioner of the fascist forces came under the
institutions of the Soviet state
Marxism and a control of the USSR. The political
needed reform: the one-party
source of and the economic systems of all
system represented by the
inspiration for
these countries were modelled
communists all Communist Party of the Soviet
after the USSR. This group of
over the world. Union had tight control over all
countries was called the Second
institutions and was unaccountable
World or the ‘socialist bloc’. The
to the people. The party refused to
Warsaw Pact, a military alliance,
recognise the urge of people in the
held them together. The USSR was
fifteen different republics that formed
the leader of the bloc.
the Soviet Union to manage their
The Soviet Union became a own affairs including their cultural
great power after the Second affairs. Although, on paper, Russia
World War. The Soviet economy was only one of the fifteen republics
was then more developed than the that together constituted the USSR,
rest of the world except for the US. in reality Russia dominated
It had a complex communications everything, and people from other
network, vast energy resources regions felt neglected and often
including oil, iron and steel, suppressed.

--- PAGE 21 ---
The End of Bipolarity 19
In the arms race, the Soviet Gorbachev, did not intervene
Union managed to match the US when the disturbances occurred,
from time to time, but at great and the communist regimes
cost. The Soviet Union lagged collapsed one after another.
LEADERS OF THE
behind the West in technology,
These developments were
SOVIET UNION
infrastructure (e.g. transport,
accompanied by a rapidly
power), and most importantly, in
escalating crisis within the USSR
fulfilling the political or economic
that hastened its disintegration.
aspirations of citizens. The Soviet
Gorbachev initiated the policies of
invasion of Afghanistan in 1979
economic and political reform and
weakened the system even
democratisation within the
further. Though wages continued
country. The reforms were
to grow, productivity and
opposed by leaders within the
technology fell considerably
Communist Party. Joseph Stalin
behind that of the West. This led (1879-1953)
to shortages in all consumer A coup took place in 1991 that Successor to Lenin
goods. Food imports increased was encouraged by Communist and led the Soviet
every year. The Soviet economy Party hardliners. The people had Union during its
consolidation
was faltering in the late 1970s and tasted freedom by then and did not
(1924-53); began
became stagnant. want the old-style rule of the
rapid
Communist Party. Boris Yeltsin
industrialisation
G emerged as a national hero in and forcible
ORBACHEV AND THE
opposing this coup. The Russian collectivisation of
D ISINTEGRATION Republic, where Yeltsin won a agriculture;
credited with
popular election, began to shake
Mikhail Gorbachev, who had Soviet victory in
off centralised control. Power
become General Secretary of the the Second World
began to shift from the Soviet
Communist Party of the Soviet War; held
centre to the republics, especially responsible for the
Union in 1985, sought to reform
in the more Europeanised part of Great Terror of the
this system. Reforms were
the Soviet Union, which saw 1930s,
necessary to keep the USSR
authoritarian
themselves as sovereign states.
abreast of the information and functioning and
The Central Asian republics did
technological revolutions taking elimination of
not ask for independence and
place in the West. However, rivals within the
wanted to remain with the Soviet party.
Gorbachev’s decision to normalise
Federation. In December 1991,
relations with the West and
under the leadership of Yeltsin,
democratise and reform the Soviet
Russia, Ukraine and Belarus,
Union had some other effects that
three major republics of the
neither he nor anyone else
USSR, declared that the Soviet
intended or anticipated. The
Union was disbanded. The
people in the East European
Communist Party of the Soviet
countries which were part of the
Union was banned. Capitalism
Soviet bloc started to protest
and democracy were adopted as
against their own governments
the bases for the post-Soviet
and Soviet control. Unlike in the
republics.
past, the Soviet Union, under

--- PAGE 22 ---
20 Contemporary World Politics
A Communist Party bureaucrat drives down from Moscow to a collective farm
to register a potato harvest.
“Comrade farmer, how has the harvest been this year?” the official asks.
LEADERS OF THE “Oh, by the grace of God, we had mountains of potatoes,” answers the
SOVIET UNION farmer.
“But there is no God,” counters the official.
“Huh”, says the farmer, “And there are no mountains of potatoes either.”
The declaration on the there may be more general lessons
disintegration of the USSR and the to be drawn from this very
formation of the Commonwealth important case.
of Independent States (CIS) came
There is no doubt that the
as a surprise to the other
Nikita Khrushchev internal weaknesses of Soviet
republics, especially to the Central
(1894-1971) political and economic institutions,
Leader of the Asian ones. The exclusion of these which failed to meet the
Soviet Union republics was an issue that was
aspirations of the people, were
(1953-64); quickly solved by making them
responsible for the collapse of the
denounced
founding members of the CIS.
system. Economic stagnation for
Stalin’s leadership
Russia was now accepted as the
style and many years led to severe
successor state of the Soviet
introduced some consumer shortages and a large
reforms in 1956; Union. It inherited the Soviet seat section of Soviet society began to
suggested in the UN Security Council. Russia doubt and question the system
“peaceful accepted all the international
and to do so openly.
coexistence” with
treaties and commitments of the
the West; Why did the system become so
Soviet Union. It took over as the
involved in weak and why did the economy
only nuclear state of the post-
suppressing
stagnate? The answer is partially
popular rebellion Soviet space and carried out some
clear. The Soviet economy used
in Hungary and in nuclear disarmament measures
much of its resources in
the Cuban missile with the US. The old Soviet Union
crisis. maintaining a nuclear and
was thus dead and buried.
military arsenal and the
development of its satellite states
W S U
HY DID THE OVIET NION in Eastern Europe and within the
D ? Soviet system (the five Central
ISINTEGRATE
Asian Republics in particular).
How did the second most powerful This led to a huge economic
country in the world suddenly burden that the system could not
disintegrate? This is a question cope with. At the same time,
worth asking not just to ordinary citizens became more
understand the Soviet Union and knowledgeable about the
I am amazed! How
the end of communism but also economic advance of the West.
could so many
sensitive people all because it is not the first and may They could see the disparities
over the world not be the last political system to between their system and the
admire a system like collapse. While there are unique systems of the West. After years
this? features of the Soviet collapse, of being told that the Soviet

--- PAGE 23 ---
The End of Bipolarity 21
system was better than Western impossible to control. There were
capitalism, the reality of its sections of Soviet society which felt
backwardness came as a political that Gorbachev should have
and psychological shock. moved much faster and were
LEADERS OF THE
disappointed and impatient with
The Soviet Union had become
SOVIET UNION
his methods. They did not benefit
stagnant in an administrative and
in the way they had hoped, or they
political sense as well. The
benefited too slowly. Others,
Communist Party that had ruled
especially members of the
the Soviet Union for over 70 years
Communist Party and those who
was not accountable to the people.
were served by the system, took
Ordinary people were alienated by
exactly the opposite view. They felt
slow and stifling administration,
that their power and privileges
rampant corruption, the inability
were eroding and Gorbachev was
of the system to correct mistakes Leonid Brezhnev
it had made, the unwillingness to moving too quickly. In this ‘tug of (1906-82)
war’, Gorbachev lost support on all Leader of the
allow more openness in
sides and divided public opinion. Soviet Union (1964-
government, and the centralisation
82); proposed
Even those who were with him
of authority in a vast land. Worse Asian Collective
became disillusioned as they felt
still, the party bureaucrats gained Security system;
more privileges than ordinary that he did not adequately defend associated with
citizens. People did not identify his own policies. the détente phase
in relations with
with the system and with the All this might not have led to
the US; involved in
rulers, and the government the collapse of the Soviet Union but suppressing a
increasingly lost popular backing. for another development that popular rebellion
surprised most observers and in Czechoslovakia
Gorbachev’s reforms promised
and in invading
indeed many insiders. The rise of
to deal with theseproblems.
Afghanistan.
nationalism and the desire for
Gorbachev promised to reform the
economy, catch up with the West, sovereignty within various
and loosen the administrative republics including Russia and the
system. You may wonder why the Baltic Republics (Estonia, Latvia
Soviet Union collapsed in spite of and Lithuania), Ukraine, Georgia,
Gorbachev’s accurate diagnosis of and others proved to be the final
the problem and his attempt to and most immediate cause for the
implement reforms. Here is where disintegration of the USSR. Here
the answers become more again there are differing views.
controversial, and we have to
One view is that nationalist
depend on future historians to
urges and feelings were very much
guide us better.
at work throughout the history of
The most basic answer seems the Soviet Union and that whether
to be that when Gorbachev carried or not the reforms had occurred
out his reforms and loosened the there would have been an internal
system, he set in motion forces and struggle within the Soviet Union.
expectations that few could have This is a ‘what-if’ of history, but
predicted and became virtually surely it is not an unreasonable

--- PAGE 24 ---
22 Contemporary World Politics
view given the size and diversity of Ironically, during the Cold War
the Soviet Union and its growing many thought that nationalist
internal problems. Others think unrest would be strongest in the
that Gorbachev’s reforms speeded Central Asian republics given their
LEADERS OF THE
up and increased nationalist ethnic and religious differences with
SOVIET UNION
dissatisfaction to the point that the rest of the Soviet Union and their
the government and rulers could economic backwardness. However,
not control it. as things turned out, nationalist
TIMELINE OF DISINTEGRATION
OF THE SOVIET UNION
1985 March: Mikhail Gorbachev elected as the General Secretary of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union; appoints Boris Yeltsin as the head of the
Mikhail
Communist Party in Moscow; initiates a series of reforms in the Soviet Union
Gorbachev
(Born 1931)
1988: Independence movement begins in Lithuania; later spreads to Estonia
Last leader of the
and Latvia
Soviet Union
(1985-91);
1989 October: Soviet Union declares that the Warsaw Pact members are free
introduced
to decide their own futures; Berlin Wall falls in November
economic and
political reform
1990 February: Gorbachev strips the Soviet Communist Party of its 72-year-long
policies of
monopoly on power by calling on the Soviet parliament (Duma) to permit multi-
perestroika
party politics
(restructuring)
and glasnost
1990 March: Lithuania becomes the first of the 15 Soviet republics to declare its
(openness);
independence
stopped the arms
race with the US;
1990 June: Russian parliament declares its independence from the Soviet Union
withdrew Soviet
troops from
1991 June: Yeltsin, no longer in the Communist Party, becomes the President of
Afghanistan and
Russia
eastern Europe;
helped in the
1991 August: The Communist Party hardliners stage an abortive coup against
unification of
Gorbachev
Germany; ended
the Cold War;
1991 September: Three Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania become
blamed for the
UN members (later join NATO in March 2004)
disintegration of
the Soviet Union.
1991 December: Russia, Belarus and Ukraine decide to annul the 1922 Treaty
on the Creation of the USSR and establish the Commonwealth of Independent
States (CIS); Armenia, Azerbaijan, Moldova, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan join the CIS (Georgia joins later in 1993); Russia
takes over the USSR seat in the United Nations
1991 December 25: Gorbachev resigns as the President of the Soviet Union; the
end of the Soviet Union

--- PAGE 25 ---
The End of Bipolarity 23
dissatisfaction with the Soviet Union changed. The end of the Cold War
was strongest in the more left open only two possibilities:
“European” and prosperous part – either the remaining superpower
in Russia and the Baltic areas as would dominate and create a
LEADERS OF THE
well as Ukraine and Georgia. unipolar system, or different
SOVIET UNION
Ordinary people here felt alienated countries or groups of countries
from the Central Asians and from could become important players in
each other and concluded also that the international system, thereby
they were paying too high an bringing in a multipolar system
economic price to keep the more where no one power could
backward areas within the Soviet dominate. As it turned out, the US
Union. became the sole superpower.
Backed by the power and prestige
of the US, the capitalist economy
C
ONSEQUENCES OF
was now the dominant economic
Boris Yeltsin (Born
D ISINTEGRATION system internationally. Institutions
1931)
like the World Bank and The first elected
The collapse of the second world International Monetary Fund President of
of the Soviet Union and the became powerful advisors to all Russia (1991-
1999); rose to
socialist systems in eastern Europe these countries since they gave
power in the
had profound consequences for them loans for their transitions to
Communist Party
world politics. Let us note here capitalism. Politically, the notion of
and was made
three broad kinds of enduring liberal democracy emerged as the the Mayor of
changes that resulted from it. best way to organise political life. Moscow by
Gorbachev; later
Each of these had a number of
Third, the end of the Soviet bloc
joined the critics
effects that we cannot list here.
meant the emergence of many new of Gorbachev
First of all, it meant the end of countries. All these countries had and left the
Cold War confrontations. The their own independent aspirations Communist Party;
led the protests
ideological dispute over whether and choices. Some of them,
against the Soviet
especially the Baltic and east
the socialist system would beat the regime in 1991;
European states, wanted to join the
capitalist system was not an issue played a key role
any more. Since this dispute had European Union and become part in dissolving the
of the North Atlantic Treaty Soviet Union;
engaged the military of the two
Organisation (NATO). The Central blamed for
blocs, had triggered a massive
hardships
Asian countries wanted to take
arms race and accumulation of
suffered by
advantage of their geographical
nuclear weapons, and had led to Russians in their
location and continue their close ties
the existence of military blocs, the transition from
end of the confrontation demanded with Russia and also to establish ties communism to
with the West, the US, China and capitalism.
an end to this arms race and a
others. Thus, the international
possible new peace.
system saw many new players
Second, power relations in emerge, each with its own identity,
world politics changed and, interests, and economic and political
therefore, the relative influence of difficulties. It is to these issues that
ideas and institutions also we now turn.

--- PAGE 26 ---
24 Contemporary World Politics
S T Each of these countries was
HOCK HERAPY IN
required to make a total shift to
P -C R
OST OMMUNIST EGIMES a capitalist economy, which
meant rooting out completely
The collapse of communism was
any structures evolved during
followed in most of these
the Soviet period. Above all, it
countries by a painful process of
meant that private ownership
transition from an authoritarian
was to be the dominant pattern
socialist system to a democratic of ownership of property.
I heard someone say capitalist system. The model of Privatisation of state assets and
“The end of the
transition in Russia, Central Asia corporate ownership patterns
Soviet Union does
and east Europe that was were to be immediately brought
not mean the end of
socialism.” Is that influenced by the World Bank in. Collective farms were to be
possible? and the IMF came to be known replaced by private farming and
as ‘shock therapy’. Shock therapy capitalism in agriculture. This
varied in intensity and speed transition ruled out any
amongst the former second world alternate or ‘third way’, other
countries, but its direction and than state-controlled socialism
features were quite similar. or capitalism.
POLITICAL MAP OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF INDEPENDENT STATES, 1997
Locate the
Central Asian
Republics on
the map.
“Courtesy of the University of Texas Libraries, The University of Texas at Austin”

--- PAGE 27 ---
The End of Bipolarity 25
Shock therapy also involved a about 90 per cent of its industries
drastic change in the external were put up for sale to private
orientation of these economies. individuals and companies. Since
Development was now envisaged the restructuring was carried out
through more trade, and thus a through market forces and not by
sudden and complete switch to government-directed industrial
free trade was considered policies, it led to the virtual
essential. The free trade regime disappearance of entire industries.
and foreign direct investment This was called ‘the largest garage
(FDI) were to be the main engines sale in history’, as valuable
of change. This also involved industries were undervalued and
openness to foreign investment, sold at throwaway prices. Though
financial opening up or all citizens were given vouchers to
deregulation, and currency participate in the sales, most
convertibility. citizens sold their vouchers in the
black market because they needed
Finally, the transition also
the money.
involved a break up of the existing
The value of the ruble, the
trade alliances among the
Russian currency, declined
countries of the Soviet bloc. Each
dramatically. The rate of inflation
state from this bloc was now
was so high that people lost all
linked directly to the West and not
their savings. The collective farm
to each other in the region. These
system disintegrated leaving
states were thus to be gradually
people without food security, and
absorbed into the Western
Russia started to import food. The
economic system. The Western
real GDP of Russia in 1999 was
capitalist states now became the
below what it was in 1989. The old
leaders and thus guided and
trading structure broke down with
controled the development of the
no alternative in its place.
region through various agencies
and organisations. The old system of social welfare
was systematically destroyed. The
C S withdrawal of government
ONSEQUENCES OF HOCK
subsidies pushed large sections of
T
HERAPY the people into poverty. The middle
classes were pushed to the
The shock therapy administered in periphery of society, and the
the 1990s did not lead the people academic and intellectual
into the promised utopia of mass manpower disintegrated or
consumption. Generally, it
migrated. A mafia emerged in most
brought ruin to the economies and of these countries and started
I can see the shock.
disaster upon the people of the controlling many economic
But where is the
entire region. In Russia, the large activities. Privatisation led to new therapy? Why do we
state-controlled industrial disparities. Post-Soviet states, talk in such
complex almost collapsed, as especially Russia, were divided euphemisms?

--- PAGE 28 ---
26 Contemporary World Politics
T C
between rich and poor regions. ENSIONS AND ONFLICTS
Unlike the earlier system, there Most of the former Soviet
was now great economic inequality Republics are prone to conflicts,
between people. and many have had civil wars and
insurgencies. Complicating the
The construction of democratic
As a result of institutions was not given the picture is the growing involvement
‘shock therapy’ of outside powers.
same attention and priority as
about half of
the demands of economic In Russia, two republics,
Russia’s 1,500
transformation. The constitutions Chechnya and Dagestan, have
banks and other
finacial institutions of all these countries were drafted had violent secessionist
went bankrupt. in a hurry and most, including movements. Moscow’s method of
This image is that Russia, had a strong executive dealing with the Chechen rebels
of Inkombank, president with the widest possible and indiscriminate military
Russia’s second
powers that rendered elected bombings have led to many
largest bank, that
human rights violations but failed
parliaments relatively weak. In
went bankrupt in
to deter the aspirations for
1998. As a result, Central Asia, the presidents had
the money of great powers, and several of them independence.
10,000 corporate became very authoritarian. For In Central Asia, Tajikistan
and private
example, the presidents of witnessed a civil war that went on
shareholders was
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan for ten years till 2001. The region
lost, along with the
money kept in the appointed themselves to power as a whole has many sectarian
bank by first for ten years and then conflicts. In Azerbaijan’s province
customers. extended it for another ten years. of Nagorno-Karabakh, some local
They allowed no dissent or Armenians want to secede and
opposition. A judicial culture and join Armenia. In Georgia, the
independence of the judiciary was demand for independence has
yet to be established in most of come from two provinces,
these countries. resulting in a civil war. There are
movements against the existing
Most of these economies,
regimes in Ukraine, Kyrgyzstan
especially Russia, started
and Georgia. Countries and
reviving in 2000, ten years after
provinces are fighting over river
their independence. The reason
waters. All this has led to
for the revival for most of their
instability, making life difficult for
economies was the export of
the ordinary citizen.
natural resources like oil, natural
gas and minerals. Azerbaijan, The Central Asian Republics are
What is the difference Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkmenistan areas with vast hydrocarbon
between nationalism
and Uzbekistan are major oil and gas resources, which have brought
and secessionism? If
producers. Other countries have them economic benefit. Central
you succeed, you are
gained because of the oil Asia has also become a zone of
celebrated as a
nationalist hero, and if pipelines that cross their competition between outside
you fail you are territories for which they get rent. powers and oil companies. The
condemned for crimes Some amount of manufacturing region is next to Russia, China,
of secessionism. has restarted. Afghanistan, and Pakistan, and

--- PAGE 29 ---
The End of Bipolarity 27
close to West Asia. After 11 embedded in a history of trust and
Make a list of
September 2001, the US wanted common interests and are
the similarities
military bases in the region and matched by popular perceptions.
between
paid the governments of all Central Indian heroes from Raj Kapoor to
India and the
Asian states to hire bases and to Amitabh Bachhan are household
USSR in their
allow airplanes to fly over their names in Russia and many post-
political and
territory during the wars in Soviet countries. One can hear
economic
Afghanistan and Iraq. However, Hindi film songs all over the
ideologies.
Russia perceives these states as its region, and India is part of the
‘Near Abroad’ and believes that they popular memory.
should be under Russian influence.
Russia and India share a vision
China has interests here because
of a multipolar world order. What
of the oil resources, and the Chinese
they mean by a multipolar world
have begun to settle around the
borders and conduct trade. BOLLYWOOD STIRS UZBEK
In eastern Europe, PASSIONS
Czechoslovakia split peacefully
into two, with the Czechs and the
Seven years after the Soviet Union collapsed, the Uzbek
Slovaks forming independent passion for Indian films continues. Within months of the
countries. But the most severe release of the latest film in India, pirate copies were already
conflict took place in the Balkan on sale in the Uzbek capital, Tashkent.
republics of Yugoslavia. After
Mohammed Sharif Pat runs a shop selling Indian films near
1991, it broke apart with several one of Tashkent’s biggest markets. He is an Afghan who
provinces like Croatia, Slovenia brings videos from the Pakistani frontier town Peshawar.
and Bosnia and Herzegovina “There are many people who love Indian films here. I’d say
declaring independence. Ethnic at least 70% of the people in Tashkent buy them. We sell
about 100 videos a day. I’ve just had to put in an order for a
Serbs opposed this, and a
thousand more,” he says. “The Uzbeks are Central Asians,
massacre of non-Serb Bosnians
they are part of Asia. They have a common culture. That’s
followed. The NATO intervention
why they like Indian films.”
and the bombing of Yugoslavia
followed the inter-ethnic civil war. Despite the shared history, for many Indians living in
Uzbekistan, the passion the Uzbeks have for their films and
film stars has come as a bit of a surprise. “Wherever we go
I NDIA AND P OST - COMMUNIST and meet local dignitaries - even ministers or cabinet
ministers - during our conversation it is always mentioned,”
C
OUNTRIES says Ashok Shamer from the Indian embassy in Tashkent. “This
shows that Indian films, culture, songs and especially Raj
India has maintained good Kapoor have been household names here. Most of them
relations with all the post- can sing some Hindi songs, they may not know the meaning
communist countries. But the but their pronunciation is correct and they know the music,”
strongest relations are still those he says. “I have found out that almost all my neighbours
can sing and play Hindi songs. This was really a big surprise
between Russia and India. India’s
to me when I came to Uzbekistan.”
relations with Russia are an
important aspect of India’s foreign A report by the BBC’s Central Asia Correspondent Louise Hidalgo
policy. Indo-Russian relations are

--- PAGE 30 ---
28 Contemporary World Politics
order is the co-existence of several powers in the
FLASHBACK: INDIA
international system, collective security (in which an
AND THE USSR
attack on any country is regarded as a threat to all
countries and requires a collective response), greater
regionalism, negotiated settlements of international
During the Cold War era, India and
conflicts, an independent foreign policy for all countries,
the USSR enjoyed a special
and decision making through bodies like the UN that
relationship which led critics to say
should be strengthened, democratised, and empowered.
that India was part of the Soviet
camp. It was a multi-dimensional More than 80 bilateral agreements have been signed
relationship: between India and Russia as part of the Indo-Russian
Strategic Agreement of 2001.
Economic: The Soviet Union assisted
India stands to benefit from its relationship with
India’s public sector companies at a
Russia on issues like Kashmir, energy supplies,
time when such assistance was
sharing information on international terrorism,
difficult to get. It gave aid and
technical assistance for steel plants
like Bhilai, Bokaro, Visakhapatnam,
and machinery plants like Bharat
Heavy Electricals Ltd., etc. The Soviet
Union accepted Indian currency for
trade when India was short of foreign
exchange.
STEPS
Political: The Soviet Union supported
India’s positions on the Kashmir issue (cid:139) Select any five Cold War allies each of the Soviet
in the UN. It also supported India
Union and the US.
during its major conflicts, especially
during the war with Pakistan in 1971. (cid:139) Divide the class accordingly (10 groups). Allot a
India too supported Soviet foreign country to each group. Assign the group to
policy in some crucial but indirect collect information on the political, social and
ways. economic profile of these countries during the
Cold War days.
Military: India received most of its
(cid:139) They should also prepare a profile of that
military hardware from the Soviet
Union at a time when few other country after the collapse of communism and
countries were willing to part with say what difference, if any, the disintegration of
military technologies. The Soviet Union the second world made to that country.
entered into various agreements
(cid:139) Each group is to present its findings to the entire
allowing India to jointly produce
class. Ensure that students talk about how
military equipment.
people of these countries felt about themselves
Culture: Hindi films and Indian culture as citizens.
were popular in the Soviet Union. A
Ideas for the Teacher
large number of Indian writers and
(cid:13) You could link the students’ findings to the working of the
artists visited the USSR.
democratic system and communist system and highlight
the pros and cons of both these systems.
(cid:13) You could encourage the students to discuss if there is an
alternative to both communism and capitalism.

--- PAGE 31 ---
The End of Bipolarity 29
access to Central Asia, and imports from Russia and the
balancing its relations with republics of Kazakhstan and
China. Russia stands to benefit Turkmenistan. Cooperation with
from this relationship because these republics includes
India is the second largest arms partnership and investment in
market for Russia. The Indian oilfields. Russia is important for
military gets most of its hardware India’s nuclear energy plans and
from Russia. Since India is an oil- assisted India’s space industry by
importing nation, Russia is giving, for example, the cryogenic
important to India and has rocket when India needed it.
repeatedly come to the assistance Russia and India have
of India during its oil crises. India collaborated on various scientific
is seeking to increase its energy projects.
1. Which among the following statements that describe the nature E
of Soviet economy is wrong?
a. Socialism was the dominant ideology
x
b. State ownership/control existed over the factors of production
c. People enjoyed economic freedom
d. Every aspect of the economy was planned and controlled by
the State e
2. Arrange the following in chronological order:
a. Soviet invasion of Afghanistan
r
b. Fall of the Berlin Wall
c. Disintegration of the Soviet Union
d. Russian Revolution
c
3. Which among the following is NOT an outcome of the disintegration
of the USSR?
a. End of the ideological war between the US and USSR
i
b. Birth of CIS
c. Change in the balance of power in the world order
d. Crises in the Middle East s
4. Match the following:
i. Mikhail Gorbachev a. Successor of USSR
e
ii. Shock Therapy b. Military pact
iii. Russia c. Introduced reforms
iv. Boris Yeltsin d. Economic model
s
v. Warsaw e. President of Russia

--- PAGE 32 ---
30 Contemporary World Politics
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E
5. Fill in the blanks.
a. The Soviet political system was based on ___________________
ideology.
b. _________________ was the military alliance started by the USSR.
c. ____________________ party dominated the Soviet Union’s
political system.
d. ______________________ initiated the reforms in the USSR in 1985.
e. The fall of the ____________________ symbolised the end of the
Cold War.
6. Mention any three features that distinguish the Soviet economy from
that of a capitalist country like the US?
7. What were the factors that forced Gorbachev to initiate the reforms
in the USSR?
8. What were the major consequences of the disintegration of the
Soviet Union for countries like India?
9. What was Shock Therapy? Was this the best way to make a transition
from communism to capitalism?
10. Write an essay for or against the following proposition: “With the
disintegration of the second world, India should change its foreign
policy and focus more on friendship with the US rather than with
traditional friends like Russia”.

--- PAGE 33 ---
Chapter 3
US Hegemony in World Politics
O
VERVIEW
We have seen that the end of Cold
War left the US without any
serious rival in the world. The era
since then has been described as
a period of US dominance or a
unipolar world. In this chapter, we
try to understand the nature,
extent and limits of this
dominance. We begin by narrating
the story of the rise of the new
world order from the First Gulf
War to the US-led invasion of Iraq.
We then pause to understand the
nature of US domination with the
help of the concept of ‘hegemony’.
After exploring the political,
The attack on the twin towers of the World Trade Centre in
economic and cultural aspects of New York on 11 September 2001 has been seen as a
US hegemony, we assess India’s watershed event in contemporary history.
policy options in dealing with the
US. Finally, we turn to see if there
are challenges to this hegemony
and whether it can be overcome.

--- PAGE 34 ---
32 Contemporary World Politics
A , J A forced to study a subject that he
YESHA ABU AND NDREI
has no interest in. In contrast,
Ayesha was doing very well in her Ayesha has lost her leg and is
studies at a high school in the lucky to be alive. How can we even
outskirts of Baghdad, and was discuss their problems in the same
planning to study medicine in breath? We can, and must, do so.
university. She lost a leg in 2003 As we shall see in this chapter, all
when a missile slammed into an three have been, in different ways,
air raid shelter in which she was affected by US hegemony. We will
hiding with her friends. Now she meet Ayesha, Jabu and Andrei
is learning to walk all over again. again. But let us first understand
She still plans to become a doctor, how US hegemony began and how
but only after the foreign armies it operates in the world today.
leave her country.
We will follow the popular
Jabu is a talented young artist usage of the word ‘America’ to
who lives in Durban, South Africa. refer to the United States of
His paintings are heavily America. But it may be useful to
influenced by traditional tribal art remind ourselves that the
forms. He wants to go to art school expression America covers the two
and later open his own studio. continents of North and South
However, his father wants him to America and that the US is only
study for an MBA and then join one of the countries of the
the family business. The business American continent. Thus, the use
is not doing too well; Jabu’s father of the word America solely for the
feels that with an MBA degree, US is already a sign of the US
Jabu will be able to make the hegemony that we seek to
family business profitable. understand in this chapter.
Andrei is a young man living
B ‘N
in Perth, Australia. His parents are EGINNING OF THE EW
immigrants from Russia. His
W O ’
ORLD RDER
mother gets very angry every time
Andrei puts on blue jeans to go to
The sudden collapse of the Soviet
church. She wants him to look
Union took everyone by surprise.
respectable in church. Andrei tells
While one of the two superpowers
his mother that jeans are “cool”,
ceased to exist, the other remained
that they give him the sense of
with all its powers intact, even
freedom. Andrei’s father reminds
enhanced. Thus, it would appear
I’m glad I did not opt his wife how they too used to wear
that the US hegemony began in
for the Science jeans when they were youngsters
1991 after Soviet power
subjects. Or else I too
in Leningrad, and for the same
disappeared from the international
would have been a
reason that their son now invokes.
victim of US scene. This is largely correct, but
hegemony. Can you Andrei has had an argument we need to keep in mind two riders
think how and why? with his mother. Jabu may be to this. First, as we shall see in this

--- PAGE 35 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 33
This picture of burned and broken vehicles was taken on the ‘Highway of Death’, a road between Kuwait and
Basra, on which the retreating Iraqi army was attacked by American aircraft during the First Gulf War in February
1991. Some commentators have suggested that the US forces deliberately bombed this stretch of highway where
fleeing and ‘out of combat’ Iraqi soldiers were stuck in a frenzied traffic jam and that the victims included Kuwaiti
prisoners and hostages and Palestinian civilian refugees. Many observers have called it a ‘war crime’ and a
violation of the Geneva Convention.
chapter, some aspects of US series of diplomatic attempts failed
hegemony did not emerge in 1991 at convincing Iraq to quit its
but in fact go back to the end of aggression, the United Nations
the Second World War in 1945. mandated the liberation of Kuwait
Second, the US did not start by force. For the UN, this was a
behaving like a hegemonic power dramatic decision after years of
right from 1991; it became clear deadlock during the Cold War. The
much later that the world was in US President George H.W. Bush
fact living in a period of hegemony. hailed the emergence of a ‘new
Let us therefore look at this world order’.
process by which US hegemony
A massive coalition force of
got established more closely.
660,000 troops from 34 countries
In August 1990, Iraq invaded fought against Iraq and defeated
Kuwait, rapidly occupying and it in what came to be known as
subsequently annexing it. After a the First Gulf War. However, the

--- PAGE 36 ---
34 Contemporary World Politics
UN operation, which was called campaigned on domestic rather
‘Operation Desert Storm’, was than foreign policy issues. Bill
overwhelmingly American. An Clinton won again in 1996 and
American general, Norman thus remained the president of the
Schwarzkopf, led the UN coalition US for eight years. During the
and nearly 75 per cent of the Clinton years, it often seemed that
coalition forces were from the US. the US had withdrawn into its
Although the Iraqi President, internal affairs and was not fully
Saddam Hussein, had promised engaged in world politics. In
“the mother of all battles”, the foreign policy, the Clinton
Iraqi forces were quickly defeated government tended to focus on
and forced to withdraw from ‘soft issues’ like democracy
Kuwait. promotion, climate change and
world trade rather than on the
The First Gulf War revealed
‘hard politics’ of military power and
the vast technological gap that had
security.
opened up between the US military
capability and that of other states. Nevertheless, the US on
Is it true that the US has The highly publicised use of so- occasion did show its readiness to
never fought a war on called ‘smart bombs’ by the US led use military power even during the
its own land? Doesn’t some observers to call this a Clinton years. The most important
that make it easy for ‘computer war’. Widespread episode occurred in 1999, in
Americans to get into television coverage also made it a response to Yugoslavian actions
miliray adventures?
‘video game war’, with viewers against the predominantly
around the world watching the Albanian population in the
destruction of Iraqi forces live on
province of Kosovo. The air forces
TV in the comfort of their living
of the NATO countries, led by the
rooms.
US, bombarded targets around
Incredibly, the US may Yugoslavia for well over two
actually have made a profit from months, forcing the downfall of
the war. According to many the government of Slobodan
reports, the US received more Milosevic and the stationing of a
money from countries like NATO force in Kosovo.
Germany, Japan and Saudi
Another significant US military
Arabia than it had spent on the
action during the Clinton years was
war.
in response to the bombing of the
US embassies in Nairobi, Kenya
T C Y and Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania in
HE LINTON EARS
1998. These bombings were
Despite winning the First Gulf War, attributed to Al-Qaeda, a terrorist
George H.W. Bush lost the US organisation strongly influenced by
presidential elections of 1992 to extremist Islamist ideas. Within a
William Jefferson (Bill) Clinton of few days of this bombing, President
the Democratic Party, who had Clinton ordered Operation Infinite

--- PAGE 37 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 35
This is ridiculous!
Does it mean
that Sri Lanka
can drop a
missile on Paris if
it suspects that
some of the LTTE
militants are
hiding there?
Reach, a series of cruise missile
strikes on Al-Qaeda terrorist targets
in Sudan and Afghanistan. The US
did not bother about the UN
sanction or provisions of
international law in this regard. It
was alleged that some of the targets
were civilian facilities unconnected
to terrorism. In retrospect, this was
merely the beginning.
9/11 ‘G
AND THE LOBAL
W T ’
AR ON ERROR
On 11 September 2001, nineteen
hijackers hailing from a number
of Arab countries took control of
four American commercial aircraft
This is how The New York Times reported 9/11 in its edition the
shortly after takeoff and flew them
following morning.
into important buildings in the
US. One airliner each crashed into
write the month first, followed by
the North and South Towers of the
the date; hence the short form ‘9/
World Trade Centre in New York.
11’ instead of ‘11/9’ as we would
A third aircraft crashed into the
write in India).
Pentagon building in Arlington,
Virginia, where the US Defence The attacks killed nearly three
Department is headquartered. thousand persons. In terms of their
The fourth aircraft, presumably shocking effect on Americans, they
bound for the Capitol building of have been compared to the British
the US Congress, came down in a burning of Washington, DC in 1814
field in Pennsylvania. The attacks and the Japanese attack on Pearl
have come to be known as “9/11”. Harbour in 1941. However, in terms
(In America the convention is to of loss of life, 9/11 was the most

--- PAGE 38 ---
36 Contemporary World Politics
severe attack on US soil since the Qaeda have remained potent, as
founding of the country in 1776. is clear from the number of
terrorist attacks launched by
The US response to 9/11 was
them against Western targets
swift and ferocious. Clinton had
since.
been succeeded in the US
presidency by George W. Bush The US forces made arrests
of the Republican Party, son of all over the world, often without
the earlier President George H. the knowledge of the government
W. Bush. Unlike Clinton, Bush of the persons being arrested,
had a much harder view of US transported these persons
interests and of the means by across countries and detained
which to advance them. As a part them in secret prisons. Some of
of its ‘Global War on Terror’, the them were brought to
US launched ‘Operation Guantanamo Bay, a US Naval
Do they also have
Enduring Freedom’ against all base in Cuba, where the
political dynasties in
the US? Or was this the those suspected to be behind prisoners did not enjoy the
only exception? this attack, mainly Al-Qaeda and protection of international law or
the Taliban regime in the law of their own country or
Afghanistan. The Taliban regime that of the US. Even the UN
was easily overthrown, but representatives were not allowed
remnants of the Taliban and Al- to meet these prisoners.
Suppose you are the Secretary of State in the US (their equivalent of our Minister of External Affairs).
How would you react in a press conference to these cartoons?
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,regniS
ydnA
©
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,regniS
ydnA
©

--- PAGE 39 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 37
T I I
HE RAQ NVASION
On 19 March 2003, the US
launched its invasion of Iraq under
the codename ‘Operation Iraqi
Freedom’. More than forty other
countries joined in the US-led
‘coalition of the willing’ after the UN
refused to give its mandate to the
invasion. The ostensible purpose of
the invasion was to prevent Iraq
from developing weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). Since no
evidence of WMD has been
unearthed in Iraq, it is speculated
that the invasion was motivated by
other objectives, such as controlling
Iraqi oilfields and installing a regime
friendly to the US.
Although the government of
Saddam Hussein fell swiftly, the
US has not been able to ‘pacify’
Iraq. Instead, a full-fledged
insurgency against US occupation
was ignited in Iraq. While the US
Soldier World Map © Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
has lost over 3,000 military
personnel in the war, Iraqi
W D H
HAT OES EGEMONY
casualties are very much higher.
It is conservatively estimated that M EAN ?
50,000 Iraqi civilians have been
killed since the US-led invasion. Politics is about power. Just as
It is now widely recognised that individuals want to gain and
the US invasion of Iraq was, in retain power, groups too want to
some crucial respects, both a gain and retain power. We
military and political failure. routinely talk of someone
becoming powerful or someone
doing something for power. In the
List the post- case of world politics too,
Cold War countries and groups of countries
conflicts/wars are engaged in constantly trying
in which the to gain and retain power. This
US played a power is in the form of military
critical role. domination, economic power,
political clout and cultural
superiority.

--- PAGE 40 ---
38 Contemporary World Politics
is called a ‘unipolar’ system. This
appears to be a misapplication of
the idea of ‘pole’ derived from
physics. It may be more appropriate
to describe an international system
with only one centre of power by
the term ‘hegemony’.
We can identify three very
different understandings of what
hegemony is. Let us examine each
of these meanings of hegemony
and relate them to contemporary
international politics.
H H
EGEMONY AS ARD
P
OWER
The roots of the word hegemony
lie in classical Greek. The word
implies the leadership or
predominance of one state, and
was originally used to denote the
Entitled ‘Under US Thumb’, this cartoon captures our
preponderant position of Athens
commonsensical understanding of what hegemony means.
vis-à-vis the other city-states of
What does this cartoon say about the nature of US hegemony?
Which part of the world is the cartoonist talking about? ancient Greece. Thus, the first
meaning of hegemony relates to the
Therefore, if we wanted to
relations, patterns and balances of
understand world politics, it is
military capability between states.
necessary that we understand the
It is this notion of hegemony as
distribution of power among the
military preponderance that is
countries of the world. For
especially germane to the current
instance, during the years of the
position and role of the US in world
Cold War (1945-91) power was
politics. Do you remember Ayesha,
divided between the two groups of
who lost her leg in an American
countries, and the US and the
missile attack? It is hard power
Soviet Union represented the two
hegemony that has broken
‘camps’ or centres of power in
Ayesha’s body, if not her spirit.
international politics during that
period. The collapse of the Soviet The bedrock of contemporary
Why use such
Union left the world with only a US power lies in the overwhelming
complicated words
single power, the United States superiority of its military power.
like hegemony? In
of America. Sometimes, the American military dominance
my town they call it
dadagiri. Isn’t that international system dominated by today is both absolute and
better? a sole superpower, or hyper-power, relative. In absolute terms, the US
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,nagiloB
legnA
©

--- PAGE 41 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 39
US C S
OMMAND TRUCTURE
USEUCOM
USNORTHCOM
USCENTCOM
USSOUTHCOM
USPACOM
Source: http://www.army.mil/institution/organization/areaof_responsibility.jpg
Most armed forces
today has military capabilities chasm that no other power can at in the world divide
their areas of
that can reach any point on the present conceivably span.
operation into
planet accurately, lethally and in
Undoubtedly, the US invasion various
real time, thereby crippling the ‘commands’
of Iraq reveals several American
adversary while its own forces are which are
vulnerabilities. The US has not
assigned to
sheltered to the maximum extent
been able to force the Iraqi people different
possible from the dangers of war.
into submitting to the occupation commanders. This
map depicts the
But even more awesome than forces of the US-led coalition. To
areas of
the absolute capabilities of the US fully understand the nature of
responsibility of the
is the fact that no other power American weakness, however, we five Commands of
today can remotely match them. need to have a historical the US armed
forces. It shows
The US today spends more on its perspective. Imperial powers
that the
military capability than the through history have used
commands of the
next 12 powers combined. military forces to accomplish only US military are not
Furthermore, a large chunk of the four tasks: to conquer, deter, limited to the area
Pentagon’s budget goes into punish and police. As the Iraq of the United
States; it extends
military research and development, invasion shows, the American
to include the
or, in other words, technology. capacity to conquer is formidable.
whole world. What
Thus, the military dominance of Similarly, the US capability to does this map tell
the US is not just based on higher deter and to punish is self-evident. us about the
military power of
military spending, but on a Where US military capability has
the US?
qualitative gap, a technological thus far been shown to have

--- PAGE 42 ---
40 Contemporary World Politics
possess both the ability and the
desire to establish certain norms
for order and must sustain the
global structure. The hegemon
usually does this to its own
advantage but often to its relative
detriment, as its competitors take
advantage of the openness of the
world economy without paying the
costs of maintaining its openness.
Hegemony in this second
sense is reflected in the role
played by the US in providing
global public goods. By public
goods we mean those goods that
can be consumed by one person
without reducing the amount of
the good available for someone
else. Fresh air and roads are
examples of public goods. In the
context of the world economy, the
best examples of a global public
good are sea-lanes of
The US today spends more on its military capability than the next 12 communication (SLOCs), the sea
powers combined. As you can see here, most of the other countries routes commonly used by
that are big military spenders are US friends and allies. Thus,
merchant ships. Free trade in an
balancing US power is not a feasible strategy today.
open world economy would not
be possible without open SLOCs.
serious weaknesses is in policing
an occupied territory.
H S
EGEMONY AS TRUCTURAL
P
OWER
The second notion of hegemony is
very different from the first. It
emerges from a particular
understanding of the world
economy. The basic idea is that
an open world economy requires
a hegemon or dominant power to
support its creation and
existence. The hegemon must
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©
Dollar World

--- PAGE 43 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 41
It is the naval power of the sectors of the world economy and
hegemon that underwrites the in all areas of technology. The US
law of the sea and ensures share of the world economy
freedom of navigation in remains an enormous 28 per cent.
international waters. Since the
The US also accounts for 15
decline of British naval power
per cent of world trade, if intra-
after the Second World War, the
European Union trade is included
multi-oceanic US Navy has
in world trade data. There is not
played this role.
a single sector of the world
Another example of a global economy in which an American
public good is the Internet. firm does not feature in the “top
Although it is seen today as three” list.
making the virtual world of the
It is important to remember
World Wide Web possible, we
that the economic preponderance
should not forget that the Internet
of the US is inseparable from its
is the direct outcome of a US
structural power, which is the
military research project that
power to shape the global How can this country
began in 1950. Even today, the economy in a particular way. After be so rich? I see so
Internet relies on a global network all, the Bretton Woods system, set many poor people
of satellites, most of which are up by the US after the Second here. Most of them
owned by the US government. World War, still constitutes the are non-White.
basic structure of the world
As we know, the US is present
economy. Thus, we can regard the
in all parts of the world, in all
The American economy is the largest in the world, but unlike in the sphere of military power,
the US faces credible competitors in the world economy. This becomes even clearer if we
consider the world economy in Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) terms as in the graphic on the
right. PPP is what a nation’s currency actually buys in goods and services.

--- PAGE 44 ---
42 Contemporary World Politics
World Bank, International win the consent of dominated
Monetary Fund (IMF) and World classes, by persuading the
Trade Organisation (WTO) as the dominated classes to view the
products of American hegemony. world in a manner favourable to the
ascendancy of the dominant class.
A classic example of the
Adapted to the field of world
structural power of the US is the
politics, this notion of hegemony
academic degree called the
suggests that a dominant power
Master’s in Business Administration
deploys not only military power but
(MBA). The idea that business is
also ideological resources to shape
a profession that depends upon
the behaviour of competing and
skills that can be taught in a
lesser powers. The behaviour of the
university is uniquely American.
weaker countries is influenced in
The first business school in the
ways that favour the interests of
world, the Wharton School at the
the most powerful country, in
University of Pennsylvania, was
particular its desire to remain pre-
established in 1881. The first MBA
eminent. Consent, in other words,
courses were initiated around
goes hand-in-hand with, and is
1900. The first MBA course
often more effective than, coercion.
outside the US was established
only in 1950. Today, there is no The predominance of the US in
country in the world in which the the world today is based not only
MBA is not a prestigious academic on its military power and economic
degree. This takes us back to our prowess, but also on its cultural
South African friend Jabu. presence. Whether we choose to
Structural hegemony explains recognise the fact or not, all ideas
why Jabu’s father is insisting that of the good life and personal
his son gives up painting and success, most of the dreams of
studies for the MBA instead. individuals and societies across
the globe, are dreams churned out
by practices prevailing in
H S P
EGEMONY AS OFT OWER
twentieth-century America.
America is the most seductive, and
It would however be a mistake to
in this sense the most powerful,
see US hegemony in purely military
culture on earth. This attribute is
and economic terms without
If I had opted for the called ‘soft power’: the ability to
considering the ideological or the
Science subjects
persuade rather than coerce. Over
I would have to sit for cultural dimension of US
time we get so used to hegemony
the entrance exams to hegemony. This third sense of
that we hardly notice it, any more
medical or hegemony is about the capacity to
than we notice the rivers, birds,
engineering college. ‘manufacture consent’. Here,
That would mean and trees around us.
hegemony implies class
competing with so
ascendancy in the social, political You couldn’t have forgotten
many others who wish
and particularly ideological Andrei and his ‘cool’ pair of blue
to become doctors or
engineers so as to go spheres. Hegemony arises when jeans. When his parents were
to the US. the dominant class or country can youngsters in the Soviet Union,

--- PAGE 45 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 43
blue jeans were the ultimate
symbol of ‘liberation’ for their
generation. Young men and
women often spent over a year’s
salary to buy blue jeans from
foreign tourists on the black
market. Somehow, for an entire
Soviet generation blue jeans came
to represent aspirations of the
‘good life’ that were not available
in their own country.
During the Cold War, the US
found it difficult to score victories
against the Soviet Union in the
realm of hard power. It was in the
area of structural power and soft
power that the US scored notable
victories. Although the Soviet
centrally-planned economy
provided an alternate model of
internal economic organisation,
the world economy throughout
the Cold War years remained a
world capitalist economy. But it
was in the area of soft power that
the US was ultimately triumphant.
As the example of blue jeans in
That is strange!
I never think of the
US when buying
jeans for myself.
How can I still be
a victim of US
hegemony?
All these images are from Jakarta in
Indonesia. Identify elements of US
hegemony in each of these
photographs. Can you identify similar
elements on your way back from
school to home?

--- PAGE 46 ---
44 Contemporary World Politics
the Soviet Union clearly shows, three branches of government
the US was able to engineer a places significant brakes upon the
generational divide in Soviet unrestrained and immoderate
society on the basis of a cultural exercise of America’s military
product.
power by the executive branch.
The second constraint on
C A
ONSTRAINTS ON MERICAN American power is also domestic
P in nature, and stems from the
OWER
open nature of American society.
Although the American mass
History tells us that empires
media may from time to time
decline because they decay from
impose or promote a particular
within. Similarly, the biggest
perspective on domestic public
constraints to American
opinion in the US, there is
hegemony lie within the heart of
nevertheless a deep scepticism
hegemony itself. We can identify
regarding the purposes and
three constraints on American
methods of government in
power. None of these constraints
American political culture. This
seemed to operate in the years
factor, in the long run, is a huge
following 9/11. However, it now
constraint on US military action
appears that all three of these
overseas.
constraints are slowly beginning
to operate again. However, it is the third
constraint on the US that is
The first constraint is the
perhaps the most important.
institutional architecture of the
There is only one organisation in
American state itself. A system of
the international system that
division of powers between the
These two photographs are from an exhibition on the Human Costs of the Iraq War by the American Friends
Service Committee organised at the National Convention of the Democratic Party in 2004. To what extent do
protests like this constrain the US government?

--- PAGE 47 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 45
could possibly moderate the interrelated. Consider the
exercise of American power today, following facts:
and that is the North Atlantic
The US absorbs about 65 per
Treaty Organisation (NATO). The
cent of India’s total exports in
US obviously has an enormous
the software sector.
interest in keeping the alliance of
35 per cent of the technical
democracies that follow the
staff of Boeing is estimated to
market economies alive and
be of Indian origin.
therefore it is possible that its
allies in the NATO will be able to 300,000 Indians work in
moderate the exercise of US Silicon Valley.
hegemony.
15 percent of all high-tech
start-ups are by Indian-
I ’ R Americans.
NDIA S ELATIONSHIP WITH
US Like all other countries, India
THE
too has to decide exactly what type
During the Cold War years, India of relationship it wants with the US
found itself on the opposite side in this phase of global hegemony.
of the divide from the US. India’s The choices are not exactly easy.
Within India, the debate seems to
closest friendship during those As soon as I say I am
be around three possible strategies.
years was with the Soviet Union. from India, they ask
After the collapse of the Soviet Those Indian analysts who see me if I am a
computer engineer.
Union, India suddenly found itself international politics largely in
That feels nice.
friendless in an increasingly hostile terms of military power are
international environment. However, fearful of the growing
these were also the years when closeness between India and
India decided to liberalise its the US. They would prefer that
economy and integrate it with the India maintains its aloofness
global economy. This policy and from Washington and focuses
India’s impressive economic upon increasing its own
growth rates in recent years have comprehensive national power.
made the country an attractive
Other analysts see the growing
economic partner for a number of Collect news
convergence of interests
countries including the US. clippings and
between the US and India as a
articles about
It is important that we do not historic opportunity for India.
the recent
lose sight of the fact that two new They advocate a strategy that
Indo-US civil
factors have emerged in Indo-US would allow India to take
nuclear deal.
relations in recent years. These advantage of US hegemony
Summarise the
factors relate to the technological and the mutual convergences
position of the
dimension and the role of the to establish the best possible
supporters and
Indian-American diaspora. options for itself. Opposing the
opponents of
Indeed, these two factors are US, they argue, is a futile
the deal.

--- PAGE 48 ---
46 Contemporary World Politics
strategy that will only hurt
LOK SABHA DEBATES INDO-US
India in the long run.
RELATIONS
A third group of analysts
would advocate that India
Here are three extracts from the speeches by the Prime
should take the lead in
Minister and two opposition leaders during the debate
in Lok Sabha on the Indo-US agreement on nuclear establishing a coalition of
energy. Are these three positions in some way linked countries from the developing
to the three strategies mentioned in the chapter? world. Over time, this coalition
would become more powerful
Dr Manmohan Singh, Congress
and may succeed in weaning
“Sir, I would respectfully urge this august House to
the hegemon away from its
recognise the changed mood of the world towards
dominating ways.
India. This is not to say that power politics is a thing of
the past; that there will never be any attempt to twist India-US relations are perhaps
our arms. We will protect ourselves to ensure against
too complex to be managed by a
the risks that are there. But it would be wrong for us
single strategy. India needs to
not to take advantage of the opportunities that are
develop an appropriate mix of
now on the horizon. I sincerely believe that it is in the
foreign policy strategies to deal
interest of our country to have good relations with all
the major powers. I make no apology that we seek with the US.
good relations with the United States. The United States
is a pre-eminent power.”
H H
OW CAN EGEMONY BE
Shri Basu Deb Acharia, CPI(M) O ?
VERCOME
“Since Independence, we have been pursuing
independent foreign policy because of our national
How long will hegemony last? How
interest. What have we seen in case of Iraq and in
do we get beyond hegemony?
case of Iran? After the July statement, and when there
was voting in International Atomic Energy Agency, we These become, for obvious
found that we sided with the United States of America. reasons, some of the burning
We supported the resolution moved by US and P 5. questions of our time. History
That was not expected before that. When we were provides us with some fascinating
trying to bring gas from Iran via Pakistan which we
clues to answer these questions.
need, we supported America’s stand in regard to Iran.
But what about the present and
There we find that the independent foreign policy has
the future? In international
been affected.”
politics, very few factors formally
Maj. Gen. (Retd.) B. C. Khanduri, BJP curtail the exercise of military
“We have also to take note of the fact that today US power by any country. There is no
is — whether we like it or not — the only super power world government like the
in this unipolar world. But at the same time, we must government of a country. As we
also remember that India is also emerging as a world
shall see in Chapter 6,
power, and a super power. Therefore, we feel that
international organisation is not
we should have good relations with the USA in the
world government. Thus,
international scenario, but it should not be at the cost
international politics is ‘politics
of our security.”
without government’. There are
some rules and norms called the
laws of war that restrict, but do

--- PAGE 49 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 47
not prohibit, war. But few states
will entrust their security to
international law alone. Does this
mean that there is no escape from
war and hegemony?
In the short term, we must
recognise that no single power is
anywhere near balancing the US
militarily. A military coalition
against the US is even less likely
given the differences that exist
among big countries like China,
India, and Russia that have the
potential to challenge US
hegemony.
How long do you think the US will stay on the super-power
Some people argue that it is stage? If you were to draw this, who would you show as waiting
in the wings?
strategically more prudent to take
advantage of the opportunities
seem to be viable for the big,
that hegemony creates. For
second-rank powers for very long.
instance, raising economic growth
While it may be an attractive,
rates requires increased trade,
viable policy for small states, it is
technology transfers, and
hard to imagine mega-states like
investment, which are best
China, India, and Russia or huge
acquired by working with rather
agglomerations such as the EU
than against the hegemon. Thus,
being able to hide for any
it is suggested that instead of
substantial length of time.
engaging in activities opposed to
the hegemonic power, it may be Some people believe that
advisable to extract benefits by resistance to American hegemony
operating within the hegemonic may not come from other states,
system. This is called the which as we have seen are
‘bandwagon’ strategy. powerless to confront the US
today, but rather from non-state
Another strategy open to
actors. These challenges to
states is to ‘hide’. This implies
American hegemony will emerge
staying as far removed from the
in the economic and cultural
dominant power as possible.
realms, and will come from a
There are many examples of this
combination of non-governmental
behaviour. China, Russia, the
organisations (NGOs), social
European Union—all of them, in
movements, and public opinion;
different ways, are seeking to stay
it may arise from sections of the
below the radar, as it were, and
media and intellectuals, artists,
not overly and unduly antagonise
and writers. These various actors
the US. However, this would not
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,wodraC
maC
©

--- PAGE 50 ---
48 Contemporary World Politics
may well form links across
national boundaries, including
with Americans, to criticise and
resist US policies.
You might have heard the
saying that we now live in a
‘global village’. In this global
village, we are all neighbours of
the village headman. If the
STEPS
behaviour of the headman
(cid:139) Assign students to major geo-political regions of becomes intolerable, we will not
the world from the vantage point of the US have the option of leaving the
(Central America, South America, Africa, global village, because this is the
Europe, former USSR, West Asia, South Asia, East only world we know and the only
Asia and Australia). Alternatively, you could village we have. Resistance will
assign students to major conflict zones of the then be the only option available.
post-Cold War period in which the US was
involved. (e.g., Afghanistan, Iraq, Israel-Palestine
or Kosovo or any active conflict at the time of
teaching).
(cid:139) Group the students in equal strength according
to the number of areas identified. Each group is
to prepare a fact-file on the role of the US in
these regions or conflicts. The fact-file should
focus on the US interest in the region, its activities
and the public opinion about the US in the
region. Students can also collect and present
related pictures/cartoons from all available
sources.
(cid:139) Each group is to present their fact-file before
the class.
Ideas for the Teacher
(cid:13) Using the fact-file as the background information, the teacher
All this sounds like a
has to refocus on the intervention made by the US and whether
lot of jealousy. What
these interventions have been in line with the principles
advocated by the UN. is our problem with US
hegemony? Just that
(cid:13) Invite the students to reflect on the future of the region or
we were not born
conflict twenty years from now. How long will the US continue
there? Or something
to be hegemonic? Which other powers may be in a position
to challenge US hegemony in that region? else?

--- PAGE 51 ---
US Hegemony in World Politics 49
WHAT DOES HISTORY TEACH US ABOUT HEGEMONY?
Given the logic of balance of power, hegemony is a rather unusual condition in international affairs. This is for
a very simple reason: in the absence of world government, every state must ensure its own security and, in
extreme circumstances, its own survival. Thus, states are acutely aware of power distribution in the international
political system, and would not normally allow a single state to become so powerful as to pose a mortal threat
to other states.
The balance of power logic of international politics, as outlined above, is amply supported by history. By
convention, we regard 1648 as the year in which the sovereign territorial state emerged as the principal
actor in world politics. In the over three and a half centuries since then, there have been only two previous
occasions when a single state succeeded in gaining preponderance in the system to a similar degree as the
US predominates the system today. France from 1660 to 1713 in the context of European continental politics
in the first instance of hegemony, Britain with its global maritime empire from 1860 to 1910 is the second.
History also tells us that although at its height hegemony seems formidable, it does not last forever. To the
contrary, balance of power politics over time reduces the relative power of the hegemon. In 1660, France
under Louis XIV was unchallenged; by 1713, England, Habsburg Austria and Russia were contesting French
power. In 1860, the high noon of the Victorian period, Pax Britannica looked secure forever. By 1910, it was
clear that Germany, Japan and the US had emerged as contenders to British power. Thus, twenty years from
now, another great power, or may be a coalition of great powers could well emerge just as US capabilities
are declining in relative terms.
Based on an article by Christopher Layne, “The Unipolar Illusion: Why New Great Powers Will Rise”
E
1. Which among the following statements about hegemony is
x
incorrect?
a. The word implies the leadership or predominance of one State.
b. It was used to denote the predominance of Athens in the e
ancient Greece.
c. The country having hegemonic position will possess
r
unchallenged military power.
d. Hegemonic position is fixed. Once a hegemon, always a
hegemon.
c
2. Which among the following statements is wrong about the
contemporary world order?
i
a. There is an absence of world government, which could regulate
the State’s behaviour.
s
b. The US is the predominant player in world affairs.
c. States are using force against one another.
e
d. States, which violate international law, are severely punished
by the UN.
s

--- PAGE 52 ---
50 Contemporary World Politics
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E
3. Which among the following statements is wrong with regard to
‘Operation Iraqi Freedom’?
a. More than forty countries joined in the US-led coalition of the
willing to invade Iraq.
b. The reason given for invading Iraq was to prevent it from
developing weapons of mass destruction.
c. The action was taken with the prior approval of the UN.
d. The US-led coalition did not face major resistance from Iraqi
forces
4. Give an example each of the three kinds of hegemony that are
dealt with in the chapter. Do not cite examples that are in the
chapter.
5. Mention three ways in which US dominance since the Cold War is
different from its position as a superpower during the Cold War.
6. Match the following:
i. Operation Infinite Reach
ii. Operation Enduring Freedom
iii. Operation Desert Storm
iv. Operation Iraqi Freedom
a. War against Al-Qaeda and Taliban
b. Coalition of the willing
c. Missile attack in Sudan
d. First Gulf War
7. What are the constraints on American hegemony today? Which
one of these do you expect to get more important in the future?
8. Read the three extracts in the chapter from the Lok Sabha debate
on the Indo-US deal. Develop any one of these into a full speech
defending a certain position on Indo-US relations.
9. “If big and resourceful states cannot resist the US hegemony, it is
unrealistic to expect much smaller and weaker non-state actors to
offer any resistance.” Examine this proposition and give your opinion.

--- PAGE 53 ---
Chapter 4
Alternative Centres
of Power
O
VERVIEW
After the end of the bipolar
structure of world politics in the
early 1990s, it became clear that
alternative centres of political and
economic power could limit
America’s dominance. Thus, in
Europe, the European Union (EU)
and, in Asia, the Association of
South East Asian Nations (ASEAN),
have emerged as forces to reckon
with. While evolving regional
solutions to their historical
enmities and weaknesses, both the
EU and the ASEAN have developed
alternative institutions and
conventions that build a more
peaceful and cooperative regional
order and have transformed the
countries in the region into
prosperous economies. The
economic rise of China has made
The two images here represent two phases of the history of
a dramatic impact on world
China. The red poster – “The Socialist Road is the Broadest of
politics. In this chapter, we take a
All” – represents the ideology that guided China during its
look at some of these emerging early phase after the Revolution. The photograph below is
alternative centres of power and that of the city of Shanghai, the symbol of China’s new
economic power.
assess their possible role in the
future.

--- PAGE 54 ---
52 Contemporary World Politics
E U (OEEC) was established in 1948
UROPEAN NION
to channel aid to the west
As the Second World War came to European states. It became a
an end, many of Europe’s leaders forum where the western
grappled with the ‘Question of European states began to
Europe’. Should Europe be cooperate on trade and
allowed to revert to its old rivalries economic issues. The Council of
or be reconstructed on principles Europe, established in 1949,
and institutions that would was another step forward in
contribute to a positive conception political cooperation. The
of international relations? The process of economic integration
Second World War shattered many of European capitalist countries
of the assumptions and structures proceeded step by step (see
on which the European states had Timeline of European Integration)
based their relations. In 1945, the leading to the formation of the
European states confronted the European Economic Community
ruin of their economies and the in 1957. This process acquired
destruction of the assumptions a political dimension with the
and structures on which Europe creation of the European
had been founded. Parliament. The collapse of the
Soviet bloc put Europe on a fast
European integration after
track and resulted in the
1945 was aided by the Cold War.
establishment of the European
America extended massive
Union in 1992. The foundation
financial help for reviving
was thus laid for a common
Europe’s economy under what
foreign and security policy,
was called the ‘Marshall Plan’.
cooperation on justice and
The US also created a new
home affairs, and the creation
collective security structure
of a single currency.
under NATO. Under the Marshall
Plan, the Organisation for The European Union has
European Economic Cooperation evolved over time from an
economic union to an
increasingly political one. The EU
has started to act more as a
nation state. While the attempts
to have a Constitution for the EU
have failed, it has its own flag,
anthem, founding date, and
currency. It also has some form
The European Union Flag of a common foreign and security
policy in its dealings with other
The circle of gold stars stands for solidarity and harmony between
the peoples of Europe. It has twelve stars, as the number twelve is nations. The European Union
traditionally the symbol of perfection, completeness and unity. has tried to expand areas of
Source: http://europa.eu/abc/symbols/emblem/index_en.htm cooperation while acquiring new

--- PAGE 55 ---
Alternative Centres of Power 53
E U M
UROPEAN NION AP
Ireland United
Kingdom
members, especially from the more than $12 trillion in 2005,
erstwhile Soviet bloc. The process slightly larger than that of the
has not proved easy, for people United States. Its currency, the
in many countries are not very euro, can pose a threat to the
enthusiastic in giving the EU dominance of the US dollar. Its
powers that were exercised by the share of world trade is three times
Oh, now I know what a
government of their country. larger than that of the United Schengen visa means!
There are also reservations about States allowing it to be more Under the Schengen
including some new countries assertive in trade disputes with agreement, you have to
within the EU. get a visa from just one
the US and China. Its economic
of the EU countries and
The EU has economic, political power gives it influence over its
that allows you entry in
and diplomatic, and military closest neighbours as well as in
most of the other
influence. The EU is the world’s Asia and Africa. It also functions as European Union
biggest economy with a GDP of an important bloc in international countries.
lagutroP
Older Members
New Members
Sweden Finland
Estonia
Denmark Latvia
Lithuania
Netherlands
Poland
Germany
Belgium
Czech
Republic Slovakia
Luxembourg
Austria
France Hungary
Slovenia
Italy
Spain
Malta Greece
Cyprus

--- PAGE 56 ---
54 Contemporary World Politics
France, hold permanent seats on
TIMELINE OF EUROPEAN
the UN Security Council. The EU
INTEGRATION
includes several non-permanent
members of the UNSC. This has
1951 April: Six west European countries, France, West
enabled the EU to influence some
Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg
sign the Treaty of Paris establishing the European Coal and US policies such as the current US
Steel Community (ECSC). position on Iran’s nuclear
programme. Its use of diplomacy,
1957 March 25: These six countries sign the Treaties of Rome
economic investments, and
establishing the European Economic Community (EEC) and
negotiations rather than coercion
the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom).
and military force has been
1973 January: Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom effective as in the case of its
join the European Community (EC). dialogue with China on human
rights and environmental
1979 June: First direct elections to the European Parliament
degradation.
1981 January: Greece joins the EC.
Militarily, the EU’s combined
armed forces are the second
1985 June: The Schengen Agreement abolishes border
largest in the world. Its total
controls among the EC members.
spending on defence is second
1986 January: Spain and Portugal join the EC. after the US. Two EU member
states, Britain and France, also
1990 October: Unification of Germany.
have nuclear arsenals of
approximately 550 nuclear
1992 February 7: The Treaty of Maastricht was signed
warheads. It is also the world’s
establishing the European Union (EU).
second most important source of
1993 January: The single market was created. space and communications
technology.
1995 January: Austria, Finland and Sweden join the EU.
As a supranational organi-
2002 January: Euro, the new currency, was introduced in sation, the EU is able to intervene
the 12 EU members. in economic, political and social
areas. But in many areas its
2004 May: Ten new members, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
member states have their own
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
foreign relations and defence
and Slovenia join the EU.
policies that are often at odds
2007 January: Bulgaria and Romania join the EU. with each other. Thus, Britain’s
Slovenia adopts the Euro. Prime Minister Tony Blair was
America’s partner in the Iraq
invasion, and many of the EU’s
economic organisations such as
newer members made up the US-
the World Trade Organisation
led ‘coalition of the willing’
(WTO).
whereas Germany and France
The EU also has political and opposed American policy. There
diplomatic influence. Two is also a deep-seated ‘Euro-
members of the EU, Britain and skepticism’ in some parts

--- PAGE 57 ---
Alternative Centres of Power 55
The cartoon appeared in 2003 when the European Union’s initiative to draft a
common Constitution failed. Why does the cartoonist use the image of the ship
Titanic to represent EU?
of Europe about the EU’s region of Asia? Before and during
integrationist agenda. Thus, for the Second World War, this region
example, Britain’s former prime of Asia suffered the economic and
minister, Margaret Thatcher, political consequences of
kept the UK out of the European repeated colonialisms, both
Market. Denmark and Sweden European and Japanese. At the
have resisted the Maastricht end of the war, it confronted
Treaty and the adoption of the problems of nation-building, the
euro, the common European ravages of poverty and economic
currency. This limits the ability backwardness and the pressure
of the EU to act in matters of to align with one great power or
another during the Cold War. This
foreign relations and defence.
was a recipe for conflict, which
the countries of Southeast Asia
A S
SSOCIATION OF OUTH could ill afford. Efforts at Asian
E A N and Third World unity, such as
AST SIAN ATIONS
the Bandung Conference and the
Imagine what would
(ASEAN)
Non-Aligned Movement, were happen if they have
ineffective in establishing the a European Union
Take a look at the political map of
conventions for informal football team!
the world. Which countries would
cooperation and interaction.
you say fall in the southeastern
Hence, the Southeast Asian
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©

--- PAGE 58 ---
56 Contemporary World Politics
cultural development’. A secondary
M AP OF E AST AND S OUTH E AST A SIA objective was to promote regional
peace and stability based on the
rule of law and the principles of the
United Nations Charter. Over the
years, Brunei Darussalam,
Vietnam, Lao PDR, Myanmar
(Burma) and Cambodia joined
ASEAN taking its strength to ten.
Unlike the EU there is little
desire in ASEAN for supranational
structures and institutions. ASEAN
countries have celebrated what has
become known as the ‘ASEAN
Way’, a form of interaction that is
informal, non-confrontationist and
cooperative. The respect for national
sovereignty is critical to the
functioning of ASEAN.
With some of the fastest
growing economies in the world,
ASEAN broadened its objectives
beyond the economic and social
spheres. In 2003, ASEAN moved
along the path of the EU by
agreeing to establish an ASEAN
Community comprising three
pillars, namely, the ASEAN
Security Community, the ASEAN
“Courtesy of the University of Texas Libraries, The University of Texas
Economic Community and the
at Austin”
ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community.
nations sought an alternative by
establishing the Association for
South East Asian Nations
(ASEAN).
ASEAN was established in
Who are
1967 by five countries of this
the
region — Indonesia, Malaysia, the
members
Philippines, Singapore and The ASEAN Flag
of the
Thailand — by signing the
ASEAN In the ASEAN logo, the ten stalks of
Bangkok Declaration. The paddy (rice) represent the ten
Regional
objectives of ASEAN were primarily Southeast Asian countries bound
Forum
together in friendship and solidarity.
to accelerate economic growth and
(ARF)? The circle symbolises the unity of ASEAN.
through that ‘social progress and
Source : www.aseansec.org

--- PAGE 59 ---
Alternative Centres of Power 57
The ASEAN security organisation. Its Vision 2020 has
community was based on the defined an outward-looking role
conviction that outstanding for ASEAN in the international
territorial disputes should not community. This builds on the
escalate into armed confrontation. existing ASEAN policy to
By 2003, ASEAN had several encourage negotiation over
agreements in place by which conflicts in the region. Thus, Isn’t India a part of
Southeast Asia? The
member states promised to uphold ASEAN has mediated the end of
north-eastern states
peace, neutrality, cooperation, the Cambodian conflict, the East
are so close to the
non-interference, and respect for Timor crisis, and meets annually
ASEAN countries.
national differences and sovereign to discuss East Asian cooperation.
rights. The ASEAN Regional
The current economic strength
Forum (ARF), which was
of ASEAN, especially its economic
established in 1994, is the
relevance as a trading and
organisation that carries out
investment partner to the growing
coordination of security and
Asian economies such as India
foreign policy.
and China, makes this an
ASEAN was and still remains attractive proposition. During the
principally an economic Cold War years Indian foreign
association. While the ASEAN policy did not pay adequate
region as a whole is a much attention to ASEAN. But in recent
smaller economy compared to the years, India has tried to make
US, the EU, and Japan, its amends. It signed FTAs with two
economy is growing much faster ASEAN members, Singapore and
than all these. This accounts for
the growth in its influence both in
the region and beyond. The
objectives of the ASEAN Economic
Community are to create a
common market and production
base within ASEAN states and to
aid social and economic
development in the region. The
Economic Community would also
like to improve the existing ASEAN
Dispute Settlement Mechanism to
resolve economic disputes. ASEAN
has focused on creating a Free
Trade Area (FTA) for investment,
labour, and services. The US and
China have already moved fast to
negotiate FTAs with ASEAN.
Keshav, The Hindu
ASEAN is rapidly growing into India’s ‘Look East’ Policy since 1991 has led to greater economic
interaction with the East Asian nations (ASEAN, China, Japan and
a very important regional
South Korea).

--- PAGE 60 ---
58 Contemporary World Politics
Thailand. It is trying to sign an affairs. The strength of its
FTA with ASEAN itself. ASEAN’s economy, together with other
strength, however, lies in its factors such as population, land
policies of interaction and mass, resources, regional location
consultation with member states, and political influence, adds to its
with dialogue partners, and with power in significant ways.
other non-regional organisations.
After the inception of the
It is the only regional association
People’s Republic of China in 1949,
in Asia that provides a political
following the communist revolution
forum where Asian countries and
under the leadership of Mao, its
the major powers can discuss
economy was based on the Soviet
political and security concerns.
model. The economically backward
communist China chose to sever
Why did ASEAN its links with the capitalist world.
succeed where Locate the It had little choice but to fall back
SAARC did not? Is this
ASEAN on its own resources and, for a
because they do not
members on brief period, on Soviet aid and
have one dominant
the map. Find advice. The model was to create a
country in that
region? the location of state-owned heavy industries
the ASEAN sector from the capital
Secretariat. accumulated from agriculture. As
it was short of foreign exchange
that it needed in order to buy
T R C
HE ISE OF THE HINESE technology and goods on the
world market, China decided to
E
CONOMY
substitute imports by domestic
goods.
Let us now turn to the third major
alternative centre of power and This model allowed China to
our immediate neighbour, China. use its resources to establish the
The cartoon on the following page foundations of an industrial
sums up the current mood all over economy on a scale that did not
the world about the rise of China exist before. Employment and
as an economic power. China’s social welfare was assured to all
economic success since 1978 has citizens, and China moved ahead
been linked to its rise as a great of most developing countries in
power. China has been the fastest educating its citizens and ensuring
growing economy since the better health for them. The
reforms first began there. It is economy also grew at a respectable
projected to overtake the US as the rate of 5-6 per cent. But an annual
world’s largest economy by 2040. growth of 2-3 per cent in population
Its economic integration into the meant that economic growth was
region makes it the driver of East insufficient to meet the needs of a
Asian growth, thereby giving it growing population. Agricultural
enormous influence in regional production was not sufficient to

--- PAGE 61 ---
Alternative Centres of Power 59
generate a surplus for industry. In
Chapter 2, we discussed the crisis
of the state controlled economy in
the USSR. A similar crisis was to
face China too: its industrial
production was not growing fast
enough, international trade was
minimal and per capita income was
very low.
The Chinese leadership took
major policy decisions in the
1970s. China ended its political
and economic isolation with the
establishment of relations with
the United States in 1972.
Premier Zhou Enlai proposed the
‘four modernisations’(agriculture,
industry, science and technology
and military) in 1973. By 1978,
the then leader Deng Xiaoping
announced the ‘open door’ policy
and economic reforms in China. The Great Wall and Dragon are two symbols most commonly
associated with China. This cartoon uses both these to depict
The policy was to generate higher
China’s economic rise. Who do you think is the little man in this
productivity by investments of
cartoon? Can he stop the dragon?
capital and technology from
abroad.
Privatisation of agriculture led to
China followed its own path in
a remarkable rise in agricultural
introducing a market economy. The
production and rural incomes.
Chinese did not go for ‘shock
High personal savings in the rural
therapy’ but opened their economy
economy lead to an exponential
step by step. The privatisation of
growth in rural industry. The
agriculture in 1982 was followed
Chinese economy, including both
by the privatisation of industry in
industry and agriculture, grew at
1998. Trade barriers were
a faster rate. The new trading laws
eliminated only in Special
and the creation of Special
Economic Zones (SEZs) where
Economic Zones led to a
foreign investors could set up
phenomenal rise in foreign trade.
enterprises. In China, the state
China has become the most
played and continues to play a
important destination for foreign
central role in setting up a market
direct investment (FDI) anywhere
economy. A total of 6 SEZs in
in the world. It has large foreign
China and more
The new economic policies exchange reserves that now allow
than 200 approved
helped the Chinese economy it to make big investment in other
SEZs in India! Is this
to break from stagnation. countries. China’s accession to the good for India?
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,leiM
yoC
gneD
©

--- PAGE 62 ---
60 Contemporary World Politics
WTO in 2001 has been a further
step in its opening to the outside
world. The country plans to deepen
its integration into the world
economy and shape the future
world economic order.
While the Chinese economy has
improved dramatically, not
everyone in China has received the
benefits of the reforms.
Unemployment has risen in China
with nearly 100 million people
looking for jobs. Female
employment and conditions of
work are as bad as in Europe of
the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. Environmental degradation
and corruption have increased
besides a rise in economic
inequality between rural and
urban residents and coastal and
inland provinces.
China then and now However, regionally and
globally, China has become an
economic power to reckon with.
The integration of China’s economy
and the inter-dependencies that
this has created has enabled China
to have considerable influence
with its trade partners. Hence, its
outstanding issues with Japan, the
US, ASEAN, and Russia have been
tempered by economic
considerations. It hopes to resolve
its differences with Taiwan, which
it regards as a renegade province,
by integrating it closely into its
economy. Fears of China’s rise
Chinese bicycle have also been mitigated by its
contributions to the stability of the
Like the opening images for this chapter, the first cartoon
ASEAN economies after the 1997
comments on the change in China’s orientation. The second
cartoon uses the symbol of the bicycle — China is the largest user financial crisis. Its more outward
of bicycles in the world — to comment on a duality in today’s looking investment and aid
China. What is this duality? Can we call this a contradiction?
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,enaL
ekiM
©
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©

--- PAGE 63 ---
Alternative Centres of Power 61
policies in Latin America and military conflict over a border
Africa are increasingly projecting dispute between the two countries
it as a global player on the side of marred that hope. Soon after
developing economies. independence, both states were
involved in differences arising from
I – C R the Chinese takeover of Tibet in
NDIA HINA ELATIONS
1950 and the final settlement of
India and China were great the Sino-Indian border. China and
powers in Asia before the advent India were involved in a border
of Western imperialism. China conflict in 1962 over competing
had considerable influence and territorial claims principally in
control on the periphery of its Arunachal Pradesh and in the
borders based on its unique Aksai Chin region of Ladakh.
tributary system. At different
The conflict of 1962, in which
times in China’s long history of
India suffered military reverses,
dynastic rule, Mongolia, Korea,
had long-term implications for
parts of Indo-China, and Tibet
India–China relations. Diplomatic
accepted China’s authority.
relations between the two
Various kingdoms and empires
countries were downgraded until
in India also extended their
1976. Thereafter, relations
influence beyond their borders.
between the two countries began
In both cases this influence was
to improve slowly. After the change
political, economic and cultural.
in China’s political leadership
However, the regions where India
from the mid to late 1970s,
and China exercised influence
China’s policy became more
rarely ever overlapped. Thus,
pragmatic and less ideological. So
there was limited political and
it was prepared to put off the
cultural interaction between the
settlement of contentious issues
two. The result was that neither
while improving relations with
country was very familiar with India. A series of talks to resolve
the other. In the twentieth the border issue were also initiated
century, when both nations in 1981.
confronted each other, they had
Since the end of the Cold
some difficulty evolving a foreign
War, there have been significant
policy to deal with each other.
changes in India–
After India regained its China relations.
independence from Britain, and Their relations now The Chinese
China expelled the foreign powers, have a strategic as President Hu Jintao
there was hope that both would well as an economic was in India during
come together to shape the future dimension. Both view November 2006.
of the developing world and of themselves as rising Find out about the
Asia particularly. For a brief while, powers in global agreements signed
the slogan of ‘Hindi-Chini bhai- politics, and both during his visit.
bhai’ was popular. However, would like to play a

--- PAGE 64 ---
62 Contemporary World Politics
positive perspective on relations
with China has emerged. Bilateral
trade between India and China has
increased from $338 million in
1992 to more than $18 billion in
STEPS 2006. More recently, both
countries have agreed to cooperate
(cid:139) Divide the classroom into three groups.
with each other in areas that could
(cid:139) Assign each group one organisation to work on otherwise create conflict between
a fact file on the EU, ASEAN and SAARC. the two, such as bidding for energy
(cid:139) Students have to prepare a fact file that deals abroad. At the global level,
India and China have adopted
contains information on the objectives,
similar policies in international
functions and recent activities of these
economic institutions like the
organisations. Pictures of the conferences /
World Trade Organisation.
summit meetings can be collected.
(cid:139) Each group is to present its fact file before the India’s nuclear tests in 1998,
class. sometimes justified on the
grounds of a threat from China,
Ideas for the Teacher
did not stop greater interaction.
(cid:13) The teacher is to focus on the functions of these organisations.
It is true that China was seen as
(cid:13) Draw the attention of students to the achievements of regional contributing to the build up of
organisations.
Pakistan’s nuclear programme.
(cid:13) Link the role of regional economic organisations to the over China’s military relations with
all development of the member countries.
Bangladesh and Myanmar were
(cid:13) Sensitise students to the growing importance of regional
viewed as hostile to Indian
economic organisations as an alternative approach to the
interests in South Asia. However,
peace and security of the world.
none of these issues is likely to
lead to conflict between the two.
One sign of this is that the talks to
major role in the Asian economy
resolve the boundary question have
and politics.
continued without interruption and
Rajiv Gandhi’s visit to China in military-to-military cooperation is
December 1988 provided the increasing. Indian and Chinese
impetus for an improvement in leaders and officials visit Beijing
India–China relations. Since then and New Delhi with greater
both governments have taken frequency, and both sides are
measures to contain conflict and now becoming more familiar
maintain ‘peace and tranquility’ on with each other. Increasing
the border. They have also signed transportation and communication
agreements on cultural exchanges links, common economic interests
Some people say and cooperation in science and and global concerns should help
Chinese products are technology, and opened four establish a more positive and
going to flood our border posts for trade. With India– sound relationship between the
market? But where China trade growing at 30 per cent two most populous countries of
are they?
per year since 1999, a more the world.

--- PAGE 65 ---
Alternative Centres of Power 63
JAPAN
You might have heard about famous Japanese brands such as Sony,
Panasonic, Canon, Suzuki, Honda, Toyota, Mazda. They have a
reputation for making high-technology products. Japan has very few
natural resources and imports most of the its raw materials. Even then it
progressed rapidly after the end of the Second World War. It is the
second largest economy in the world. It is the only Asian member of the
G-8. It is the tenth most populous nation in the world.
Japan is the only nation that suffered the destruction caused by nuclear
bombs. It is the second largest contributor to the regular budget of the
UN, contributing almost 20 per cent of the total. Japan has a security
alliance with the US since 1951. As per Article 9 of the Japanese
Constitution, “the Japanese people forever renounce war as a
sovereign right of the nation and the threat or use of force as means of
settling international disputes.” Although Japan’s military expenditure is
only one per cent of its GDP, it is the fourth largest in the world. ASIMO, The World’s Most
Advanced Humanoid Robot
Keeping all this in mind, do you think Japan can effectively function as
Credit:
an alternative centre of power?
http://world.honda.com/news/
Also find out about the agreements signed during the visit of the Indian 2005/c051213_13.html
Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to Japan during December 2006.
E
1. Arrange the following in chronological order.
x
a. China’s accession to WTO b. Establishment of the EEC
c. Establishment of the EU d. Birth of ARF
2. The ‘ASEAN Way’ e
a. Reflects the life style of ASEAN members
b. A form of interaction among ASEAN members that is informal r
and cooperative
c. The defence policy followed by the ASEAN members
c
d. The road that connects all the ASEAN members
3. Who among the following adopted an ‘open door’ policy?
a. China b. EU c. Japan d. USA i
4. Fill in the blanks:
s
a. The border conflict between China and India in 1962 was
principally over ______________ and __________________ region.
e
b. ARF was established in the year ______________________ .
c. China entered into bilateral relations with __________ (a major
country) in 1972. s

--- PAGE 66 ---
64 Contemporary World Politics
d. ____________ Plan influenced the establishment of the
Organisation for European Economic Cooperation in 1948.
e. ___________ is the organisation of ASEAN that deals with security.
5. What are the objectives of establishing regional organisations?
6. How does geographical proximity influence the formation of
regional organisations?
7. What are the components of the ASEAN Vision 2020?
8. Name the pillars and the objectives of the ASEAN Community.
9. In what ways does the present Chinese economy differs from its
command economy?
10. How did the European countries resolve their post-Second World
War problem? Briefly outline the attempts that led to the formation
of the European Union.
11. What makes the European Union a highly influential regional
organisation?
12. The emerging economies of China and India have great potential
to challenge the unipolar world. Do you agree with the statement?
Substantiate your arguments.
13. The Peace and prosperity of countries lay in the establishment and
strengthening of regional economic organisations. Justify this
statement.
14. Identify the contentious issues between China and India. How could
these be resolved for greater cooperation? Give your suggestions.
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E

--- PAGE 67 ---
Chapter 5
Contemporary South Asia
O
VERVIEW
Let us shift our gaze from the larger
global developments in the post-Cold
War era to developments in our own
region, South Asia. When India and
Pakistan joined the club of nuclear
powers, this region suddenly
became the focus of global attention.
The focus was, of course, on the
various kinds of conflict in this
region: there are pending border and
water sharing disputes between the
states of the region. Besides, there
are conflicts arising out of
insurgency, ethnic strife and
resource sharing. This makes the
region very turbulent. At the same
time, many people in South Asia
recognise the fact that this region
can develop and prosper if the states
of the region cooperate with each
other. In this chapter, we try to
understand the nature of conflict
and cooperation among different
countries of the region. Since much
of this is rooted in or conditioned by
the domestic politics of these
countries, we first introduce the
region and the domestic politics of Source: Subhas Rai’s adaptation of ‘Liberty Leading the
some of the big countries in the People’, painted by Eugene Delacroix in 1830. Courtesy of
Himal Southasian, (January 2007) The Southasia Trust, Nepal
region.

--- PAGE 68 ---
66 Contemporary World Politics
W S A ? The various countries in South
HAT IS OUTH SIA
Asia do not have the same kind of
We are all familiar with the political systems. Despite many
gripping tension during an India- problems and limitations, Sri
Identify some Pakistan cricket match. We have Lanka and India have successfully
features also seen the goodwill and operated a democratic system
common to all hospitality shown to visiting since their independence from the
the South Asian Indian and Pakistani fans by their British. You will study more about
countries but hosts when they come to watch a the evolution of democracy in
different from cricket match. This is symbolic of India in the textbook that deals
countries in the larger pattern of South Asian with politics in India since
West Asia or affairs. Ours is a region where independence. It is, of course,
Southeast Asia. rivalry and goodwill, hope and possible to point out many
despair, mutual suspicion and limitations of India’s democracy;
trust coexist. but we have to remember the fact
that India has remained a
Let us begin by asking an
democracy throughout its
elementary question: what is South
existence as an independent
Asia? The expression ‘South Asia’
country. The same is true of Sri
usually includes the following
Lanka.
countries: Bangladesh, Bhutan,
India, the Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan Pakistan and Bangladesh have
and Sri Lanka. The mighty experienced both civilian and
Himalayas in the north and the vast military rulers, with Bangladesh
Indian Ocean, the Arabian Sea and remaining a democracy in the
the Bay of Bengal in the south, west post-Cold War period. Pakistan
and east respectively provide a began the post-Cold War period
natural insularity to the region, with successive democratic
which is largely responsible for the governments under Benazir
linguistic, social and cultural Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif
distinctiveness of the sub- respectively. But it suffered a
continent. The boundaries of the military coup in 1999 and has
region are not as clear in the east been run by a military regime
and the west, as they are in the since then. Till 2006, Nepal was a
north and the south. Afghanistan constitutional monarchy with the
and Myanmar are often included danger of the king taking over
in discussions of the region as a executive powers. In 2006 a
whole. China is an important player successful popular uprising led to
but is not considered to be a part the restoration of democracy and
of the region. In this chapter, we reduced the king to a nominal
shall use South Asia to mean the position. From the experience of
seven countries mentioned above. Bangladesh and Nepal, we can say
Is there a fixed
Thus defined, South Asia stands for that democracy is becoming an
definition of these
diversity in every sense and yet accepted norm in the entire region
regions? Who
constitutes one geo-political space. of South Asia.
decides that?

--- PAGE 69 ---
Contemporary South Asia 67
Similar changes are taking place in the two
smallest countries of the region. Bhutan is still
a monarchy but the king has initiated plans for
its transition to multi-party democracy. The
Maldives, the other island nation, was a
Sultanate till 1968 when it was transformed into
a republic with a presidential form of
government. In June 2005, the parliament of the
Maldives voted unanimously to introduce a
multi-party system. The Maldivian Democratic
Party (MDP) dominates the political affairs of the
island. Democracy strengthened in the Maldives
after the 2005 elections when some opposition
parties were legalised.
Despite the mixed record of the democratic
experience, the people in all these countries share
the aspiration for democracy. A recent survey of
the attitudes of the people in the five big countries
of the region showed that there is widespread
support for democracy in all these countries.
Ordinary citizens, rich as well as poor and
belonging to different religions, view the idea of
democracy positively and support the institutions
of representative democracy. They prefer
democracy over any other form of democracy and
think that democracy is suitable for their country.
These are significant findings, for it was earlier Both these graphs are based on interviews with
believed that democracy could flourish and find more than 19,000 ordinary citizens in the five
countries of South Asia. Source: SDSA Team, State of
support only in prosperous countries of the world.
Democracy in South Asia, New Delhi: Oxford
University Press, 2007

--- PAGE 70 ---
68 Contemporary World Politics
In that sense the South Asian
TIMELINE OF SOUTH ASIA
experience of democracy has
SINCE 1947
expanded the global imagination of
democracy.
1947: India and Pakistan emerge as independent nations
after the end of British rule Let us look at the experience
1948: Sri Lanka (then Ceylon) gains independence; Indo- of democracy in each of the four
Pak conflict over Kashmir
big countries of the region other
1954-55: Pakistan joins the Cold War military blocs, SEATO than India.
and CENTO
1960 September: India and Pakistan sign the Indus Waters
T M
Treaty HE ILITARY AND
1962: Border conflict between India and China D P
EMOCRACY IN AKISTAN
1965: Indo-Pak War; UN India-Pakistan Observation Mission
1966: India and Pakistan sign the Tashkent Agreement; After Pakistan framed its first
Six-point proposal of Sheikh Mujib-ur Rahman for greater constitution, General Ayub Khan
autonomy to East Pakistan took over the administration of
1971 March: Proclamation of Independence by leaders of the country and soon got himself
Bangladesh elected. He had to give up office
August : Indo-Soviet Treaty of Friendship signed for 20 years when there was popular
December : Indo-Pak War, Liberation of Bangladesh dissatisfaction against his rule.
1972 July: India and Pakistan sign the Shimla Agreement This gave way to a military
1974 May: India conducts nuclear test takeover once again under
General Yahya Khan. During
1976: Pakistan and Bangladesh establish diplomatic
relations Yahya’s military rule, Pakistan
1985 December: South Asian leaders sign the SAARC faced the Bangladesh crisis, and
Charter at the first summit in Dhaka after a war with India in 1971,
1987: Indo-Sri Lanka Accord; Indian Peace Keeping Force East Pakistan broke away to
(IPKF) operation in Sri Lanka (1987-90) emerge as an independent country
1988: India sends troops to the Maldives to foil a coup called Bangladesh. After this, an
attempt by mercenaries elected government under the
India and Pakistan sign the agreement not to attack leadership of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto
nuclear installations and facilities of each other came to power in Pakistan from
1988-91: Democracy restoration in Pakistan, Bangladesh 1971 to 1977. The Bhutto
and Nepal government was removed by
1996 December: India and Bangladesh sign the Farakka General Zia-ul-Haq in 1977.
Treaty for sharing of the Ganga Waters General Zia faced a pro-democracy
1998 May: India and Pakistan conduct nuclear tests movement from 1982 onwards and
December: India and Sri Lanka sign the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and an elected democratic
1999 February: Indian PM Vajpayee undertakes bus journey government was established once
to Lahore to sign a Peace Declaration again in 1988 under the leadership
June-July: Kargil conflict between India and Pakistan of Benazir Bhutto. In the period
2001 July: Vajpayee - Musharraf Agra Summit unsuccessful that followed, Pakistani politics
2004 January: SAFTA signed at the 12th SAARC Summit in centred around the competition
Islamabad between her party, the Pakistan

--- PAGE 71 ---
Contemporary South Asia 69
People’s Party, and the Muslim
League. This phase of elective
democracy lasted till 1999 when
the army stepped in again and
General Pervez Musharraf removed
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. In
2001, General Musharraf got
himself elected as the President.
Pakistan continues to be ruled by
the army, though the army rulers
have held some elections to give
their rule a democratic image.
Several factors have
contributed to Pakistan’s failure
in building a stable democracy.
The social dominance of the
military, clergy, and landowning Surendra, The Hindu
aristocracy has led to the frequent This cartoon comments on the dual role of Pakistan’s ruler Pervez
overthrow of elected governments Musharraf as the President of the country and as the army General.
and the establishment of military Read the equations carefully and write down the message of this
cartoon.
government. Pakistan’s conflict
with India has made the pro- countries have encouraged the
military groups more powerful. military’s authoritarian rule in the
These groups have often said that past, for their own reasons. Given
political parties and democracy in their fear of the threat of what they
Pakistan are flawed, that call ‘global Islamic terrorism’ and
Pakistan’s security would be the apprehension that Pakistan’s
harmed by selfish-minded parties nuclear arsenal might fall into the
and chaotic democracy, and that hands of these terrorist groups,
the army’s stay in power the military regime in Pakistan
is, therefore, justified. While has been seen as the protector of
democracy has not been fully Western interests in West Asia and
successful in Pakistan, there has South Asia.
been a strong pro-democracy
sentiment in the country.
D B
EMOCRACY IN ANGLADESH
Pakistan has a courageous and
relatively free press and a strong
Bangladesh was a part of Pakistan
human rights movement.
from 1947 to 1971. It consisted
The lack of genuine of the partitioned areas of Bengal If Germany can be
reunited, why can’t
international support for and Assam from British India. The
the people of India
democratic rule in Pakistan has people of this region resented the
and Pakistan at least
further encouraged the military to domination of western Pakistan
travel more easily to
continue its dominance. The and the imposition of the Urdu each other’s
United States and other Western language. Soon after the partition, country?

--- PAGE 72 ---
70 Contemporary World Politics
they began protests against the to convene the assembly. Sheikh
unfair treatment meted out to the Mujib was arrested. Under the
Bengali culture and language. They military rule of General Yahya
also demanded fair representation Khan, the Pakistani army tried to
in administration and a fair share suppress the mass movement of
in political power. Sheikh Mujib- the Bengali people. Thousands
ur Rahman led the popular were killed by the Pakistan army.
struggle against West Pakistani This led to a large scale migration
domination. He demanded into India, creating a huge refugee
autonomy for the eastern region. problem for India. The government
In the 1970 elections in the then of India supported the demand of
Pakistan, the Awami League led the people of East Pakistan for
by Sheikh Mujib won all the seats their independence and helped
in East Pakistan and secured a them financially and militarily.
majority in the proposed This resulted in a war between
constituent assembly for the India and Pakistan in December
whole of Pakistan. But the 1971 that ended in the surrender
government dominated by the of the Pakistani forces in East
West Pakistani leadership refused Pakistan and the formation of
A mural in Dhaka University to remember Noor Hossain who was killed by the police during pro-democracy protests
against General Ershad in 1987. Painted on his back: “Let Democracy be Freed” . Photo credit: Shahidul Alam/ Drik

--- PAGE 73 ---
Contemporary South Asia 71
Bangladesh as an independent common people of Nepal have Let’s know more
country. wanted a more open and about
responsive system of government. Bangladesh’s
Bangladesh drafted its
But the king, with the help of the Grameen Bank.
constitution declaring faith in
army, retained full control over the Can we make
secularism, democracy and
government and restricted the use of the idea
socialism. However, in 1975 Sheikh
expansion of democracy in Nepal. to reduce
Mujib got the constitution
poverty in
amended to shift from the The king accepted the demand
India?
parliamentary to presidential form for a new democratic constitution
of government. He also abolished in 1990, in the wake of a strong
all parties except his own, the pro-democracy movement.
Awami League. This led to conflicts However, democratic governments
and tensions. In a dramatic and had a short and troubled career.
tragic development, he was During the nineties, the Maoists
assassinated in a military uprising of Nepal were successful in
in August 1975. The new military spreading their influence in many
ruler, Ziaur Rahman, formed his parts of Nepal. They believed in
own Bangladesh National Party armed insurrection against the
and won elections in 1979. He was monarch and the ruling elite. This
assassinated and another military led to a violent conflict between
takeover followed under the the Maoist guerrillas and the
leadership of Lt Gen H. M. Ershad. armed forces of the king. For
The people of Bangladesh soon rose some time, there was a triangular
in support of the demand for conflict among the monarchist
democracy. Students were in the forces, the democrats and the
forefront. Ershad was forced to Maoists. In 2002, the king
allow political activity on a limited abolished the parliament and
scale. He was later elected as dismissed the government, thus
President for five years. Mass public ending even the limited
protests made Ershad step down democracy that existed in Nepal.
in 1990. Elections were held in
In April 2006, there were
1991. Since then representative
massive, country wide, pro-
democracy based on multi-party
democracy protests. The struggling
elections has been working in
pro-democracy forces achieved their
Bangladesh.
first major victory when the king was
forced to restore the House of
M ONARCHY AND Representatives that had been
dissolved in April 2002. The largely
D N
EMOCRACY IN EPAL
non-violent movement was led by
the Seven Party Alliance (SPA), the
Nepal was a Hindu kingdom in the
Maoists and social activists.
past and then a constitutional
monarchy in the modern period Nepal’s transition to
for many years. Throughout this democracy is not complete. At the
period, political parties and the moment, Nepal is undergoing a

--- PAGE 74 ---
72 Contemporary World Politics
unique moment in its history since its independence in 1948.
because it is moving towards the But it faced a serious challenge,
formation of a constituent not from the military or monarchy
assembly that will write the but rather from ethnic conflict
constitution for Nepal. Some leading to the demand for
sections in Nepal still think that a secession by one of the regions.
nominal monarchy is necessary
After its independence, politics
Nepal sounds really for Nepal to retain its link with the
in Sri Lanka (it was then known
exciting. I wish I was past. The Maoist groups have
as Ceylon) was dominated by
in Nepal! agreed to suspend armed struggle.
forces that represented the interest
They want the constitution to
of the majority Sinhala
include the radical programmes of
community. They were hostile to a
social and economic restructuring.
large number of Tamils who had
All the parties in the SPA may not
migrated from India to Sri Lanka
agree with this programme. The
and settled there. This migration
Maoists and some other political
continued even after independence.
groups are also deeply suspicious
of the Indian government and its The Sinhala nationalists thought
role in the future of Nepal. that Sri Lanka should not give
‘concessions’ to the Tamils because
Sri Lanka belongs to the Sinhala
E C
THNIC ONFLICT AND
people only. The neglect of Tamil
D S L concerns led to militant Tamil
EMOCRACY IN RI ANKA
nationalism. From 1983 onwards,
We have already seen that Sri the militant organisation, the
Lanka has retained democracy Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
Democracy activist, Durga Thapa,
participating in a pro-democracy rally in
Kathmandu in 1990. The second picture
shows the same person in 2006, this time
celebrating the success of the second
democracy movement.
Photo credit: Min Bajracharya

--- PAGE 75 ---
Contemporary South Asia 73
(LTTE) has been fighting an armed
struggle with the army of Sri Lanka
and demanding ‘Tamil Eelam’ or a
separate country for the Tamils of
Sri Lanka. The LTTE controls the
northeastern parts of Sri Lanka.
The Sri Lankan problem
involves people of Indian origin,
and there is considerable pressure
from the Tamil people in India to
the effect that the Indian
government should protect the
interests of the Tamils in Sri
Lanka. The government of India
has from time to time tried to
negotiate with the Sri Lankan Keshav, The Hindu
The cartoon depicts the dilemma of the Sri Lankan leadership in
government on the Tamil question.
trying to balance Sinhala hardliners or the Lion and Tamil militants
But in 1987, the government of
or the Tiger while negotiating peace.
India for the first time got directly
involved in the Sri Lankan Tamil In spite of the ongoing conflict,
question. India signed an accord Sri Lanka has registered
with Sri Lanka and sent troops to considerable economic growth
stabilise relations between the Sri and recorded high levels of human
Lankan government and the development. Sri Lanka was one
Tamils. Eventually, the Indian of the first developing countries to
Army got into a fight with the successfully control the rate of
LTTE. The presence of Indian growth of population, the first
troops was also not liked much country in the region to liberalise
by the Sri Lankans. They saw this the economy, and it has had the
as an attempt by India to interfere highest per capita gross domestic
in the internal affairs of Sri Lanka. product (GDP) for many years
In 1989, the Indian Peace Keeping right through the civil war. Despite
Force (IPKF) pulled out of Sri the ravages of internal conflict, it
Lanka without attaining its has maintained a democratic
objective. political system.
The Sri Lankan crisis
continues to be violent. However, I NDIA -P AKISTAN C ONFLICTS
international actors, particularly
the Scandinavian countries such Let us now move from domestic
as Norway and Iceland have been politics and take a look at some
trying to bring the warring groups of the areas of conflict in the inter-
back to negotiations. The future national relations in this region.
of the island hinges on the The post-Cold War era has not
outcome of these talks. meant the end of conflicts and

--- PAGE 76 ---
74 Contemporary World Politics
Kashmir and the Indian province of
Jammu and Kashmir divided by the
Line of Control. In 1971, India won
a decisive war against Pakistan but
the Kashmir issue remained
unsettled.
India’s conflict with Pakistan is
also over strategic issues like the
control of the Siachen glacier and
over acquisition of arms. The arms
race between the two countries
assumed a new character with
both states acquiring nuclear
weapons and missiles to deliver
such arms against each other in
the 1990s. In 1998, India
conducted nuclear explosion in
Pokaran. Pakistan responded
within a few days by carrying out
Keshav, The Hindu nuclear tests in the Chagai Hills.
A view of the current phase of the Indo-Pak negotiations. Since then India and Pakistan
seem to have built a military
tensions in this region. We have relationship in which the
already noted the conflicts around possibility of a direct and full-scale
internal democracy or ethnic war has declined.
differences. But there are also
But both the governments
some very crucial conflicts of an
continue to be suspicious of each
international nature. Given the
other. The Indian government has
position of India in this region,
blamed the Pakistan government
most of these conflicts involve
for using a strategy of low-key
India.
violence by helping the Kashmiri
The most salient and over- militants with arms, training,
whelming of these conflicts is, of money and protection to carry out
course, the one between India and terrorist strikes against India. The
Pakistan. Soon after the partition, Indian government also believes
the two countries got embroiled in that Pakistan had aided the pro-
a conflict over the fate of Kashmir. Khalistani militants with arms
The Pakistani government claimed and ammunitions during the
that Kashmir belonged to it. Wars period 1985-1995. Its spy agency,
Discussion on Kashmir
between India and Pakistan in Inter Services Intelligence (ISI), is
sounds like a property
1947-48 and 1965 failed to settle alleged to be involved in various
dispute between the
the matter. The 1947-48 war anti-India campaigns in India’s
rulers of India and
Pakistan! What do the resulted in the division of the northeast, operating secretly
Kashmiris feel about it? province into Pakistan-occupied through Bangladesh and Nepal.

--- PAGE 77 ---
Contemporary South Asia 75
The government of Pakistan, in unhappy with Bangladesh’s
turn, blames the Indian denial of illegal immigration to
government and its security India, its support for anti-Indian
agencies for fomenting trouble in Islamic fundamentalist groups,
the provinces of Sindh and Bangladesh’s refusal to allow
Balochistan. Indian troops to move through its
territory to northeastern India,
India and Pakistan also have
and its decision not to export
had problems over the sharing of
natural gas to India or allow
river waters. Until 1960, they were Why is it that every
Myanmar to do so through
locked in a fierce argument over one of our
Bangladeshi territory. neighbours has a
the use of the rivers of the Indus
Bangladeshi governments have felt problem with India?
basin. Eventually, in 1960, with
that the Indian government Is there something
the help of the World Bank, India
behaves like a regional bully over wrong with our
and Pakistan signed the Indus foreign policy? Or is
the sharing of river waters,
Waters Treaty which has survived it just our size?
encouraging rebellion in the
to this day in spite of various
Chittagong Hill Tracts, trying to
military conflicts in which the two
extract its natural gas and being
countries have been involved.
unfair in trade. The two countries
There are still some minor
have not succeeded in resolving
differences about the interpretation
their boundary dispute.
of the Indus Waters Treaty and the
use of the river waters. The two Despite their differences, India
countries are not in agreement and Bangladesh do cooperate on
over the demarcation line in Sir many issues. Economic relations
Creek in the Rann of Kutch. The have improved considerably in the
dispute seems minor, but there is last ten years. Bangladesh is a
an underlying worry that how the part of India’s Look East policy
dispute is settled may have an that wants to link up with
impact on the control of sea Southeast Asia via Myanmar. On
resources in the area adjoining Sir disaster management and
Creek. India and Pakistan are environmental issues, the two
holding negotiations on all these states have cooperated regularly.
Efforts are on to broaden the areas
issues.
of cooperation further by
identifying common threats and
I O
NDIA AND ITS THER being more sensitive to each
N other’s needs.
EIGHBOURS
Nepal and India enjoy a very
The governments of India and special relationship that has very
Bangladesh have had differences few parallels in the world. A treaty
over several issues including the between the two countries allows
sharing of the Ganga and the citizens of the two countries
Brahmaputra river waters. The to travel to and work in the other
Indian government has been country without visas and

--- PAGE 78 ---
76 Contemporary World Politics
passports. Despite this special
relationship, the governments of the
two countries have had trade-
related disputes in the past. The
Indian government has often
expressed displeasure at the warm
STEPS
relationship between Nepal and
(cid:139) Divide the classroom into seven groups (as many China and at the Nepal
government’s inaction against anti-
as the number of countries). The number of
Indian elements. Indian security
students in each group may vary, reflecting the
agencies see the Maoist movement
size of the countries of South Asia.
in Nepal as a growing security
(cid:139) Name each group after a country and hand over
threat, given the rise of Naxalite
a brief country profile to respective groups. Besides
groups in various Indian states
the basic information, include a short note on the
from Bihar in the north to Andhra
contentious issues/disputes among the South Asian
Pradesh in the south. Many leaders
countries. The issues could be those discussed in
and citizens in Nepal think that the
this chapter or an issue of relevance but not
Indian government interferes in its
discussed in the chapter.
internal affairs, has designs on its
(cid:139) Allow students to select an issue of their choice.
river waters and hydro-electricity,
The dispute could be bilateral or multilateral (the
and prevents Nepal, a landlocked
issue could be related to India, given the
country, from getting easier access
geographic peculiarity of the region).
to the sea through Indian territory.
(cid:139) Assign each group to find out what initiatives the Nevertheless, Indo-Nepal relations
governments involved have taken and the reasons are fairly stable and peaceful.
for their failures in resolving the disputes. Despite differences, trade, scientific
cooperation, common natural
(cid:139) Students should assume the role of representing
resources, electricity generation
their respective countries and share their findings.
and interlocking water
Ideas for the Teacher
management grids hold the two
(cid:13) Pair up the countries sharing the common issue/dispute. It countries together. There is a hope
could be two groups in the case of a bilateral issue or more in
that the consolidation of democracy
case of a multilateral issue (examples of bilateral issues include
in Nepal will lead to improvements
the Jammu and Kashmir dispute between India and Pakistan,
the migrant problem between India and Bangladesh; in the ties between the two
multilateral issues include the creation of a free trade zone or countries.
tackling terrorism).
(cid:13) Groups should negotiate on the proposals and counter- The difficulties in the
proposals within a time limit. The teacher is to take note of the relationship between the
outcome of the negotiations. The focus should be on the areas governments of India and Sri Lanka
of agreement and disagreement.
are mostly over ethnic conflict in
(cid:13) Link the outcome of the negotiations with the prevailing
the island nation. Indian leaders
situation among the countries of South Asia. Talk about the
and citizens find it impossible to
difficulties involved in negotiating on a political issue based
on the observation made. Conclude by discussing the remain neutral when Tamils are
importance of accommodating each other’s interest for the politically unhappy and are
sake of peaceful coexistence.
being killed. After the military
intervention in 1987, the Indian

--- PAGE 79 ---
Contemporary South Asia 77
government now prefers a policy of the region. The smaller countries
disengagement vis-à-vis Sri Lanka’s fear that India wants to be a
internal troubles. India signed a free regionally-dominant power.
trade agreement with Sri Lanka,
Not all conflicts in South Asia
which strengthened relations
are between India and its
between two countries. India’s help
neighbours. Nepal and Bhutan, as
in post-tsunami reconstruction in
well as Bangladesh and Myanmar,
Sri Lanka has also brought the two
have had disagreements in the past
countries closer.
over the migration of ethnic If the chapter, on US
was called ‘US
India enjoys a very special Nepalese into Bhutan and the
Hegemony’ why is
relationship with Bhutan too and Rohingyas into Myanmar,
this chapter not
does not have any major conflict respectively. Bangladesh and Nepal
called ‘Indian
with the Bhutanese government. have had some differences over the
Hegemony’?
The efforts made by the Bhutanese future of the Himalayan river
monarch to weed out the guerrillas waters. The major conflicts and
and militants from northeastern differences, though, are between
India that operate in his country India and the others, partly
have been helpful to India. India is because of the geography of the
involved in big hydroelectric region, in which India is located
projects in Bhutan and remains the centrally and is therefore the only
Himalayan kingdom’s biggest country that borders the others.
source of development aid. India’s
ties with the Maldives remain warm
and cordial. In November 1988,
when some Tamil mercenaries
from Sri Lanka attacked the
Maldives, the Indian air force and
navy reacted quickly to the
Maldives’ request to help stop the
invasion. India has also
contributed towards the island’s
economic development, tourism
and fisheries.
You may have noticed that
India has various problems with its
smaller neighbours in the region.
Given its size and power, they are
bound to be suspicious of India’s
intentions. The Indian government,
on the other hand, often feels
exploited by its neighbours. It does Surendra, The Hindu
not like the political instability in
these countries, fearing it can help What does this cartoon tell you about the role of India and
outside powers to gain influence in Pakistan in the process of regional cooperation in South Asia?

--- PAGE 80 ---
78 Contemporary World Politics
P C
EACE AND OOPERATION
Do the states of South Asia cooperate with each
other? Or do they only keep fighting with each
other? In spite of the many conflicts, the states
of South Asia recognise the importance of
cooperation and friendly relationship, among
themselves. The South Asian Association for
Regional Cooperation (SAARC) is a major regional
initiative by the South Asian states to evolve
cooperation through multilateral means. It
began in 1985. Unfortunately, due to persisting
political differences, SAARC has not had much
Keshav, The Hindu
success. SAARC members signed the South
Asian Free Trade (SAFTA) agreement which
promised the formation of a free trade zone for
the whole of South Asia.
A new chapter of peace and cooperation might
evolve in South Asia if all the countries in the region
allow free trade across the borders. This is the spirit
behind the idea of SAFTA. The Agreement was
signed in 2004 and came into effect on 1 January
2006. SAFTA aims at lowering trade tariffs by 20
percent by 2007. But some of our neighbours fear
that SAFTA is a way for India to ‘invade’ their
Pakistan Tribune
markets and to influence their societies and politics
The two cartoons, one from India and the other
through commercial ventures and a commercial
from Pakistan, interpret the role of two key
presence in their countries. India thinks that there
players who are also interested in the region. Do
you notice any commonality between their are real economic benefits for all from SAFTA and
perspectives? that a region that trades more freely will be able to
cooperate better on political issues. Some in India
think that SAFTA is not worth the trouble since
India already has bilateral agreements with Bhutan,
Nepal and Sri Lanka.
Although India-Pakistan relations seem to be a
story of endemic conflict and violence, there have
been a series of efforts to manage tensions and
Every association
build peace. The two countries have agreed to
seems to have
emerged for trade! undertake confidence building measures to reduce
Is trade more the risk of war. Social activists and prominent
important than personalities have collaborated to create an
people-to-people
atmosphere of friendship among the people of both
relations?
countries. Leaders have met at summits to
understand each other better and to find solutions

--- PAGE 81 ---
Contemporary South Asia 79
to the major problems between the American involvement in South
two neighbours. A number of bus Asia has rapidly increased after the
routes have been opened up Cold War. The US has had good
between the two countries. Trade relations with both India and
between the two parts of Punjab Pakistan since the end of the Cold
has increased substantially in the War and increasingly works as a
last five years. Visas have been moderator in India-Pakistan
more easily given. relations. Economic reforms and
liberal economic policies in both
No region exists in a vacuum.
countries have greatly increased
It is influenced by outside powers
the depth of American participation
and events no matter how much
in the region. The large South Asian
it may try to insulate itself from
diasporas in the US and the huge
non-regional powers. China and
size of the population and markets
the United States remain key
of the region also give America an
players in South Asian politics.
added stake in the future of
Sino-Indian relations have
regional security and peace.
improved significantly in the last
ten years, but China’s strategic However, whether South Asia
partnership with Pakistan will continue to be known as a
remains a major irritant. The conflict prone zone or will evolve into
demands of development and a regional bloc with some common
globalisation have brought the cultural features and trade interests
two Asian giants closer, and their will depend more on the people and
economic ties have multiplied the governments of the region than
rapidly since 1991. any other outside power.
E
1. Identify the country:
a. The struggle among pro-monarchy, pro-democracy groups and x
extremists created an atmosphere of political instability:
b. A landlocked country with multi-party competition: e
c. The first country to liberalise its economy in the South Asian
r
region:
d. In the conflict between the military and pro-democracy groups,
c
the military has prevailed over democracy:
e. Centrally located and shares borders with most of the South
i
Asian countries:
s
f. Earlier the island had the Sultan as the head of state. Now, it’s
a republic:
e
g. Small savings and credit cooperatives in the rural areas have
helped in reducing poverty: s
h. A landlocked country with a monarchy:

--- PAGE 82 ---
80 Contemporary World Politics
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E
2. Which among the following statements about South Asia is wrong?
a) All the countries in South Asia are democratic.
b) Bangladesh and India have signed an agreement on river-water
sharing.
c) SAFTA was signed at the 12th SAARC Summit in Islamabad.
d) The US and China play an influential role in South Asian politics.
3. What are some of the commonalities and differences between
Bangladesh and Pakistan in their democratic experiences?
4. List three challenges to democracy in Nepal.
5. Name the principal players in the ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka. How do
you assess the prospects of the resolution of this conflict?
6. Mention some of the recent agreements between India and Pakistan.
Can we be sure that the two countries are well on their way to a
friendly relationship?
7. Mention two areas each of cooperation and disagreement between
India and Bangladesh?
8. How are the external powers influencing bilateral relations in South
Asia? Take any one example to illustrate your point.
9. Write a short note on the role and the limitations of SAARC as a forum
for facilitating economic cooperation among the South Asian
countries.
10. India’s neighbours often think that the Indian government tries to
dominate and interfere in the domestic affairs of the smaller countries
of the region. Is this a correct impression?

--- PAGE 83 ---
Chapter 6
International Organisations
O
VERVIEW
In this chapter we shall discuss
the role of international
organisations after the collapse of
the Soviet Union. We shall
examine how, in this emerging
world, there were calls for the
restructuring of international
organisations to cope with various
new challenges including the rise
of US power. The potential reform
of the United Nations Security
Council is an interesting case of
the reform process and its
difficulties. We then turn to India’s
involvement in the UN and its view
of Security Council reforms. The
This is the United Nations’ logo. The emblem has a world map
chapter closes by asking if the UN
with olive branches around it, signifying world peace.
can play any role in dealing with Credit : www.un.org
a world dominated by one
superpower. In this chapter we
also look at some other trans-
national organisations that are
playing a crucial role.

--- PAGE 84 ---
82 Contemporary World Politics
W I “Talking shop? Yes, there are
HY NTERNATIONAL
a lot of speeches and meetings at
O ?
RGANISATIONS the U.N., especially during the
annual sessions of the General
Read the two cartoons on this
Assembly. But as Churchill put it,
page. Both the cartoons comment
jaw-jaw is better than war-war.
on the ineffectiveness of the
Isn’t it better to have one place
United Nations Organisation,
where all… countries in the world
usually referred to as the UN, in
can get together, bore each other
the Lebanon crisis in 2006. Both
sometimes with their words rather
the cartoons represent the kind of
than bore holes into each other on
opinions that we often hear about
the battlefield?” — Shashi Tharoor,
the UN.
the former UN Under-Secretary-
On the other hand, we also
General for Communications and
find that the UN is generally
Public Information.
regarded as the most important
These two quotes suggest
international organisation in
today’s world. In the eyes of many something important. International
people all over the world, it is organisations are not the answer
indispensable and represents the to everything, but they are
great hope of humanity for peace important. International organi-
and progress. Why do we then sations help with matters of war
need organisations like the UN? and peace. They also help
Let us hear two insiders: countries cooperate to make
That’s what they say
better living conditions for us all.
about the “The United Nations was not
parliament too — created to take humanity to Countries have conflicts and
a talking shop. Does heaven, but to save it from hell.” differences with each other. That
it mean that we
— Dag Hammarskjold, the UN’s does not necessarily mean they
need talking shops?
second Secretary-General. must go to war to deal with their
During June 2006, Israel attacked Lebanon, saying that it was necessary to control the militant group called Hezbollah.
Large numbers of civilians were killed and many public buildings and even residential areas came under Israeli
bombardment. The UN passed a resolution on this only in August and the Israel army withdrew from the region only in
October. Both these cartoons comment on the role of the UN and its Secretary-General in this episode.
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,nosirraH
yrraH
©
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,civortsemsiP
rateP
©

--- PAGE 85 ---
83
International Organisations
antagonisms. They can, instead,
discuss contentious issues and
find peaceful solutions; indeed,
even though this is rarely noticed,
most conflicts and differences are
resolved without going to war. The
role of an international
organisation can be important in
this context. An international
organisation is not a super-state
with authority over its members.
It is created by and responds to
states. It comes into being when
states agree to its creation. Once
created, it can help member states
Unfortunately, recognising the
resolve their problems peacefully.
need for cooperation and actually
International organisations cooperating are two different
are helpful in another way. things. Nations can recognise the
Nations can usually see that there need to cooperate but cannot
are some things they must do always agree on how best to do so,
together. There are issues that are how to share the costs of
so challenging that they can only cooperating, how to make sure
be dealt with when everyone that the benefits of cooperating are
works together. Disease is an justly divided, and how to ensure
example. Some diseases can only that others do not break their end
be eradicated if everyone in the of the bargain and cheat on an
world cooperates in inoculating or agreement. An international
vaccinating their populations. Or organisation can help produce
take global warming and information and ideas about how
its effects. As atmospheric to cooperate. It can provide
temperatures rise because of the mechanisms, rules and a
spread of certain chemicals called bureaucracy, to help members have
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), there more confidence that costs will be
is a danger that sea levels will also shared properly, that the benefits
rise, thereby submerging many
coastal areas of the world
including huge cities. Of course,
Make a list of issues or
each country can try to find its
problems (other than the
own solution to the effects of
ones mentioned in the
global warming. But in the end a
text) that cannot be
more effective approach is to stop
handled by any one
the warming itself. This requires
country and require an
at least all of the major industrial
international organisation.
powers to cooperate.
FMI
IMF
The International Monetary Fund
(IMF) is an international organ-
isation that oversees those
financial institutions and regula-
tions that act at the international
level. The IMF has 184 members countries, but
they do not enjoy an equal say. The top ten
countries have 55 per cent of the votes. They
are the G-8 members (the US, Japan, Germany,
France, the UK, Italy, Canada and Russia), Saudi
Arabia and China. The US alone has 17.4 per
cent voting rights.

--- PAGE 86 ---
84 Contemporary World Politics
government? We shall try to
FOUNDING OF THE UNITED NATIONS
answer this question at the end
of the chapter.
1941August: Signing of the Atlantic Charter by the US President
Franklin D. Roosevelt and British PM Winston S. Churchill
E UN
VOLUTION OF THE
1942 January: 26 Allied nations fighting against the Axis
Powers meet in Washington, D.C., to support the Atlantic The First World War encouraged
Charter and sign the ‘Declaration by United Nations’
the world to invest in an
international organisation to deal
1943 December: Tehran Conference Declaration of the
Three Powers (US, Britain and Soviet Union) with conflict. Many believed that
such an organisation would help
1945 February: Yalta Conference of the ‘Big Three’
the world to avoid war. As a result,
(Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin) decides to organise a United
the League of Nations was born.
Nations conference on the proposed world organisation
However, despite its initial
April-May: The 2-month long United Nations Conference on success, it could not prevent the
International Organisation at San Francisco Second World War (1939-45).
Many more people died and were
1945 June 26: Signing of the UN Charter by 50 nations
wounded in this war than ever
(Poland signed on October 15; so the UN has 51 original
founding members) before.
The UN was founded as a
1945 October 24: the UN was founded (hence October 24 is
celebrated as UN Day) successor to the League of
Nations. It was established in
1945 October 30: India joins the UN
1945 immediately after the
will be fairly divided, and that once
a member joins an agreement it
will honour the terms and
conditions of the agreement.
With the end of the Cold War,
we can see that the UN may have
a slightly different role. As the
United States and its allies
emerged victorious, there was
concern amongst many
governments and peoples that the
Western countries led by the US The US Office of War Information
would be so powerful that there created the above poster during the
Second World War as per the
would be no check against their
Declaration by United Nations of 1942.
wishes and desires. Can the UN
The poster features the flags of all
serve to promote dialogue and nations that were part of the Allied
discussion with the US in Forces. It reflects the belligerent origins
particular, and could it limit the of the UN.
power of the American

--- PAGE 87 ---
85
International Organisations
Adapted from http://www.newint.org/issue375/pics/un-map-big.gif

--- PAGE 88 ---
86 Contemporary World Politics
Second World War. The 2007. He is the first Asian to hold
Search for at
organisation was set up through the post since 1971.
least one news
the signing of the United Nations
item about the The UN consists of many
Charter by 51 states. It tried to
activities of different structures and agencies.
achieve what the League could not
each of the War and peace and differences
between the two world wars. The
UN agencies between member states are
UN’s objective is to prevent
mentioned on discussed in the General
international conflict and to
this page. Assembly as well as the Security
facilitate cooperation among
Council. Social and economic
states. It was founded with the
issues are dealt with by many
hope that it would act to stop the
agencies including the World
conflicts between states escalating
Health Organisation (WHO), the
into war and, if war broke out, to
United Nations Development
limit the extent of hostilities.
Programme (UNDP), the United
Furthermore, since conflicts often
Nations Human Rights Commision
arose from the lack of social and
(UNHRC), the United Nations High
economic development, the UN
Commission for Refugees (UNHCR),
was intended to bring countries
the United Nations Children’s Fund
together to improve the prospects
(UNICEF), and the United Nations
of social and economic
Educational, Scientific, and
development all over the world.
Cultural Organisation (UNESCO),
By 2006, the UN had 192 among others.
member states. These includeed
almost all independent states. In
R UN
EFORM OF THE AFTER
the UN General Assembly, all
members have one vote each. In THE C OLD W AR
the UN Security Council, there are
five permanent members. These Reform and improvement are
are: the United States, Russia, the fundamental to any organisation
United Kingdom, France and to serve the needs of a changing
China. These states were selected environment. The UN is no
as permanent members as they exception. In recent years, there
were the most powerful have been demands for reform of
Cold War or no immediately after the Second the world body. However, there is
Cold War, one World War and because they little clarity and consensus on the
reform is needed constituted the victors in the War. nature of reform.
above all. Only
democratic leaders The UN’s most visible public Two basic kinds of reforms
should be allowed figure, and the representative face the UN: reform of the
to represent their head, is the Secretary-General. organisation’s structures and
countries in the UN. The present Secretary-General is processes; and a review of the
How can they allow
Ban Ki-Moon from South Korea. issues that fall within the
dictators to speak in
He is the eighth Secretary-General jurisdiction of the organisation.
the name of the
of the UN. He took over as the Almost everyone is agreed that
people of their
country? Secretary-General on 1 January both aspects of reform are

--- PAGE 89 ---
87
International Organisations
necessary. What they cannot agree
UN SECRETARIES-GENERAL
on is precisely what is to be done,
how it is to be done, and when it is
to be done. Trygve Lie(1946-1952) Norway; lawyer and
foreign minister; worked for ceasefire
On the reform of structures between India and Pakistan on Kashmir;
and processes, the biggest criticised for his failure to quickly end the
discussion has been on the Korean war; Soviet Union opposed second
term for him; resigned from the post.
functioning of the Security
Council. Related to this has been Dag Hammarskjöld(1953-1961) Sweden;
the demand for an increase in the Economist and lawyer; worked for resolving
the Suez Canal dispute and the
UN Security Council’s permament
decolonisation of Africa; awarded Nobel
and non-permanent membership
Peace Prize posthumously in 1961 for his
so that the realities of
efforts to settle the Congo crisis; Soviet Union
contemporary world politics are and France criticised his role in Africa.
better reflected in the structure of
U Thant(1961-1971) Burma (Myanmar);
the organisation. In particular, teacher and diplomat; worked for resolving
there are proposals to increase the Cuban Missile Crisis and ending the
membership from Asia, Africa and Congo crisis; established the UN
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus; criticised
South America. Beyond this, the
the US during the Vietnam War.
US and other Western countries
want improvements in the UN’s Kurt Waldheim(1972-1981) Austria; diplomat
and foreign minister; made efforts to resolve
budgetary procedures and its
the problems of Namibia and Lebanon;
administration.
oversaw the relief operation in Bangladesh;
China blocked his bid for a third term.
On the issues to be given greater
priority or to be brought within the Javier Perez de Cuellar(1982-1991) Peru;
jurisdiciton of the UN, some lawyer and diplomat; worked for peace in
Cyprus, Afghanistan and El Salvador;
countries and experts want the
mediated between Britain and Argentina
organisation to play a greater or
after the Falklands War; negotiated for the
more effective role in peace and
independence of Namibia.
security missions, while others
Boutros Boutros-Ghali(1992-1996) Egypt;
want its role to be confined to
diplomat, jurist, foreign minister; issued a
development and humanitarian report, An Agenda for Peace; conducted
work (health, education, a successful UN operation in Mozambique;
environment, population control, blamed for the UN failures in Bosnia, Somalia
and Rwanda; due to serious disagreements,
human rights, gender and social
the US blocked a second term for him.
justice).
Kofi A. Annan (1997-2006) Ghana; UN
Let us look at both sets of
official; created the Global Fund to fight
reforms, with an emphasis on AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria; declared
reform of the structures and the US-led invasion of Iraq as an illegal act;
processes. established the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Human Rights Council in 2005;
The UN was established in awarded the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize
1945 immediately after the
Second World War. The way it was Photo Credit: www.un.org

--- PAGE 90 ---
88 Contemporary World Politics
terrorism, nuclear proliferation,
climate change, environmental
degradation, epidemics).
In this situation, in 1989, as
the Cold War was ending, the
question facing the world was: is
the UN doing enough? Is it
equipped to do what is required?
What should it be doing? And
how? What reforms are necessary
to make it work better? For the
UN60: A Time for Renewal Credit: www.un.org
past decade and a half, member
states have been trying to find
organised and the way it satisfactory and practical answers
functioned reflected the realities of to these questions.
world politics after the Second
World War. After the Cold War,
R S
those realities are different. Here EFORM OF TRUCTURES AND
are some of the changes that have P
ROCESSES
occurred:
While the case for reform has
The Soviet Union has
collapsed. widespread support, getting
agreement on what to do is
The US is the strongest power.
difficult. Let us examine the
The relationship between debate over reform of the UN
Russia, the successor to the Security Council. In 1992, the UN
Soviet Union, and the US is General Assembly adopted a
much more cooperative. resolution. The resolution
reflected three main complaints:
China is fast emerging as a
great power, and India also is The Security Council no longer
growing rapidly. represents contemporary
political realities.
The economies of Asia are
growing at an unprecedented Its decisions reflect only
rate. Western values and interests
and are dominated by a few
Many new countries have
powers.
joined the UN (as they became
independent from the Soviet It lacks equitable representation.
Union or former communist
In view of these growing
states in eastern Europe).
demands for the restructuring of
A whole new set of challenges the UN, on 1 January 1997, the
confronts the world (genocide, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan
civil war, ethnic conflict, initiated an inquiry into how the

--- PAGE 91 ---
89
International Organisations
UN should be reformed. How, for
instance, should new Security
Council members be chosen?
In the years since then, the
following are just some of the
criteria that have been proposed
for new permanent and non-
permanent members of the
Security Council. A new member,
it has been suggested, should be:
A major economic power
A major military power
A substantial contributor to
the UN budget
A big nation in terms of its
population
A nation that respects
democracy and human rights
A country that would
Clearly, each of these criteria
make the Council more
has some validity. Governments
representative of the world’s
saw advantages in some criteria
diversity in terms of
and disadvantages in others
geography, economic systems,
depending on their interests and
and culture
aspirations. Even if they had no
desire to be members themselves,
countries could see that the
criteria were problematic. How big
an economic or military power did
you have to be to qualify for
Security Council membership?
What level of budget contribution
would enable a state to buy its way
into the Council? Was a big
population an asset or a liability
for a country trying to play a bigger
role in the world? If respect for
democracy and human rights was
the criteria, countries with
excellent records would be in line
to be members; but would they be
effective as Council members?
KNAB
DLROW
World Bank
The World Bank was created
immediately after the Second
World War in 1945. Its activities
are focused on the developing
countries. It works for human
development (education, health), agriculture
and rural development (irrigation, rural services),
environmental protection (pollution reduction,
establishing and enforcing regulations),
infrastructure (roads, urban regeneration,
electricity) and governance (anti-corruption,
development of legal institutions). It provides
loans and grants to the member-countries. In
this way, it exercises enormous influence on the
economic policies of developing countries. It is
often criticised for setting the economic
agenda of the poorer nations, attaching
stringent conditions to its loans and forcing free
market reforms.

--- PAGE 92 ---
90 Contemporary World Politics
members of the developing world?
Even here, there are difficulties.
The developing world consists of
countries at many different levels
of development. What about
culture? Should different cultures
STEPS
or ‘civilisations’ be given
representation in a more balanced
(cid:139) Divide the class into six groups. Each group is to
way? How does one divide the
follow one of the six criteria (or more if there are
world by civilisations or cultures
more suggestions) listed here for permanent
given that nations have so many
membership of the UN Security Council.
cultural streams within their
(cid:139) Each group is to make its own list of the
borders?
permanent members based on its given
A related issue was to change
criterion (e.g. the group working on the
the nature of membership
‘population’ criterion will find out the which are
altogether. Some insisted, for
five most populous countries).
instance, that the veto power of
(cid:139) Each group can make a presentation of their
the five permanent members be
recommended list and reasons why their
abolished. Many perceived the
criterion should be accepted.
veto to be in conflict with the
Ideas for the Teacher concept of democracy and
(cid:13) Allow the students to opt for the group whose criterion they sovereign equality in the UN and
themselves favour. thought that the veto was no
(cid:13) Compare all the lists and see how many names are longer right or relevant.
common and how often India features.
In the Security Council, there
(cid:13) Keep some time for an open ended discussion on which
are five permanent members and
criterion should be adopted.
ten non-permanent members. The
Charter gave the permanent
Furthermore, how was the members a privileged position to
matter of representation to be bring about stability in the world
resolved? Did equitable after the Second World War. The
representation in geographical main privileges of the five
terms mean that there should be permanent members are
one seat each from Asia, Africa, permanency and the veto power.
and Latin America and the The non-permanent members
Caribbean? Should the serve for only two years at a time
representation, on the other hand, and give way after that period to
be by regions or sub-regions newly elected members. A country
(rather than continents)? Why cannot be re-elected immediately
should the issue of equitable after completing a term of two
representation be decided by years. The non-permanent
geography? Why not by levels of members are elected in a manner
economic development? Why not, so that they represent all
in other words, give more seats to continents of the world.

--- PAGE 93 ---
91
International Organisations
Most importantly, the non- J UN
URISDICTION OF THE
permanent members do not have
the veto power. What is the veto The question of membership is a
power? In taking decisions, the serious one. In addition, though,
Security Council proceeds by there are more substantial issues
voting. All members have one vote. before the world. As the UN
However, the permanent members completed 60 years of its That’s very unfair! It’s
actually the weaker
can vote in a negative manner so existence, the heads of all the
countries who need
that even if all other permanent member-states met in September
a veto, not those
and non-permanent members 2005 to celebrate the anniversary who already have so
vote for a particular decision, any and review the situation. The much power.
permanent member’s negative leaders in this meeting decided
vote can stall the decision. This that the following steps should be
negative vote is the veto. taken to make the UN more
relevant in the changing context.
While there has been a move
to abolish or modify the veto Creation of a Peacebuilding
system, there is also a realisation Commission
that the permanent members are
Acceptance of the responsibility
unlikely to agree to such a reform.
of the international community
Also, the world may not be ready
in case of failures of national
for such a radical step even
governments to protect their
though the Cold War is over.
own citizens from atrocities
Without the veto, there is the
danger as in 1945 that the great Establishment of a Human
powers would lose interest in the Rights Council (operational
world body, that they would do since 19 June 2006) What are
what they pleased outside it, and the
Agreements to achieve the
that without their support and Millennium
Millennium Development
involvement the body would be Development
Goals
ineffective. Goals?
Condemnation of terrorism in
all its forms and manifestations
Creation of a Democracy Fund
An agreement to wind up the
Trusteeship Council
It is not hard to see that these
are equally contentious issues for
the UN. What should a
Peacebuilding Commission do?
There are any number of conflicts
all over the world. Which ones
should it intervene in? Is it possible
or even desirable for it to intervene

--- PAGE 94 ---
92 Contemporary World Politics
in each and every conflict?
Similarly, what is the responsibility
of the international community in
dealing with atrocities? What are
human rights and who should
determine the level of human
rights violations and the course of
action to be taken when they are
violated? Given that so many
countries are still part of the
developing world, how realistic is
it for the UN to achieve an
ambitious set of goals such as
those listed in the Millennium
Development Goals? Can there be
The humanitarian crisis in Darfur, Sudan since 2003 has agreement on a definition of
attracted empty promises by the International Community. terrorism? How shall the UN use
How do you think the UN can intervene in situations like this?
funds to promote democracy? And
Would that require a change in its jurisdiction?
so on.
MAP OF UN PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS
MISSIONS ADMINISTERED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF PEACEKEEPING OPERATIONS
Sierra Western Sudan 2005- Cyprus 1964- Lebanon 1978- Afghanistan*
Leone* Sahara 1991- 2002-
Georgia
2006- Kosovo 1999- Israel and
1993- India and
Syria 1974-
Pakistan
1949-
Ethiopia and
Eritrea 2000-
Haiti Côte d'Ivoire
2004- 2004-
Liberia DR Congo Burundi Middle East Timor
2003- 1999- 2004- East 1948- 2006-
* political or peacebuilding mission
Adapted from http://www.un.org/depts/dhl/maplib/flag.html. Should the UN increase its peacekeeping
activities? Place a star on the parts of the world where you would like to see the UN peacekeeping forces.
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,yelgaB
taP
©

--- PAGE 95 ---
93
International Organisations
I UN R
NDIA AND THE EFORMS
WTO
India has supported the The World Trade Organisation
restructuring of the UN on several (WTO) is an international
grounds. It believes that a organisation which sets the rules
for global trade. This organisation
strengthened and revitalised UN is
was set up in 1995 as the
desirable in a changing world.
successor to the General Agreement on Trade
India also supports an enhanced and Tariffs (GATT) created after the Second
role for the UN in promoting World War. It has 150 members. All decisions are
development and cooperation taken unanimously but the major economic
among states. India believes that powers such as the US, EU and Japan have
managed to use the WTO to frame rules of trade
development should be central to
to advance their own interests. The developing
the UN’s agenda as it is a vital
countries often complain of non-transparent
precondition for the maintenance procedures and being pushed around by big
of international peace and security. powers.
One of India’s major concerns
has been the composition of the
Security Council, which has India supports an increase in
remained largely static while the the number of both permanent
UN General Assembly member- and non-permanent members. Its
ship has expanded considerably. representatives have argued that
India considers that this has the activities of the Security
harmed the representative Council have greatly expanded in
character of the Security Council. the past few years. The success of
It also argues that an expanded the Security Council’s actions
Council, with more representation, depends upon the political
will enjoy greater support in the support of the international
world community. community. Any plan for
restructuring of the Security
We should keep in mind that
Council should, therefore, be
the membership of the UN
broad-based. For example, the
Security Council was expanded
Security Council should have
from 11 to 15 in 1965. But, there
more developing countries in it.
was no change in the number of
permanent members. Since then, Not surprisingly, India itself
the size of the Council has also wishes to be a permanent
remained stationary. The fact member in a restructured UN.
remains that the overwhelming India is the second most populous
majority of the UN General country in the world comprising
Assembly members now are almost one-fifth of the world
developing countries. Therefore, population. Moreover, India is also
India argues that they should also the world’s largest democracy.
have a role in shaping the India has participated in virtually
decisions in the Security Council all of the initiatives of the UN. Its
which affect them. role in the UN’s peacekeeping
OTW
Do we want to
oppose the bossism
of the big five or do
we want to join them
and become
another boss?

--- PAGE 96 ---
94 Contemporary World Politics
think that its difficulties with
IAEA Pakistan will make India
ineffective as a permanent
The International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) was established in member. Yet others feel that if
1957. It came into being to India is included, then other
implement US President Dwight emerging powers will have to be
Eisenhower’s “Atoms for Peace”
accommodated such as Brazil,
proposal. It seeks to promote the peaceful use of
Germany, Japan, perhaps even
nuclear energy and to prevent its use for military
South Africa, whom they oppose. purposes. IAEA teams regularly inspect nuclear
facilities all over the world to ensure that civilian There are those who feel that
reactors are not being used for military purposes. Africa and South America must be
represented in any expansion of
the permanent membership since
efforts is a long and substantial
those are the only continents not
one. The country’s economic
to have representation in the
emergence on the world stage is
present structure. Given these
another factor that perhaps
concerns, it may not be very easy
justifies India’s claim to a
for India or anyone else to become
permanent seat in the Security
a permanent member of the UN in
Council. India has also made
the near future.
regular financial contributions to
the UN and never faltered on its
T UN U
payments. India is aware that HE IN A NIPOLAR
permanent membership of the W
ORLD
Security Council also has
symbolic importance. It signifies Among the concerns about the
a country’s growing importance in reform and restructuring of the
world affairs. This greater status UN has been the hope of some
is an advantage to a country in countries that changes could help
the conduct of its foreign policy: the UN cope better with a unipolar
the reputation for being powerful word in which the US was the
makes you more influential. most powerful country without
any serious rivals. Can the UN
Despite India’s wish to be a
serve as a balance against US
permanent veto-wielding member
dominance? Can it help maintain
of the UN, some countries
a dialogue between the rest of the
question its inclusion.
world and the US and prevent
Neighbouring Pakistan, with
America from doing whatever it
which India has troubled
wants?
relations, is not the only country
that is reluctant to see India US power cannot be easily
become a permanent veto member checked. First of all, with the
What happens if the
of the Security Council. Some disappearance of the Soviet
UN invites someone
countries, for instance, are Union, the US stands as the only
to New York but the
concerned about India’s nuclear superpower. Its military and
US does not issue
visa? weapons capabilities. Others economic power allow it to ignore
AEAI

--- PAGE 97 ---
95
International Organisations
the UN or any other international
organisation.
Secondly, within the UN, the
influence of the US is
considerable. As the single largest
contributor to the UN, the US has
unmatched financial power. The
fact that the UN is physically
located within the US territory
gives Washington additional
sources of influence. The US also
has many nationals in the UN
bureaucracy. In addition, with its
veto power the US can stop any
moves that it finds annoying or
damaging to its interests or the
interests of its friends and allies.
The power of the US and its veto
within the organisation also
ensure that Washington has a
considerable degree of say in the
choice of the Secretary General of
the UN. The US can and does use
this power to “split” the rest of the
world and to reduce opposition to
its policies.
The UN is not therefore a great
balance to the US. Nevertheless,
in a unipolar world in which the
US is dominant, the UN can and
Amnesty
has served to bring the US and
the rest of the world into International
discussions over various issues.
Amnesty International is an NGO
US leaders, in spite of their that campaigns for the
frequent criticism of the UN, do protection of human rights all
see the organisation as serving a over the world. It promotes
respect for all the human rights in the Universal
purpose in bringing together over
Declaration of Human Rights. It believes that
190 nations in dealing with
human rights are interdependent and indivisible.
conflict and social and economic
It prepares and publishes reports on human rights.
development. As for the rest of the Governments are not always happy with these
world, the UN provides an arena reports since a major focus of Amnesty is the
in which it is possible to modify misconduct of government authorities.
Nevertheless, these reports play an important role
US attitudes and policies. While
in research and advocacy on human rights.
the rest of the world is rarely
LANOITANRETNI
YTSENMA
© Mike Lane, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

--- PAGE 98 ---
96 Contemporary World Politics
Human Rights Watch
Human Rights Watch is another
international NGO involved in
research and advocacy on
human rights. It is the largest
international human rights
organisation in the US. It draws the global media’s
attention to human rights abuses. It helped in
building international coalitions like the
campaigns to ban landmines, to stop the use of
child soldiers and to establish the International
Criminal Court.
united against Washington, and
while it is virtually impossible to
“balance” US power, the UN does
provide a space within which
arguments against specific US
attitudes and policies are heard
and compromises and
concessions can be shaped.
HCTAW
STHGIR
NAMUH
The UN is an imperfect body,
but without it the world would be
worse off. Given the growing
connections and links between
societies and issues—what we
often call ‘interdependence’—it is
hard to imagine how more than
seven billion people would live
together without an organisation
such as the UN. Technology
promises to increase planetary
interdependence, and therefore
the importance of the UN will only
increase. Peoples and govern-
ments will have to find ways of
supporting and using the UN and
other international organisations
in ways that are consistent with
their own interests and the
interests of the international
community more broadly.
1. Mark correct or wrong against each of the following statements
below about the veto power.
a. Only the permanent members of the Security Council possess
the veto power.
b. It’s a kind of negative power.
c. The Secretary-General uses this power when not satisfied with
any decision.
d. One veto can stall a Security Council resolution.
2. Mark correct or wrong against each of the following statements
below that describe the way the UN functions.
a. All security and peace related issues are dealt with in the
Security Council.
b. Humanitarian policies are implemented by the main organs
and specialised agencies spread across the globe.
c. Having consensus among the five permanent members on
security issues is vital for its implementation.
d. The members of the General Assembly are automatically the
members of all other principal organs and specialised agencies
of the UN.
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E

--- PAGE 99 ---
97
International Organisations
3. Which among the following would give more weightage to India’s
proposal for permanent membership in the Security Council?
a. Nuclear capability
b. It has been a member of the UN since its inception
c. It is located in Asia
d. India’s growing economic power and stable political system
4. The UN agency concerned with the safety and peaceful use of E
nuclear technology is:
a. The UN Committee on Disarmament
x
b. International Atomic Energy Agency
c. UN International Safeguard Committee
d. None of the above
5. WTO is serving as the successor to which of the following e
organisations
a. General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs
r
b. General Arrangement on Trade and Tariffs
c. World Health Organisation
d. UN Development Programme
c
6. Fill in the blanks.
a. The prime objective of the UN is ___________________________
b. The highest functionary of the UN is called_________________
i
c. The UN Security Council has _____ permanent and _____non-
permanent members.
d. ______________________ is the present UN Secretary-General. s
7. Match the principal organs and agencies of the UN with their
functions:
1. Economic and Social Council e
2. International Court of Justice
3. International Atomic Energy Agency
s
4. Security Council
5. UN High Commission for Refugees
6. World Trade Organisation
7. International Monetary Fund
8. General Assembly
9. World Health Organisation
10. Secretariat

--- PAGE 100 ---
98 Contemporary World Politics
a. Oversees the global financial system
b. Preservation of international peace and security
c. Looks into the economic and social welfare of the member
countries
d. Safety and peaceful use of nuclear technology
e. Resolves disputes between and among member countries
f. Provides shelter and medical help during emergencies
g. Debates and discusses global issues
h. Administration and coordination of UN affairs
i. Providing good health for all
j. Facilitates free trade among member countries
8. What are the functions of the Security Council?
9. As a citizen of India, how would you support India’s candidature for
the permanent membership of the Security Council? Justify your
proposal.
10. Critically evaluate the difficulties involved in implementing the
suggested reforms to reconstruct the UN.
11. Though the UN has failed in preventing wars and related miseries,
nations prefer its continuation. What makes the UN an indispensable
organisation?
12. ‘Reforming the UN means restructuring of the Security Council’. Do
you agree with this statement? Give arguments for or against this
position.
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E

--- PAGE 101 ---
Chapter 7
Security in the
Contemporary World
O
VERVIEW
In reading about world politics, we
frequently encounter the terms
‘security’ or ‘national security’. Do
we know what these terms mean?
Often, they are used to stop debate
and discussion. We hear that an
issue is a security issue and that
it is vital for the well-being of the
country. The implication is that it
is too important or secret to be
debated and discussed openly.
We see movies in which everything
surrounding ‘national security’ is
shadowy and dangerous. Security
seems to be something that is not
the business of the ordinary
citizen. In a democracy, surely this
cannot be the case. As citizens of
a democracy, we need to know
more about the term security.
What exactly is it? And what are
India’s security concerns? This
chapter debates these questions.
It introduces two different ways of
looking at security and highlights The concern about human security was reflected in the 1994
the importance of keeping in mind UNDP’s Human Development Report, which contends, “the
concept of security has for too long been interpreted
different contexts or situations
narrowly… It has been more related to nation states than
which determine our view of
people… Forgotten were the legitimate concerns of ordinary
security. people who sought security in their daily lives.” The images
above show various forms of security threats.

--- PAGE 102 ---
100 Contemporary World Politics
W HAT IS S ECURITY ? those things that threaten ‘core
values’ should be regarded as being
At its most basic, security implies of interest in discussions of
freedom from threats. Human security. Whose core values
existence and the life of a country though? The core values of the
are full of threats. Does that mean country as a whole? The core
that every single threat counts as values of ordinary women and men
a security threat? Every time a in the street? Do governments, on
Who decides about person steps out of his or her behalf of citizens, always have the
my security? Some house, there is some degree of same notion of core values as the
leaders and experts?
threat to their existence and way ordinary citizen?
Can’t I decide what
of life. Our world would be
is my security? Furthermore, when we speak
saturated with security issues if
of threats to core values, how
we took such a broad view of what
intense should the threats be?
is threatening.
Surely there are big and small
Those who study security, threats to virtually every value we
therefore, generally say that only hold dear. Can all those threats
be brought into the understanding
of security? Every time another
country does something or fails to
do something, this may damage
the core values of one’s country.
Every time a person is robbed in
the streets, the security of
ordinary people as they live their
daily lives is harmed. Yet, we
would be paralysed if we took such
an extensive view of security:
everywhere we looked, the world
would be full of dangers.
So we are brought to a
conclusion: security relates only
to extremely dangerous threats—
threats that could so endanger
core values that those values
would be damaged beyond repair
if we did not do something to deal
with the situation.
Having said that, we must
admit that security remains a
slippery idea. For instance, have
Taming Peace societies always had the same
Have you heard of ‘peacekeeping force’? Do you think this is conception of security? It would
paradoxical term?
be surprising if they did because
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©

--- PAGE 103 ---
Security in the Contemporary World 101
so many things change in the
world around us. And, at any
given time in world history, do all
societies have the same conception
of security? Again, it would be
amazing if six hundred and fifty
crore people, organised in nearly
200 countries, had the same
conception of security! Let us begin
by putting the various notions of
security under two groups:
traditional and non-traditional
conceptions of security.
T N :
RADITIONAL OTIONS
E
XTERNAL
Economy of war
Most of the time, when we read
© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
and hear about security we are
talking about traditional, national breaks out so as to deny the
security conceptions of security. attacking country its objectives
In the traditional conception of and to turn back or defeat the
security, the greatest danger to a attacking forces altogether.
country is from military threats. Governments may choose to
The source of this danger is surrender when actually confronted
another country which by by war, but they will not advertise
threatening military action this as the policy of the country.
endangers the core values of Therefore, security policy is
sovereignty, independence and concerned with preventing war,
territorial integrity. Military action which is called deterrence, and
also endangers the lives of with limiting or ending war, which
ordinary citizens. It is unlikely that is called defence.
in a war only soldiers will be hurt
Traditional security policy has
or killed. Quite often, ordinary
a third component called balance
men and women are made targets
of power. When countries look
of war, to break their support of
around them, they see that some
the war.
countries are bigger and stronger.
In responding to the threat of This is a clue to who might be a
war, a government has three basic threat in the future. For instance,
War is all about
choices: to surrender; to prevent a neighbouring country may not insecurity, destruction
the other side from attacking by say it is preparing for attack. and deaths. How
promising to raise the costs of war There may be no obvious reason can a war make
to an unacceptable level; and to for attack. But the fact that this anyone secure?
defend itself when war actually country is very powerful is a sign

--- PAGE 104 ---
102 Contemporary World Politics
formalised in written treaties and
are based on a fairly clear
identification of who constitutes
the threat. Countries form
alliances to increase their
effective power relative to another
country or alliance. Alliances are
based on national interests and
can change when national
interests change. For example,
the US backed the Islamic
militants in Afghanistan against
the Soviet Union in the 1980s,
but later attacked them when Al
Qaeda—a group of Islamic
How do the big powers react when new countries claim nuclear militants led by Osama bin
status? On what basis can we say that some countries can be Laden—launched terrorist
trusted with nuclear weapons while others can’t be?
strikes against America on 11
September 2001.
that at some point in the future it In the traditional view of
may choose to be aggressive. security, then, most threats to a
Governments are, therefore, very country’s security come from
sensitive to the balance of power outside its borders. That is
between their country and other because the international system
countries. They do work hard to is a rather brutal arena in which
maintain a favourable balance of there is no central authority
power with other countries, capable of controlling behaviour.
especially those close by, those Within a country, the threat of
with whom they have differences, violence is regulated by an
or with those they have had acknowledged central authority —
conflicts in the past. A good part the government. In world politics,
of maintaining a balance of power
there is no acknowledged central
is to build up one’s military power,
authority that stands above
although economic and techno-
everyone else. It is tempting to
logical power are also important
think that the United Nations is
since they are the basis for
such an authority or could become
military power.
such an institution. However, as
A fourth and related presently constituted, the UN is a
component of traditional security creature of its members and has
policy is alliance building. An authority only to the extent that
alliance is a coalition of states the membership allows it to have
that coordinate their actions to authority and obeys it. So, in
deter or defend against military world politics, each country has to
attack. Most alliances are be responsible for its own security.
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,ikstinramoK
otsirhC
©

--- PAGE 105 ---
Security in the Contemporary World 103
T N : Again, we draw attention to
RADITIONAL OTIONS
Browse through a
contexts and situations. We know
I week’s newspaper
NTERNAL that the period after the Second
and list all the
World War was the Cold War in
external and
By now you will have asked
which the US-led Western alliance
internal conflicts
yourself: doesn’t security depend
faced the Soviet-led Communist
that are taking
on internal peace and order? How
alliance. Above all, the two
place around the
can a society be secure if there is
alliances feared a military attack
globe.
violence or the threat of violence
from each other. Some European
inside its borders? And how can
powers, in addition, continued to
it prepare to face violence from
worry about violence in their
outside its borders if it is not
colonies, from colonised people
secure inside its borders?
who wanted independence. We
Traditional security must also, have only to remember the French
therefore, concern itself with fighting in Vietnam in the 1950s
internal security. The reason it is or the British fighting in Kenya in
not given so much importance is the 1950s and the early 1960s.
that after the Second World War
As the colonies became free
it seemed that, for the most
from the late 1940s onwards, their
powerful countries on earth,
security concerns were often
internal security was more or less
similar to that of the European
assured. We said earlier that it is
powers. Some of the newly-
important to pay attention to
independent countries, like the
contexts and situations. While
European powers, became
internal security was certainly
members of the Cold War alliances.
a part of the concerns of
They, therefore, had to worry about
governments historically, after the
the Cold War becoming a hot war
Second World War there was a
and dragging them into hostilities
context and situation in which
— against neighbours who might
internal security did not seem to
have joined the other side in the
matter as much as it had in the
Cold War, against the leaders of the
past. After 1945, the US and the
alliances (the United States or
Soviet Union appeared to be
Soviet Union), or against any of the
united and could expect peace
other partners of the US and Soviet
within their borders. Most of the
Union. The Cold War between the
European countries, particularly
two superpowers was responsible
the powerful Western European
for approximately one-third of all
countries, faced no serious threats
wars in the post-Second World
from groups or communities living
War period. Most of these wars
within those borders. Therefore,
were fought in the Third World.
these countries focused primarily
Just as the European colonial
on threats from outside their
powers feared violence in the
borders.
colonies, some colonial people
What were the external threats feared, after independence, that
facing these powerful countries? they might be attacked by their

--- PAGE 106 ---
104 Contemporary World Politics
Internally, the new states
worried about threats from
separatist movements which
wanted to form independent
countries. Sometimes, the
external and internal threats
merged. A neighbour might help
or instigate an internal separatist
movement leading to tensions
between the two neighbouring
countries. Internal wars now
make up more than 95 per cent of
all armed conflicts fought
anywhere in the world. Between
1946 and 1991, there was a
twelve-fold rise in the number of
civil wars—the greatest jump in
200 years. So, for the new states,
Third World Arms © Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. external wars with neighbours and
internal wars posed a serious
former colonial rulers in Europe.
challenge to their security.
They had to prepare, therefore, to
defend themselves against an
T S
imperial war. RADITIONAL ECURITY AND
The security challenges facing C OOPERATION
the newly-independent countries
of Asia and Africa were different In traditional security, there is a
from the challenges in Europe in recognition that cooperation in
two ways. For one thing, the new limiting violence is possible. These
countries faced the prospect of limits relate both to the ends and
military conflict with neighbouring the means of war. It is now an
countries. For another, they had almost universally-accepted view
to worry about internal military that countries should only go to
conflict. These countries faced war for the right reasons, primarily
threats not only from outside their self-defence or to protect other
borders, mostly from neighbours, people from genocide. War must
but also from within. Many newly- also be limited in terms of the
Those who fight independent countries came to means that are used. Armies must
against their own fear their neighbours even more avoid killing or hurting non-
country must be than they feared the US or Soviet combatants as well as unarmed
unhappy about
Union or the former colonial and surrendering combatants.
something. Perhaps it
powers. They quarrelled over They should not be excessively
is their insecurity that
borders and territories or control violent. Force must in any case
creates insecurity for
the country. of people and populations or all of be used only after all the
these simultaneously. alternatives have failed.

--- PAGE 107 ---
Security in the Contemporary World 105
Traditional views of security
do not rule out other forms of
cooperation as well. The most
important of these are dis-
armament, arms control, and
confidence building. Disarmament
requires all states to give up
certain kinds of weapons. For
example, the 1972 Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC) and
the 1992 Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC) banned the
production and possession of The text says: “Whether Elevated or Under Attack, the Department
these weapons. More than 155 of Homeland Security Terror Meter takes the uncertainty out of
staying informed of the level of terror in our nation. Move the Terror
states acceded to the BWC and
Indicator to the current threat level, which corresponds to how
181 states acceded to the CWC.
terrified the Americal people are of the threat of terror attacks.
Both conventions included all Terror is all around us, and can strike at anytime. Thanks to the
the great powers. But the Terror Meter, you will never have to wonder how terrified you should
superpowers — the US and Soviet be. Proceed with caution”.
Union — did not want to give up
to deploy a very limited number of
the third type of weapons of mass
defensive systems, it stopped them
destruction, namely, nuclear
from large-scale production of
weapons, so they pursued arms
those systems.
control.
As we noted in Chapter 1, the
Arms control regulates the
US and Soviet Union signed a
acquisition or development of
number of other arms control
weapons. The Anti-ballistic
treaties including the Strategic
Missile (ABM) Treaty in 1972 tried
Arms Limitations Treaty II or
to stop the United States and
SALT II and the Strategic Arms
Soviet Union from using ballistic
Reduction Treaty (START). The
missiles as a defensive shield
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
to launch a nuclear attack.
(NPT) of 1968 was an arms control
While it did allow both countries
treaty in the sense that it
regulated the acquisition of
nuclear weapons: those countries
that had tested and manufactured
nuclear weapons before 1967 were
allowed to keep their weapons; How funny! First they
make deadly and
and those that had not done so
expensive weapons.
were to give up the right to acquire
Then they make
them. The NPT did not abolish
complicated treaties
nuclear weapons; rather, it limited
to save themselves
the number of countries that from these weapons.
could have them. They call it security!

--- PAGE 108 ---
106 Contemporary World Politics
Traditional security also conception, the referent is the state
accepts confidence building as a with its territory and governing
means of avoiding violence. institutions. In the non-traditional
Confidence building is a process conceptions, the referent is
in which countries share ideas expanded. When we ask ‘Security
and information with their rivals. for who?’ proponents of non-
They tell each other about their traditional security reply ‘Not just
military intentions and, up to a the state but also individuals or
point, their military plans. This communities or indeed all of
is a way of demonstrating that humankind’. Non-traditional views
they are not planning a surprise of security have been called
attack. They also tell each other ‘human security’ or ‘global
about the kind of forces they security’.
possess, and they may share
Human security is about the
information on where those forces
protection of people more than the
are deployed. In short, confidence
protection of states. Human
building is a process designed to
security and state security should
ensure that rivals do not go to war
be — and often are — the same
through misunderstanding or
thing. But secure states do not
misperception.
automatically mean secure
Overall, traditional conceptions peoples. Protecting citizens from
of security are principally foreign attack may be a necessary
concerned with the use, or threat condition for the security of
of use, of military force. In individuals, but it is certainly not
traditional security, force is both
the principal threat to security
and the principal means of
achieving security.
N -T N
ON RADITIONAL OTIONS
Non-traditional notions of security
go beyond military threats to
include a wide range of threats and
dangers affecting the conditions of
human existence. They begin by
questioning the traditional referent
of security. In doing so, they also
question the other three elements
of security — what is being secured,
from what kind of threats and the
The cartoon comments on the massive
Now we are talking!
approach to security. When we say expenditure on defence and lack of
That is what I call real
referent we mean ‘Security for money for peace-related initiatives in
security for real
the US. Is it any different in our country?
human beings. who?’ In the traditional security
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,regniS
ydnA
©

--- PAGE 109 ---
Security in the Contemporary World 107
a sufficient one. Indeed, during bird flu and so on. No country can
the last 100 years, more people resolve these problems alone. And,
have been killed by their own in some situations, one country
governments than by foreign may have to disproportionately
armies. bear the brunt of a global problem
such as environmental
All proponents of human
degradation. For example, due to
security agree that its primary
global warming, a sea level rise of
goal is the protection of
1.5–2.0 meters would flood 20
individuals. However, there are
percent of Bangladesh, inundate
differences about precisely what
most of the Maldives, and threaten
threats individuals should be
nearly half the population of
protected from. Proponents of
Thailand. Since these problems are
the ‘narrow’ concept of human
global in nature, international
security focus on violent
cooperation is vital, even though
threats to individuals or, as former
it is difficult to achieve.
UN Secretary-General Kofi
Annan puts it, “the protection of
N S T
communities and individuals from EW OURCES OF HREATS
internal violence”. Proponents of
The non-traditional conceptions—
the ‘broad’ concept of human
both human security and global
security argue that the threat
security—focus on the changing
agenda should include
nature of threats to security. We
hunger, disease and natural
will discuss some of these threats
disasters because these kill far
in the section below.
more people than war, genocide
and terrorism combined. Human Terrorism refers to political
security policy, they argue, violence that targets civilians
should protect people from these deliberately and indiscriminately.
threats as well as from violence. In International terrorism involves
its broadest formulation, the the citizens or territory of more
human security agenda also than one country. Terrorist
encompasses economic security groups seek to change a political
and ‘threats to human dignity’. context or condition that they do
Put differently, the broadest not like by force or threat of
formulation stresses what has force. Civilian targets are
been called ‘freedom from want’ usually chosen to terrorise the
and ‘freedom from fear’, public and to use the
respectively. unhappiness of the public as a
weapon against national
The idea of global security
governments or other parties in
emerged in the 1990s in response
conflict.
to the global nature of threats
such as global warming, The classic cases of terrorism
international terrorism, and health involve hijacking planes or planting
epidemics like AIDS and bombs in trains, cafes, markets

--- PAGE 110 ---
108 Contemporary World Politics
and other crowded places. Since
11 September 2001 when terrorists
attacked the World Trade Centre in
America, other governments and
public have paid more attention to
terrorism, though terrorism itself is
not new. In the past, most of the
terror attacks have occurred in the
Middle East, Europe, Latin
America and South Asia.
Human rights have come to
be classified into three types. The
first type is political rights such as
freedom of speech and assembly.
The second type is economic and
social rights. The third type is the
rights of colonised people or ethnic
and indigenous minorities. While
there is broad agreement on this
classification, there is no
agreement on which set of rights
Taking the train © Tab, Cagle Cartoons Inc. should be considered as universal
Why do we always
look outside when
talking about human
rights violations?
Don’t we have
examples from our
own country? He doesn’t exist!

--- PAGE 111 ---
Security in the Contemporary World 109
human rights, nor what the population growth occurs in just
international community should six countries—India, China,
do when rights are being violated. Pakistan, Nigeria, Bangladesh
and Indonesia. Among the world’s
Since the 1990s, developments
poorest countries, population is
such as Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait,
expected to triple in the next 50
the genocide in Rwanda, and the
years, whereas many rich
Indonesian military’s killing of
countries will see population
people in East Timor have led to
shrinkage in that period. High per
a debate on whether or not the UN
capita income and low population
should intervene to stop human
growth make rich states or rich
rights abuses. There are those
social groups get richer, whereas
who argue that the UN Charter
low incomes and high population
empowers the international
growth reinforce each other to
community to take up arms in
make poor states and poor
defence of human rights. Others
groups get poorer.
argue that the national interests
of the powerful states will Globally, this disparity
determine which instances of contributes to the gap between
human rights violations the UN
the Northern and Southern
will act upon.
countries of the world. Within the
Global poverty is another South, disparities have also
source of insecurity. World sharpened, as a few countries
population—now at 650 crore— have managed to slow down
will reach 700 to 800 crore within population growth and raise
25 years and may eventually level incomes while others have failed
out at 900 to 1000 crore. to do so. For example, most of the
Currently, half the world’s world’s armed conflicts now take

--- PAGE 112 ---
110 Contemporary World Politics
place in sub-Saharan Africa, have to accept migrants. While
Take a map which is also the poorest region refugees leave their country of
of Africa and of the world. At the turn of the origin, people who have fled their
plot various 21st century, more people were homes but remain within national
threats to the being killed in wars in this region borders are called ‘internally
people’s than in the rest of the world displaced people’. Kashmiri
security on combined. Pandits that fled the violence in the
that map. Kashmir Valley in the early 1990s
Poverty in the South has also
are an example of an internally
led to large-scale migration to
displaced community.
seek a better life, especially better
economic opportunities, in the The world refugee map tallies
North. This has created almost perfectly with the world
international political frictions. conflicts map because wars and
International law and norms make armed conflicts in the South have
a distinction between migrants generated millions of refugees
(those who voluntarily leave their seeking safe haven. From 1990 to
home countries) and refugees 1995, 70 states were involved in
(those who flee from war, natural 93 wars which killed about 55 lakh
disaster or political persecution). people. As a result, individuals,
States are generally supposed to and families and, at times, whole
accept refugees, but they do not communities have been forced to
migrate because of generalised
fear of violence or due to the
destruction of livelihoods,
identities and living
environments. A look at the
correlation between wars
and refugee migration shows
that in the 1990s, all but
three of the 60 refugee flows
coincided with an internal
armed conflict.
Health epidemics such
as HIV-AIDS, bird flu, and
severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) have
rapidly spread across
countries through migration,
business, tourism and
military operations. One
country’s success or failure
in limiting the spread of
these diseases affects
infections in other countries.
Credit: www.unhcr.org

--- PAGE 113 ---
Security in the Contemporary World 111
By 2003, an estimated 4 crore
people were infected with HIV-
AIDS worldwide, two-thirds of
them in Africa and half of the rest
in South Asia. In North America
and other industrialised countries,
new drug therapies dramatically
lowered the death rate from HIV-
AIDS in the late 1990s. But these
treatments were too expensive to
help poor regions like Africa where
it has proved to be a major factor
in driving the region backward into
deeper poverty.
Other new and poorly
understood diseases such as ebola Keshav, The Hindu
virus, hantavirus, and hepatitis C
How should the world address issues shown here?
have emerged, while old diseases
like tuberculosis, malaria, dengue
as a security problem, therefore, an
fever and cholera have mutated
issue must share a minimum
into drug resistant forms that are
common criterion, say, of
difficult to treat. Epidemics among
threatening the very existence of
animals have major economic
the referent (a state or group of
effects. Since the late 1990s,
people) though the precise nature
Britain has lost billions of dollars
of this threat may be different. For
of income during an outbreak of
example, the Maldives may feel
the mad-cow disease, and bird flu
threatened by global warming
shut down supplies of poultry
because a big part of its territory
exports from several Asian
may be submerged with the rising
countries. Such epidemics
sea level, whereas for countries in
demonstrate the growing inter-
Southern Africa, HIV-AIDS poses
dependence of states making their
a serious threat as one in six
borders less meaningful than in
adults has the disease (one in three
the past and emphasise the need
for Botswana, the worst case). In
for international cooperation.
1994, the Tutsi tribe in Rwanda
Expansion of the concept of faced a threat to its existence as
security does not mean that we nearly five lakh of its people were
can include any kind of disease or killed by the rival Hutu tribe in a
distress in the ambit of security. matter of weeks. This shows that
If we do that, the concept of non-traditional conceptions of
security stands to lose its security, like traditional
coherence. Everything could conceptions of security, vary
become a security issue. To qualify according to local contexts.

--- PAGE 114 ---
112 Contemporary World Politics
C development organisations),
OOPERATIVE
businesses and corporations,
S
ECURITY and great personalities
(e.g. Mother Teresa, Nelson
We can see that
Mandela).
dealing with many
Cooperative security may
of these non-
involve the use of force as a last
traditional threats
resort. The international
to security require
community may have to sanction
cooperation rather
the use of force to deal with
than military
World Blindness
governments that kill their own
confrontation. Military force may
people or ignore the misery of
have a role to play in combating
their populations who are
terrorism or in enforcing human
devastated by poverty, disease
rights (and even here there is a
and catastrophe. It may have to
limit to what force can achieve),
agree to the use of violence
but it is difficult to see what force
against international terrorists
would do to help alleviate poverty,
and those who harbour them.
manage migration and refugee
Non-traditional security is much
movements, and control
better when the use of force
epidemics. Indeed, in most cases,
is sanctioned and applied
the use of military force would
collectively by the international
only make matters worse!
community rather than when an
Far more effective is to devise
individual country decides to use
strategies that involve
force on its own.
international cooperation.
Cooperation may be bilateral (i.e.
I ’ S S
NDIA S ECURITY TRATEGY
between any two countries),
regional, continental, or global. It
India has faced traditional
would all depend on the nature
(military) and non-traditional
of the threat and the willingness
threats to its security that have
and ability of countries to
emerged from within as well as
respond. Cooperative security
outside its borders. Its security
may also involve a variety of other
strategy has four broad
players, both international
components, which have been
and national—international
used in a varying combination
organisations (the UN, the World
from time to time.
Health Organisation, the World
Bank, the IMF etc.), non- The first component was streng-
I feel happy when I
governmental organisations thening its military capabilities
hear that my country
(Amnesty International, the Red because India has been involved
has nuclear
Cross, private foundations and in conflicts with its neighbours —
weapons. But I don’t
know how exactly it charities, churches and religious Pakistan in 1947–48, 1965, 1971
makes me and my organisations, trade unions, and 1999; and China in 1962.
family more secure. associations, social and Since it is surrounded by nuclear-
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©

--- PAGE 115 ---
Security in the Contemporary World 113
armed countries in the South challenges within the country.
Asian region, India’s decision to Several militant groups from areas
conduct nuclear tests in 1998 was such as the Nagaland, Mizoram,
justified by the Indian government the Punjab, and Kashmir among
in terms of safeguarding national others have, from time to time,
security. India first tested a sought to break away from India.
nuclear device in 1974. India has tried to preserve national
unity by adopting a democratic
The second component of
political system, which allows
India’s security strategy has been
different communities and groups
to strengthen international norms
of people to freely articulate their
and international institutions to
grievances and share political
protect its security interests.
power.
India’s first Prime Minister,
Jawaharlal Nehru, supported the Finally, there has been an
cause of Asian solidarity, attempt in India to develop its
decolonisation, disarmament, economy in a way that the vast
and the UN as a forum in which mass of citizens are lifted out of
international conflicts could be poverty and misery and huge
settled. India also took initiatives economic inequalities are not
to bring about a universal and allowed to exist. The attempt has
non-discriminatory non-proliferation not quite succeeded; we are still
regime in which all countries a very poor and unequal country.
would have the same rights and Yet democratic politics allows
obligations with respect to weapons spaces for articulating the voice
of mass destruction (nuclear, of the poor and the deprived
biological, chemical). It argued for citizens. There is a pressure on
an equitable New International the democratically elected
Economic Order (NIEO). Most governments to combine
importantly, it used non-alignment economic growth with human
to help carve out an area of peace development. Thus democracy is
outside the bloc politics of the two not just a political ideal; a
superpowers. India joined 160 democratic government is also a
countries that have signed and way to provide greater security.
ratified the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, You will read more about the
which provides a roadmap for successes and failures of Indian
reducing the emissions of democracy in this respect in the
greenhouse gases to check global textbook on politics in India since Compare the
warming. Indian troops have been independence. expenditure by
the Indian
sent abroad on UN peacekeeping
government on
missions in support of cooperative
traditional
security initiatives.
security with its
The third component of Indian expenditure on
security strategy is geared non-traditional
towards meeting security security.

--- PAGE 116 ---
114 Contemporary World Politics
STEPS
(cid:139) Narrate the following imaginary situation of four villages settled on the banks of
a river.
Kotabagh, Gewali, Kandali and Goppa are villages adjoining each other beside a
river. People in Kotabagh were the first settlers on the riverbank. They had an
uninterrupted access to abundant natural resources available in the region.
Gradually, people from different regions started coming to this region because of
the abundant natural resources and water. Now there are four villages. With time
the population of these villages expanded. But resources did not expand. Each
village started making claims over natural resources including the boundary of their
respective settlement. Inhabitants of Kotabagh argued for a greater share in natural
resources, as they were the first settlers. Settlers of Kandali and Gewali said that as
they have bigger populations than the others they both need a greater share. The
people of Goppa said as they are used to an extravagant life they need a bigger
share, though their population is smaller in size. All four villages disagreed with each
other’s demands and continued to use the resources as they wished. This led to
frequent clashes among the villagers. Gradually, everybody felt disgusted with the
state of affairs and lost their peace of mind. Now they all wish to live the way they
had lived earlier. But they do not know how to go back to that golden age.
(cid:139) Make a brief note describing the characteristics of each village — the
description should reflect the actual nature of present-day nations.
(cid:139) Divide the classroom into four groups. Each group is to represent a village. Hand
over the village notes to the respective groups.
(cid:139) The teacher is to allot a time (15 minutes) for group discussions on how to go
back to the golden age. Each should develop its own strategy.
All groups are to negotiate freely among themselves as village representatives,
to arrive at a solution (within 20 minutes). Each would put forth its arguments
and counter arguments. The result could be: an amicable agreement
accommodating the demands of all, which seldom happens; or, the entire
negotiation/discussion ends without achieving the purpose.
Ideas for the Teacher
(cid:13) Link the villages to nations and connect to the problems of security (threat to geographical territory/
access to natural resources/insurgency, and so on).
(cid:13) Talk about the observations made during the negotiation and explain how similarly the nations
behave while negotiating on related issues.
(cid:13) The activity could be concluded by making reference to some of the current security issues between
and among nations.

--- PAGE 117 ---
Security in the Contemporary World 115
1. Match the terms with their meaning:
i. Confidence Building Measures (CBMs)
ii. Arms Control
iii. Alliance
iv. Disarmament E
a. Giving up certain types of weapons
x
b. A process of exchanging information on defence matters
between nations on a regular basis
c. A coalition of nations meant to deter or defend against military
attacks
e
d. Regulates the acquisition or development of weapons
2. Which among the following would you consider as a traditional
security concern / non-traditional security concern / not a threat?
r
a. The spread of chikungunya / dengue fever
b. Inflow of workers from a neighbouring nation
c. Emergence of a group demanding nationhood for their region c
d. Emergence of a group demanding autonomy for their region
e. A newspaper that is critical of the armed forces in the country
3. What is the difference between traditional and non-traditional i
security? Which category would the creation and sustenance of
alliances belong to?
s
4. What are the differences in the threats that people in the Third World
face and those living in the First World face?
5. Is terrorism a traditional or non-traditional threat to security?
e
6. What are the choices available to a state when its security is
threatened, according to the traditional security perspective?
7. What is ‘Balance of Power’? How could a state achieve this? s
8. What are the objectives of military alliances? Give an example of
a functioning military alliance with its specific objectives.
9. Rapid environmental degradation is causing a serious threat to
security. Do you agree with the statement? Substantiate your
arguments.

--- PAGE 118 ---
116 Contemporary World Politics
10. Nuclear weapons as deterrence or defence have limited usage
against contemporary security threats to states. Explain the
statement.
11. Looking at the Indian scenario, what type of security has been given
priority in India, traditional or non-traditional? What examples could
you site to substantiate the argument?
12. Read the cartoon below and write a short note in favour or against
the connection between war and terrorism depicted in this
cartoon.
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E
© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.

--- PAGE 119 ---
Chapter 8
Environment and
Natural Resources
O
VERVIEW
This chapter examines the growing
significance of environmental as well
as resource issues in world politics.
It analyses in a comparative
perspective some of the important
environmental movements against
the backdrop of the rising profile of
environmentalism from the 1960s
onwards. Notions of common
property resources and the global
commons too are assessed. We also
discuss, in brief, the stand taken by
India in more recent environmental
The 1992 Earth Summit has brought environmental issues to
debates. Next follows a brief account the centre-stage of global politics. The pictures above show
of the geopolitics of resource rainforest and mangroves.
competition. We conclude by taking
note of the indigenous peoples’
voices and concerns from the
margins of contemporary world
politics.

--- PAGE 120 ---
118 Contemporary World Politics
E C Throughout the world,
NVIRONMENTAL ONCERNS
cultivable area is barely
G P
IN LOBAL OLITICS expanding any more, and a
substantial portion of existing
In this book we have discussed
agricultural land is losing
‘world politics’ in a fairly limited
fertility. Grasslands have been
sense: wars and treaties, rise and
overgrazed and fisheries over-
decline of state power, the
harvested. Water bodies have
relationship between the
Politics in forests, suffered extensive depletion
governments that represent their
politics in water, and pollution, severely
countries in the international
politics in restricting food production.
atmosphere! What is arena and the role of inter-
According to the Human
not political then? governmental organisations. In
Development Report 2006 of the
Chapter 7, we expanded the scope
United Nations Development
of world politics to include issues
Programme, 1.2 billion people
like poverty and epidemics. That
in developing countries have no
may not have been a very difficult
access to safe water and 2.6
step to take, for we all think that
billion have no access to
governments are responsible for
sanitation, resulting in the
controlling these. In that sense
death of more than three
they fall within the scope of world
million children every year.
politics. Now consider some other
issues. Do you think they fall Natural forests — which help
within the scope of contemporary stabilise the climate, moderate
world politics? water supplies, and harbour
a majority of the planet’s
biodiversity on land—are
being cut down and people are
being displaced. The loss of
biodiversity continues due to
the destruction of habitat in
areas which are rich in
species.
A steady decline in the total
amount of ozone in the Earth’s
stratosphere (commonly
referred to as the ozone hole)
poses a real danger to
ecosystems and human
Around the Aral Sea, thousands of people have had to leave their
health.
homes as the toxic waters have totally destroyed the fishing industry.
The shipping industry and all related activities have collapsed. Coastal pollution too is
Rising concentrations of salt in the soil have caused low crop yields.
increasing globally. Although
Numerous studies have been conducted. In fact locals joke that if
the open sea is relatively clean,
everyone who’d come to study the Aral had brought a bucket of
water, the sea would be full by now. Source: www.gobartimes.org the coastal waters are

--- PAGE 121 ---
Environment and Natural Resources 119
becoming increasingly polluted
largely due to land-based
activities. If unchecked,
intensive human settlement of
coastal zones across the globe
will lead to further
deterioration in the quality of
marine environment.
You might ask are we not
talking here about ‘natural
phenomena’ that should be studied
in geography rather than in political
science. But think about it again.
If the various governments take
steps to check environmental
degradation of the kind mentioned
above, these issues will have
political consequences in that
sense. Most of them are such that Global Warming © Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc.
no single government can address
Why do you think the fingers are designed like chimneys and the
them fully. Therefore they have to world made into a lighter?
become part of ‘world politics’. Issues
of environment and natural of the Earth’s resources against the
resources are political in another backdrop of rapidly growing world
deeper sense. Who causes population. International agencies,
environmental degradation? Who including the United Nations
pays the price? And who is Environment Programme (UNEP),
responsible for taking corrective began holding international
action? Who gets to use how much conferences and promoting
of the natural resources of the detailed studies to get a more
Earth? All these raise the issue of coordinated and effective response
who wields how much power. They to environmental problems. Since
are, therefore, deeply political then, the environment has
questions. emerged as a significant issue of
global politics.
Although environmental
concerns have a long history, The growing focus on
awareness of the environmental environmental issues within the Collect news
consequences of economic growth arena of global politics was firmly clippings on
acquired an increasingly political consolidated at the United Nations reports
character from the 1960s onwards. Conference on Environment and linking
The Club of Rome, a global think Development held in Rio de environment
and politics
tank, published a book in 1972 Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992.
in your own
entitled Limits to Growth, This was also called the Earth
locality.
dramatising the potential depletion Summit. The summit was

--- PAGE 122 ---
120 Contemporary World Politics
countries of the First World,
generally referred to as the ‘global
North’ were pursuing a different
environmental agenda than the
poor and developing countries of
the Third World, called the ‘global
South’. Whereas the Northern
states were concerned with ozone
depletion and global warming, the
Southern states were anxious to
address the relationship between
economic development and
environmental management.
The Rio Summit produced
conventions dealing with climate
change, biodiversity, forestry, and
recommended a list of development
practices called ‘Agenda 21’. But
it left unresolved considerable
differences and difficulties. There
was a consensus on combining
economic growth with ecological
responsibility. This approach to
development is commonly known as
‘sustainable development’. The
problem however was how exactly
this was to be achieved. Some
critics have pointed out that
Agenda 21 was biased in favour of
economic growth rather than
ensuring ecological conservation.
Are there different perspectives from which the rich and the poor
Let us look at some of the
countries agree to protect the Earth?
contentious issues in the global
attended by 170 states, thousands politics of environment.
of NGOs and many multinational
corporations. Five years earlier,
T P G
HE ROTECTION OF LOBAL
the 1987 Brundtland Report, Our
Common Future, had warned that C OMMONS
traditional patterns of economic
growth were not sustainable in the ‘Commons’ are those resources
long term, especially in view of the which are not owned by anyone
demands of the South for further but rather shared by a community.
industrial development. What was This could be a ‘common room’, a
obvious at the Rio Summit was ‘community centre’, a park or a
that the rich and developed river. Similarly, there are some
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©

--- PAGE 123 ---
Environment and Natural Resources 121
ANTARCTICA
The Antarctic continental region extends
over 14 million square kilometres and
comprises 26 per cent of the world’s
wilderness area, representing 90 per cent
of all terrestrial ice and 70 per cent of
planetary fresh water. The Antarctic also
extends to a further 36 million square
kilometres of ocean. It has a limited
terrestrial life and a highly productive
marine ecosystem, comprising a few plants
(e.g. microscopic algae, fungi and lichen),
marine mammals, fish and hordes of birds
adapted to harsh conditions, as well as the
krill, which is central to marine food chain
and upon which other animals are
dependent. The Antarctic plays an
important role in maintaining climatic
equilibrium, and deep ice cores provide
an important source of information about
greenhouse gas concentrations and
atmospheric temperatures of hundreds
and thousands of years ago.
Who owns this coldest, farthest, and windiest continent on globe? There are two claims about it. Some
countries like the UK, Argentina, Chile, Norway, France, Australia and New Zealand have made legal
claims to sovereign rights over Antarctic territory. Most other states have taken the opposite view that the
Antarctic is a part of the global commons and not subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of any state. These
differences, however, have not prevented the adoption of innovative and potentially far-reaching rules
for the protection of the Antarctic environment and its ecosystem. The Antarctic and the Arctic polar
regions are subjected to special regional rules of environmental protection. Since 1959, activities in the
area have been limited to scientific research, fishing and tourism. Even these limited activities have not
prevented parts of the region from being degraded by waste as a result of oil spills.
areas or regions of the world which Cooperation over the global
are located outside the sovereign commons is not easy. There have
jurisdiction of any one state, and been many path-breaking
therefore require common agreements such as the 1959
governance by the international Antarctic Treaty, the 1987
community. These are known as Montreal Protocol, and the 1991
res communis humanitatis or Antarctic Environmental Protocol.
global commons. They include the A major problem underlying all
Very soon we will
earth’s atmosphere, Antarctica ecological issues relates to the
have ecological
(see Box), the ocean floor, and difficulty of achieving consensus
degradation of the
outer space. on common environmental moon!

--- PAGE 124 ---
122 Contemporary World Politics
One of the biggest catastrophes in Africa in the 1970s, a drought turned the best cropland in five countries into
cracked and barren earth. In fact, the term environmental refugees came into popular vocabulary after this.
Many had to flee their homelands as agriculture was no longer possible. Source: www.gobartimes.org
ocean floor, the crucial issue here
agendas on the basis of vague
scientific evidence and time is technology and industrial
frames. In that sense the development. This is important
discovery of the ozone hole over because the benefits of
the Antarctic in the mid-1980s exploitative activities in outer
revealed the opportunity as well space are far from being equal
as dangers inherent in tackling either for the present or future
global environmental problems. generations.
Find out more
about the Similarly, the history of outer
C D
Kyoto Protocol. space as a global commons shows OMMON BUT IFFERENTIATED
Which major that the management of these R
ESPONSIBILITY
countries did areas is thoroughly influenced by
not sign it? And North-South inequalities. As with We have noted above a difference
why? the earth’s atmosphere and the in the approach to environment

--- PAGE 125 ---
Environment and Natural Resources 123
between the countries of the North that they bear in the international
and the South. The developed pursuit of sustainable development
countries of the North want to in view of the pressures their
discuss the environmental issue societies place on the global
as it stands now and want environment and of the technological
everyone to be equally responsible and financial resources they
for ecological conservation. The command.”
developing countries of the South
The 1992 United Nations
feel that much of the ecological
Framework Convention on
degradation in the world is the
Climate Change (UNFCCC) also
product of industrial development
provides that the parties should
undertaken by the developed
act to protect the climate system
countries. If they have caused
“on the basis of equity and in
more degradation, they must also
accordance with their common but
take more responsibility for
differentiated responsibilities and
undoing the damage now.
respective capabilities.” The
Moreover, the developing countries
parties to the Convention agreed
are in the process of industrialisation
that the largest share of
and they must not be subjected
historical and current global
to the same restrictions, which
emissions of greenhouse gases
apply to the developed countries.
has originated in developed
Thus the special needs of the
countries. It was also
developing countries must be
acknowledged that per capita
taken into account in the
emissions in developing countries
development, application, and
are still relatively low. China,
interpretation of rules of inter-
India, and other developing
national environmental law. This
countries were, therefore,
argument was accepted in the Rio
exempted from the requirements
Declaration at the Earth Summit
of the Kyoto Protocol. The Kyoto
in 1992 and is called the principle
Protocol is an international
of ‘common but differentiated
agreement setting targets for
responsibilities’.
industrialised countries to cut
The relevant part of the Rio their greenhouse gas emissions.
Declaration says that “States Certain gases like Carbon
shall cooperate in the spirit of dioxide, Methane, Hydro-fluoro
global partnership to conserve, carbons etc. are considered at
protect and restore the health least partly responsible for global
and integrity of the Earth’s warming - the rise in global
ecosystem. In view of the different temperature which may have
contributions of global environmental catastrophic consequences for
degradation, states have common life on Earth. The protocol was That’s a cool
but differentiated responsibilities. agreed to in 1997 in Kyoto in principle! A bit like
The developed countries Japan, based on principles set the reservation
acknowledge the responsibility out in UNFCCC. policy in our country,
isn’t it?

--- PAGE 126 ---
124 Contemporary World Politics
C P availability to the poor in much of
OMMON ROPERTY
the world. The institutional
R
ESOURCES arrangement for the actual
management of the sacred groves
Common property represents
on state-owned forest land
common property for the group.
appropriately fits the description
The underlying norm here is that
of a common property regime.
members of the group have both
Along the forest belt of South
rights and duties with respect to
India, sacred groves have been
the nature, levels of use, and the
traditionally managed by village
maintenance of a given resource.
communities.
Through mutual understanding
and centuries of practice, many
I ’ S
NDIA S TAND ON
village communities in India, for
example, have defined members’ E I
NVIRONMENTAL SSUES
rights and responsibilities. A
combination of factors, including India signed and ratified the 1997
privatisation, agricultural intensi- Kyoto Protocol in August 2002.
I heard about some
rivers being sold in fication, population growth and India, China and other developing
Latin America. How ecosystem degradation have countries were exempt from the
can common caused common property to requirements of the Kyoto Protocol
property be sold? dwindle in size, quality, and because their contribution to the
SACRED GROVES IN INDIA
Protecting nature for religious reasons is an ancient practice in many traditional societies. Sacred
groves in India (parcels of uncut forest vegetation in the name of certain deities or natural or
ancestral spirits) exemplify such practice. As a model of community-based resource management,
groves have lately gained attention in conservation literature. The sacred groves can be seen as a
system that informally forces traditional communities to harvest natural resources in an ecologically
sustained fashion. Some researchers believe that sacred groves hold the potential for preserving
not only biodiversity and ecological functions, but also cultural diversity.
Sacred groves embody a rich set of forest preservation practices and they share characteristics
with common property resource systems. Their size ranges from clumps of a few trees to several
hundred acres. Traditionally, sacred groves have been valued for their embodied spiritual and
cultural attributes. Hindus commonly worshipped natural objects, including trees and groves. Many
temples have originated from sacred groves. Deep religious reverence for nature, rather than
resource scarcity, seems to be the basis for the long-standing commitment to preserving these
forests. In recent years, however, expansion and human settlement have slowly encroached on
sacred forests.
In many places, the institutional identity of these traditional forests is fading with the advent of new
national forest policies. A real problem in managing sacred groves arises when legal ownership
and operational control are held by different entities. The two entities in question, the state and the
community, vary in their policy norms and underlying motives for using the sacred grove.

--- PAGE 127 ---
Environment and Natural Resources 125
emission of greenhouse gases that the major responsibility of
during the industrialisation period curbing emission rests with the
(that is believed to be causing developed countries, which have
today’s global warming and climate accumulated emissions over a long
change) was not significant. period of time.
However, the critics of the Kyoto
India’s international negotiating
Protocol point out that sooner or
position relies heavily on
later, both India and China, along
principles of historical
with other developing countries,
responsibility, as enshrined in
will be among the leading
UNFCCC. This acknowledges that
countributors to greenhouse gas
developed countries are responsible
emission. At the G-8 meeting in
for most historical and current
June 2005, India pointed out that
the per capita emission rates of the greenhouse emissions, and
developing countries are a tiny emphasizes that ‘economic and
I get it! First they
fraction of those in the developed social development are the first
destroyed the earth,
world. Following the principle of and overriding priorities of the
now it is our turn to
common but differentiated developing country parties’. So do the same! Is that
responsibility, India is of the view India is wary of recent discussions our stand?

--- PAGE 128 ---
126 Contemporary World Politics
within UNFCCC about introducing conclusions was that there had
binding commitments on rapidly been no meaningful progress with
industrialising countries (such as respect to transfer of new and
Brazil, China and India) to reduce additional financial resources and
their greenhouse gas emissions. environmentally-sound technology
India feels this contravenes the on concessional terms to
very spirit of UNFCCC. Neither developing nations. India finds it
does it seem fair to impose necessary that developed
restrictions on India when the countries take immediate
country’s rise in per capita carbon measures to provide developing
emissions by 2030 is likely to still countries with financial resources
represent less than half the world and clean technologies to enable
average of 3.8 tonnes in 2000. them to meet their existing
Indian emissions are predicted to commitments under UNFCCC.
rise from 0.9 tonnes per capita in India is also of the view that the
2000 to 1.6 tonnes per capita in SAARC countries should adopt a
2030. common position on major global
environment issues, so that the
The Indian government is
region’s voice carries greater
already participating in global
weight.
efforts through a number of
programmes. For example, India’s
National Auto-fuel Policy E M :
NVIRONMENTAL OVEMENTS
mandates cleaner fuels for
O M ?
NE OR ANY
vehicles. The Energy Conservation
Act, passed in 2001, outlines
We have, so far, looked at the way
initiatives to improve energy
governments have reacted at the
efficiency. Similarly, the Electricity
international level to the challenge
Act of 2003 encourages the use of
of environmental degradation. But
renewable energy. Recent trends
some of the most significant
in importing natural gas and
responses to this challenge have
encouraging the adoption of clean
come not from the governments
coal technologies show that India
but rather from groups of environ-
has been making real efforts. The
mentally conscious volunteers
government is also keen to launch
working in different parts of the
a National Mission on Biodiesel,
world. Some of them work at the
using about 11 million hectares
international level, but most of
of land to produce biodiesel by
them work at the local level. These
2011–2012. And India has one of
environmental movements are
the largest renewable energy
amongst the most vibrant,
programmes in the world.
diverse, and powerful social
A review of the implementation
movements across the globe
of the agreements at the Earth
today. It is within social movements
Summit in Rio was undertaken by
that new forms of political action
India in 1997. One of the key
are born or reinvented. These

--- PAGE 129 ---
Environment and Natural Resources 127
movements raise new ideas and examples) are faced with enormous
long-term visions of what we pressures. Forest clearing in the
should do and what we should not Third World continues at an
Let’s find
do in our individual and collective alarming rate, despite three
out about
lives. Here are just a few decades of environmental activism.
‘Chipko
examples to show that diversity The destruction of the world’s last
Movement’.
is an important trait of remaining grand forests has
contemporary environmental actually increased in the last
movements. decade.
The forest movements of the The minerals industry is one
South, in Mexico, Chile, Brazil, of the most powerful forms of
Malaysia, Indonesia, continental industry on the planet. A large
Africa and India (just to list a few number of economies of the South
ARE FORESTS “WILDERNESS”?
What distinguishes the forest movements of the South from
those of the North is that the forests of the former are still
peopled, whilst the forests of the latter are more or less
devoid of human habitat or, at least, are perceived as thus.
This explains to some extent the prevailing notion of
wilderness in the North as a ‘wild place’ where people do
not live. In this perspective, humans are not seen as part of
nature. In other words, ‘environment’ is perceived as
‘somewhere out there’, as something that should be
protected from humans through the creation of parks and
reserves. On the other hand, most environmental issues in
the South are based on the assumption that people live in
the forests.
Wilderness-oriented perspectives have been predominant
in Australia, Scandinavia, North America and New Zealand.
In these regions, there are still large tracts of relatively
‘underdeveloped wilderness’, unlike in most European
countries. This is not to say that wilderness campaigns are
entirely missing in the South. In the Philippines, green
organisations fight to protect eagles and other birds of prey
Do you agree with the efforts
from extinction. In India, a battle goes on to protect the
made by ecologists? Do you
alarmingly low number of Bengal tigers. In Africa, a long
agree with the way ecologists are
campaign has been waged against the ivory trade and
portrayed here?
the savage slaughter of elephants. Some of the most famous
wilderness struggles have been fought in the forests of Brazil
and Indonesia. All of these campaigns focus on individual species as well as the conservation of the
wilderness habitats, which support them. Many of the wilderness issues have been renamed biodiversity
issues in recent times, as the concept of wilderness has been proved difficult to sell in the South. Many
of these campaigns have been initiated and funded by NGOs such as the Worldwide Wildlife Fund
(WWF), in association with local people.
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©

--- PAGE 130 ---
128 Contemporary World Politics
are now being re-opened present, there has been a spurt in
to MNCs through the mega-dam building in the South,
liberalisation of the from Turkey to Thailand to South
global economy. The Africa, from Indonesia to China.
mineral industry’s India has had some of the leading
extraction of earth, its anti-dam, pro-river movements.
use of chemicals, its Narmada Bachao Andolan is one
pollution of waterways of the best known of these
An entire and land, its clearance movements. It is significant to note
community erupted of native vegetation, its that, in anti-dam and other
in protests against a displacement of communities, environmental movements in
proposed open-
amongst other factors, continue India, the most important shared
cast coal mine
project in Phulbari to invite criticism and resistance idea is non-violence.
town, in the North- in various parts of the globe. One
West district of good example is that of the R G
ESOURCE EOPOLITICS
Dinajpur,
Philippines, where a vast network
Bangladesh. Here
of groups and organisations Resource geopolitics is all about
several dozen
women, one with campaigned against the Western who gets what, when, where and
her infant child, are Mining Corporation (WMC), an how. Resources have provided
chanting slogans
Australia-based multinational some of the key means and motives
against the
company. Much opposition to the of global European power
proposed coal mine
project in 2006. company in its own country, expansion. They have also been the
Australia, is based on anti-nuclear focus of inter-state rivalry. Western
sentiments and advocacy for the geopolitical thinking about
basic rights of Australian resources has been dominated by
indigenous peoples. the relationship of trade, war and
power, at the core of which were
Another group of movements
overseas resources and maritime
are those involved in struggles
navigation. Since sea power itself
against mega-dams. In every
rested on access to timber, naval
country where a mega-dam is
timber supply became a key
being built, one is likely to find
priority for major European powers
an environmental movement
from the 17th century onwards.
opposing it. Increasingly anti-dam
The critical importance of ensuring
movements are pro-river
uninterrupted supply of strategic
movements for more sustainable
resources, in particular oil, was
and equitable management of river
well established both during the
systems and valleys. The early
First World War and the Second
1980s saw the first anti-dam
World War.
movement launched in the North,
namely, the campaign to save the Throughout the Cold War the
Franklin River and its surrounding industrialised countries of the
forests in Australia. This was a North adopted a number of
wilderness and forest campaign as methods to ensure a steady flow
well as anti-dam campaign. At of resources. These included the

--- PAGE 131 ---
Environment and Natural Resources 129
deployment of military forces near
exploitation sites and along sea-
lanes of communication, the
stockpiling of strategic resources,
efforts to prop up friendly
governments in producing
countries, as well as support to
multinational companies and
favourable international
agreements. Traditional Western
strategic thinking remained
concerned with access to
supplies, which might be
threatened by the Soviet Union. A
particular concern was Western
control of oil in the Gulf and
strategic minerals in Southern
and Central Africa. After the end
of the Cold War and the
disintegration of the Soviet Union,
the security of supply continues
to worry government and
business decisions with regard to
several minerals, in particular
radioactive materials. However,
oil continues to be the most
important resource in global strategy. substantial rise in oil demand.
Saudi Arabia has a quarter of the
The global economy relied on
world’s total reserves and is the
oil for much of the 20th century
single largest producer. Iraq’s
as a portable and indispensable
known reserves are second only
fuel. The immense wealth
to Saudi Arabia’s. And, since
associated with oil generates
substantial portions of Iraqi
political struggles to control it,
territory are yet to be fully
and the history of petroleum is
explored, there is a fair chance
also the history of war and
that actual reserves might be far
struggle. Nowhere is this more
larger. The United States, Europe,
obviously the case than in West
Japan, and increasingly India and
Asia and Central Asia. West Asia,
China, which consume this
specifically the Gulf region,
petroleum, are located at a
accounts for about 30 per cent of
considerable distance from the
global oil production. But it has
region.
about 64 percent of the planet’s
known reserves, and is therefore Water is another crucial
the only region able to satisfy any resource that is relevant to global
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,regniS
ydnA
©

--- PAGE 132 ---
130 Contemporary World Politics
EVERYONE IS PLAYING CRUDE!
"The list of petroleum based products in our lives is endless. Toothbrush, pacemaker,
paints, inks, ....Oil provides the energy for 95 per cent of the world's transportation needs.
The whole industrialised world survives on petroleum. We cannot imagine living without it.
There are billions of barrels of it under the earth for us to use. Yet there are disputes
between countries. Why here is one of the problems"
I belong to the Royal Family of the Kingdom of Black Gold. I am
what they call filthy rich. Ever since black gold was found in my
Kingdom things have never been the same again. Mr. Bigoil and
his government came prospecting one day. We struck oil...and a
deal. They armed me to the teeth till it hurt. So when I grin my
subjects look at me with awe. In return Bigoil and sons get to buy
all my oil and loyalty. I am happy and rich and so are they. I turn my
blind eye to their military in this holy land.
I value precious things. Bigoil says his President values
freedom and democracy. So I keep both safely under lock and
key in my land. Sheikh Petrodollah
King of the land of Black Gold
As advised, I did ask myself what can I do for my country. My country has
an enormous appetite for oil. So ...provide it with oil of course! I believe in
the free market system. Free to dig up oil in far away countries, free to
create pliable tin-pot dictators to keep local populations at bay and free to
destroy ecology.
We play no politics but pay them at election campaigns and get them
to invest in our company. That way we don't have to embarrass ourselves
Mr. Bigoil by foolishly waving and smiling at TV cameras.
CEO of Bigoil and sons
Leading the good life
A new beauty is parked outside our garage. Awesome! Isn't it?...
sleek chrome finish, power steering, automatic gears. Excellent
pick up and great mileage too. It is low on emissions too...gentle
on the atmosphere, you know. Global warming and all that stuff.
Now we really are in hurry to zoom off and lead the good life...God
Save Everyone!...vvrrroooommmmm
Mr & Mrs Gobbledoo
Toppleton defends freedom and democracy. That's why he is so generous with guns
and missiles. Like the ones he gave us to fight the invading Ruffians. He even
trained us. We did not realise that it was the oil they were after. Bigoil is always trying
to woo us. But we are too busy playing war games. Now we have rules of our own.
Toppleton's govt. kept changing its rules. Not fair we said. Some of us now hate
Toppleton, his government and his people. Of course their bullets and missiles
come in handy when we have to beat them at their game.
Make no mistake, we are Errorists.
Errorists
Loose cannonballs
Adapted from http://www.gobartimes.org/gt_covfeature2.htm

--- PAGE 133 ---
Environment and Natural Resources 131
(lower riparian) state’s objection
to pollution, excessive irrigation,
or the construction of dams by an
upstream (upper riparian) state,
which might decrease or degrade
the quality of water available to
the downstream state. States
have used force to protect or
seize freshwater resources. How are these
Examples of violence include conflicts different
those between Israel, Syria, and from the many water
conflicts within our
Jordan in the 1950s and 1960s
own country?
over attempts by each side to
divert water from the Jordan and
Yarmuk Rivers, and more recent
threats between Turkey, Syria,
and Iraq over the construction of
dams on the Euphrates River. A
number of studies show that
countries that share rivers — and
many countries do share rivers —
are involved in military conflicts
with each other.
© Ares, Cagle Cartoons Inc. T HE I NDIGENOUS P EOPLES
The larger part of the Earth is water than T R
AND HEIR IGHTS
the land and yet the cartoonist decides
to show larger image of the land than
The question of indigenous
water. How does the image show the
people brings the issues of
scarcity of water?
environment, resources and
politics. Regional variations and politics together. The UN defines
the increasing scarcity of indigenous populations as
freshwater in some parts of the comprising the descendants of
world point to the possibility of peoples who inhabited the
disagreements over shared water present territory of a country at
resources as a leading source of the time when persons of a
conflicts in the 21st century. different culture or ethnic origin
Some commentators on world arrived there from other parts of
politics have referred to ‘water the world and overcame them.
wars’ to describe the possibility Indigenous people today live more
of violent conflict over this life- in conformity with their particular
sustaining resource. Countries that social, economic, and cultural
share rivers can disagree over customs and traditions than the
many things. For instance, a typical institutions of the country of
disagreement is a downstream which they now form a part.

--- PAGE 134 ---
132 Contemporary World Politics
present day island states in the
Oceania region (including
Australia and New Zealand),
were inhabited by the Polynesian,
Melanesian and Micronesian
people over the course of
thousands of years. They appeal
to governments to come to terms
with the continuing existence of
indigenous nations as enduring
communities with an identity of
their own. ‘Since times
immemorial’ is the phrase used by
indigenous people all over the
world to refer to their continued
occupancy of the lands from
which they originate. The
worldviews of indigenous
In the context of world politics,
societies, irrespective of their
what are the common interests of
geographical location, are
approximately 30 crore
strikingly similar with respect to
indigenous peoples spread
land and the variety of life systems
throughout the world including
supported by it. The loss of land,
India? There are 20 lakh
which also means the loss of an
indigenous people of the
economic resource base, is the
Cordillera region of the
Philippines, 10 lakh Mapuche
people of Chile, six lakh tribal
people of the Chittagong Hill
Tracts in Bangladesh, 35 lakh
North American natives, 50,000
Kuna living east of Panama Canal
and 10 lakh Small Peoples of the
Soviet North. Like other social
movements, indigenous people
speak of their struggles, their
agenda and their rights.
The indigenous voices in world
Why don’t we hear politics call for the admission of
much about the indigenous people to the world
indigenous people community as equals. Indigenous
and their people occupy areas in Central Spoonful of Ecology
movements? Is the
and South America, Africa, India Do you agree with this perspective
media biased
(where they are known as Tribals) where a man from an urban
against them?
and Southeast Asia. Many of the (developed!) area becomes greedy for
nature?
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©

--- PAGE 135 ---
Environment and Natural Resources 133
most obvious threat to the experiences. The World Council of Indigenous
survival of indigenous people. Peoples was formed in 1975. The Council
Can political autonomy be enjoyed became subsequently the first of 11 indigenous
without its attachment to the NGOs to receive consultative status in the UN.
means of physical survival? Many of the movements against globalisation,
discussed in Chapter 9, have focussed on the
In India, the description
rights of the indigenous people.
‘indigenous people’ is usually
applied to the Scheduled Tribes
who constitute nearly eight per
cent of the population of the
country. With the exception of
small communities of hunters and
gatherers, most indigenous
populations in India depend for
their subsistence primarily on the
cultivation of land. For centuries, STEPS
if not millennia, they had free
(cid:139) Each student is asked to list any ten items they
access to as much land as they
consume/use every day.
could cultivate. It was only after
the establishment of the British (The list could include — pen/paper/eraser/
colonial rule that areas, which had computer/water etc.)
previously been inhabited by the (cid:139) Ask students to calculate the amount of natural
Scheduled Tribe communities, resources being used to make these items. (For
were subjected to outside forces. finished products like pen/pencil/computer
Although they enjoy a etc., students will calculate the amount of
constitutional protection in resources and for items like water they could
political representation, they have calculate the amount of electricity used for
not got much of the benefits of purifying and pumping along with gallons of
development in the country. In water). Each would calculate and arrive at an
fact they have paid a huge cost approximate figure.
for development since they are the
Ideas for the Teacher
single largest group among the
(cid:13) Collect the approximate figures from each student and
people displaced by various
sum up all to arrive at total resources consumed by the
developmental projects since
students of that particular class. (Teacher is to act as a
independence. facilitator and allow students to do the calculations.)
Issues related to the rights of (cid:13) Project this figure to other classes of the same school, then
to schools across the country. The country figure could be
the indigenous communities have
used to measure the amount of resources being used by
been neglected in domestic and
schools in other countries too. (The teacher is to have
international politics for very long. background information about the resources being used
During the 1970s, growing by students in a few select countries. While selecting
countries, teacher should ensure that the selected countries
international contacts among
belong to the developed / developing countries category).
indigenous leaders from around
(cid:13) Ask students to imagine the amount of resources we are
the world aroused a sense of
consuming and also to estimate future consumption.
common concern and shared

--- PAGE 136 ---
134 Contemporary World Politics
1. Which among the following best explains the reason for growing
concerns about the environment?
a. The developed countries are concerned about protecting nature.
b. Protection of the environment is vital for indigenous people and
natural habitats.
c. The environmental degradation caused by human activities has
become pervasive and has reached a dangerous level.
d. None of the above.
2. Mark correct or wrong against each of the following statements below
that describe the Earth Summit:
a. It was attended by 170 countries, thousands of NGOs and many
MNCs.
b. The summit was held under the aegis of the UN.
c. For the first time, global environmental issues were firmly
consolidated at the political level.
d. It was a summit meeting.
3. Which among the following are TRUE about the global commons?
a. The Earth’s atmosphere, Antarctica, ocean floor and outer space
are considered as part of the global commons.
b. The global commons are outside sovereign jurisdiction.
c. The question of managing the global commons has reflected the
North-South divide.
d. The countries of the North are more concerned about the
protection of the global commons than the countries of the South.
4. What were the outcomes of the Rio Summit?
5. What is meant by the global commons? How are they exploited and
polluted?
6. What is meant by ‘common but differentiated responsibilities’? How
could we implement the idea?
7. Why have issues related to global environmental protection become
the priority concern of states since the 1990s?
8. Compromise and accommodation are the two essential policies
required by states to save planet Earth. Substantiate the statement in
the light of the ongoing negotiations between the North and South
on environmental issues.
9. The most serious challenge before the states is pursuing economic
development without causing further damage to the global
environment. How could we achieve this? Explain with a few examples.
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E

--- PAGE 137 ---
O
VERVIEW
Chapter 9
In this final chapter of the book we
Globalisation
look at globalisation, something
that has been referred to in many
chapters of this book and textbooks
of many other subjects. We begin
by analysing the concept of
globalisation and then examine its
causes. We then discuss at length
the political, economic and cultural
consequences of globalisation. Our
interest is also in studying the
impact of globalisation on India as
well as how India is affecting
globalisation. We finally draw
attention to resistance to
globalisation and how social
movements in India also form part
of this resistance.

--- PAGE 138 ---
136 Contemporary World Politics
T C She now has an opportunity to
HE ONCEPT OF
take on a job and begin an
G
LOBALISATION
independent career, which the
women of her family had never
Janardhan works in a call centre.
dreamt of earlier. While some of
He leaves late in the evening for
her relatives are opposed, she
work, becomes John when he
finally decides to go ahead
enters his office, acquires a new
because of the new opportunities
accent and speaks a different
that have been made available to
language (than he does when he is
her generation.
at home) to communicate with his
clients who are living thousands All three examples illustrate an
of miles away. He works all night, aspect each of what we call
So many Nepalese
which is actually day time for his globalisation. In the first instance
workers come to
India to work. Is that overseas customers. Janardhan is Janardhan was participating in the
globalisation? rendering a service to somebody globalisation of services.
who in all probability he is never Ramdhari’s birthday purchases tell
likely to meet physically. This is his us something about the movement
daily routine. His holidays also do of commodities from one part of
not correspond to the Indian the world to another. Sarika is
calendar but to those of his clients faced with a conflict of values
who happen to be from the US. partly originating from a new
opportunity that earlier was not
Ramdhari has gone shopping
available to the women in her
to buy a birthday gift for his
nine-year old daughter. He has family but today is part of a reality
promised her a small cycle and that has gained wider
decides to search the market for acceptability.
something he finds affordable as
If we look for examples of the
well as of reasonable quality. He
use of the term ‘globalisation’ in
finally does buy a cycle, which
real life, we will realise that it is
is actually manufactured in
used in various contexts. Let us
China but is being marketed in
look at some examples, different
India. It meets his requirements
from the ones that we have looked
of quality as well as affordability,
above:
and Ramdhari decides to go
ahead with his purchase. Last Some farmers committed
year, Ramdhari on his daughter’s suicide because their crops
Go through insistence had bought her a failed. They had bought very
newspapers Barbie doll, which was originally expensive seeds supplied by a
for a week manufactured in the US but was multinational company
and collect being sold in India. (MNC).
clippings on
Sarika is a first generation An Indian company bought a
anything
learner who has done remarkably major rival company based in
related to
well throughout her school and Europe, despite protests by
globalisation.
college life by working very hard. some of the current owners.

--- PAGE 139 ---
Globalisation 137
Many retail shopkeepers fear
This chapter has
that they would lose their
a series of images
livelihoods if some major
about political,
international companies open
economic and
retail chains in the country. cultural aspects of
globalisation, taken
A film producer in Mumbai
from different parts
was accused of lifting the story
of the world.
of his film from another film
made in Hollywood.
A militant group issued a
statement threatening college
girls who wear western
clothes.
These examples show us that
globalisation need not always be
positive; it can have negative
consequences for the people.
Indeed, there are many who
believe that globalisation has
more negative consequences than
positive. These examples also
show us that globalisation need
not be only about the economic
issues, nor is the direction of
influence always from the rich to
the poor countries.
Since much of the usage tends
to be imprecise, it becomes
important to clarify what we mean
by globalisation. Globalisation as
a concept fundamentally deals
with flows. These flows could be of
various kinds — ideas moving from
one part of the world to another,
capital shunted between two or
more places, commodities being
traded across borders, and people
moving in search of better
livelihoods to different parts of the
world. The crucial element is the
Much of the Chinese
‘worldwide interconnectedness’
stuff that comes to
that is created and sustained as a
India is smuggled.
consequence of these constant
Does globalisation
flows. lead to smuggling?

--- PAGE 140 ---
138 Contemporary World Politics
Globalisation is a multi- While globalisation is not
dimensional concept. It has caused by any single factor,
political, economic and cultural technology remains a critical
manifestations, and these must be element. There is no doubt that
adequately distinguished. It is the invention of the telegraph,
wrong to assume that the telephone, and the microchip
globalisation has purely economic in more recent times has
Isn’t globalisation a dimensions, just as it would also revolutionised communication
new name for be mistaken to assume that it is a between actors in different parts
imperialism? Why do
purely cultural phenomenon. The of the world. When printing
we need a new
impact of globalisation is vastly initially came into being it laid
name?
uneven — it affects some societies the basis for the creation of
more than others and some parts nationalism. So also today we
of some societies more than others should expect that technology
— and it is important to avoid will affect the way we think of
drawing general conclusions our personal but also our
about the impact of globalisation collective lives.
without paying sufficient attention
The ability of ideas, capital,
to specific contexts.
commodities and people to move
more easily from one part of the
C G world to another has been made
AUSES OF LOBALISATION
possible largely by technological
advances. The pace of these flows
What accounts for globalisation?
may vary. For instance, the
If globalisation is about the flows
movement of capital and
of ideas, capital, commodities, and
commodities will most likely be
people, it is perhaps logical to ask
quicker and wider than the
if there is anything novel
movement of peoples across
about this phenomenon.
different parts of the world.
Globalisation in terms of
these four flows along has Globalisation, however, does
taken place through much not emerge merely because of
of human history. However, the availability of improved
those who argue that there communications. What is
is something distinct about important is for people in
contemporary globalisation different parts of the world to
point out that it is the scale recognise these interconnections
and speed of these flows with the rest of the world.
that account for the Currently, we are aware of the
uniqueness of globalisation fact that events taking place in
in the contemporary era. one part of the world could have
Globalisation has a strong an impact on another part of the
historical basis, and it is world. The Bird flu or tsunami
important to view contem- is not confined to any particular
porary flows against this nation. It does not respect
Digital Economy backdrop. national boundaries. Similarly,
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,serA
©

--- PAGE 141 ---
Globalisation 139
when major economic events
take place, their impact is felt
outside their immediate local,
national or regional environment
at the global level.
P C
OLITICAL ONSEQUENCES
One of the debates that has been
generated as a consequence of
contemporary processes of
globalisation relates to its ongoing
political impact. How does
globalisation affect traditional
conceptions of state sovereignty?
There are at least three aspects
that we need to consider when
answering this question.
At the most simple level,
globalisation results in an erosion
of state capacity, that is, the
ability of government to do what
they do. All over the world, the old
‘welfare state’ is now giving way
to a more minimalist state that
performs certain core functions
such as the maintenance of law
and order and the security of its
citizens. However, it withdraws
from many of its earlier welfare
functions directed at economic
and social well-being. In place of
the welfare state, it is the market
that becomes the prime
determinant of economic and
social priorities. The entry and the
increased role of multinational
companies all over the world leads
to a reduction in the capacity of
governments to take decisions on
their own.
At the same time, globalisation
does not always reduce state
capacity. The primacy of the state

--- PAGE 142 ---
140 Contemporary World Politics
continues to be the unchallenged E C
CONOMIC ONSEQUENCES
basis of political community. The
old jealousies and rivalries While everything may not be
between countries have not ceased known about the economic facets
to matter in world politics. The of globalisation, this particular
state continues to discharge its dimension shapes a large part of
essential functions (law and order, the content and direction of
national security) and consciously contemporary debates surrounding
withdraws from certain domains globalisation.
from which it wishes to. States
A part of the problem has to
continue to be important.
do with defining economic
Indeed, in some respects state globalisation itself. The mention of
capacity has received a boost as a economic globalisation draws our
consequence of globalisation, with attention immediately to the role
enhanced technologies available of international institutions like
at the disposal of the state to the IMF and the WTO and the role
collect information about its they play in determining economic
citizens. With this information, the policies across the world. Yet,
state is better able to rule, not less globalisation must not be viewed
able. Thus, states become more in such narrow terms. Economic
powerful than they were earlier as globalisation involves many actors
an outcome of the new technology. other than these international
institutions. A much broader way
of understanding of economic
globalisation requires us to look at
the distribution of economic gains,
i.e. who gets the most from
globalisation and who gets less,
indeed who loses from it.
What is often called economic
globalisation usually involves
greater economic flows among
different countries of the world.
Some of this is voluntary and
some forced by international
institutions and powerful
countries. As we saw in the
examples at the beginning of this
chapter, this flow or exchange can
take various forms: commodities,
capital, people and ideas.
Globalisation has involved greater
trade in commodities across the
globe; the restrictions imposed by
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,eeggirP
tliM
©

--- PAGE 143 ---
Globalisation 141
different countries on allowing the
imports of other countries have
been reduced. Similarly, the
restrictions on movement of
capital across countries have also
been reduced. In operational
terms, it means that investors in
the rich countries can invest their
money in countries other than
their own, including developing
countries, where they might get
better returns. Globalisation has
also led to the flow of ideas across
national boundaries. The spread of
internet and computer related
services is an example of that. But
globalisation has not led to the
same degree of increase in the
movement of people across the
globe. Developed countries have
carefully guarded their borders
with visa policies to ensure that
citizens of other countries cannot
take away the jobs of their own
citizens.
In thinking about the
consequences of globalisation, it
is necessary to keep in mind that
the same set of policies do not lead
to the same results everywhere.
While globalisation has led to
similar economic policies adopted
by governments in different parts
of the world, this has generated
vastly different outcomes in
different parts of the world. It is
again crucial to pay attention to
specific context rather than make
simple generalisations in this
When we talk about
connection.
‘safety net’ it means
Economic globalisation has that we expect some
people to fall down
created an intense division of
because of
opinion all over the world. Those
globalisation. Isn’t
who are concerned about social
that right?

--- PAGE 144 ---
142 Contemporary World Politics
justice are worried about the be denied is the increased
extent of state withdrawal caused momentum towards inter-
by processes of economic dependence and integration
globalisation. They point out that between governments, businesses,
it is likely to benefit only a small and ordinary people in different
section of the population while parts of the world as a result of
impoverishing those who were globalisation.
dependent on the government for
jobs and welfare (education,
C C
ULTURAL ONSEQUENCES
health, sanitation, etc.). They have
emphasised the need to ensure
The consequences of globalisation
institutional safeguards or
are not confined only to the sphere
creating ‘social safety nets’ to
of politics and economy.
minimise the negative effects of
Globalisation affects us in our
globalisation on those who are
home, in what we eat, drink, wear
economically weak. Many
and indeed in what we think. It
movements all over the world feel
shapes what we think are our
that safety nets are insufficient or
Make a list of preferences. The cultural effect of
unworkable. They have called for
products of globalisation leads to the fear that
a halt to forced economic
multinational this process poses a threat to
globalisation, for its results would
companies cultures in the world. It does so,
lead to economic ruin for the
(MNCs) that because globalisation leads to the
weaker countries, especially for
are used by rise of a uniform culture or what
the poor within these countries.
you or your is called cultural homogenisation.
Some economists have described
family. The rise of a uniform culture is
economic globalisation as re-
not the emergence of a global
colonisation of the world.
culture. What we have in the name
Advocates of economic
globalisation argue that it
generates greater economic
growth and well-being for larger
sections of the population when
there is de-regulation. Greater
trade among countries allows each
economy to do what it does best.
This would benefit the whole
world. They also argue that
economic globalisation is inevitable
and it is not wise to resist the
march of history. More moderate
supporters of globalisation say that
globalisation provides a challenge
that can be responded to
intelligently without accepting it
uncritically. What, however, cannot
.cnI
snootraC
elgaC
,regniS
ydnA
© Invading new markets

--- PAGE 145 ---
Globalisation 143
of a global culture is the
imposition of Western culture on
the rest of the world. We have
already studied this phenomenon
as the soft power of US hegemony
in Chapter 3. The popularity of a
burger or blue jeans, some argue,
has a lot to do with the powerful
influence of the American way of
Why are we scared
life. Thus, the culture of the
of Western culture?
politically and economically
Are we not confident
dominant society leaves its of our own culture?
imprint on a less powerful society,
and the world begins to look more
like the dominant power wishes
it to be. Those who make this
argument often draw attention to
the ‘McDonaldisation’ of the
world, with cultures seeking to
buy into the dominant American
dream. This is dangerous not only
for the poor countries but for the
whole of humanity, for it leads to
the shrinking of the rich cultural
heritage of the entire globe.
At the same time, it would be
a mistake to assume that cultural
consequences of globalisation are
only negative. Cultures are not
static things. All cultures accept
outside influences all the time.
Some external influences are
negative because they reduce our
Make a list of all
choices. But sometimes external
the known
influences simply enlarge our
‘dialects’ of
choices, and sometimes they
your language.
modify our culture without
Consult people
overwhelming the traditional. The
of your
burger is no substitute for a
grandparents’
masala dosa and, therefore, does
generation
not pose any real challenge. It is
about this. How
simply added on to our food
many people
choices. Blue jeans, on the other
speak those
hand, can go well with a
dialects today?
homespun khadi kurta. Here the

--- PAGE 146 ---
144 Contemporary World Politics
outcome of outside influence is a I G
NDIA AND LOBALISATION
new combination that is unique —
a khadi kurta worn over jeans. We said earlier that globalisation
Interestingly, this clothing has occurred in earlier periods in
combination has been exported history in different parts of the
back to the country that gave us world. Flows pertaining to the
blue jeans so that it is possible to movement of capital, commodities,
see young Americans wearing a ideas and people go back several
kurta and jeans! centuries in Indian history.
While cultural homogenisation During the colonial period, as
is an aspect of globalisation, the a consequence of Britain’s
same process also generates imperial ambitions, India became
precisely the opposite effect. It an exporter of primary goods and
leads to each culture becoming raw materials and a consumer of
more different and distinctive. This finished goods. After independence,
phenomenon is called cultural because of this experience with
heterogenisation. This is not to the British, we decided to make
deny that there remain differences things ourselves rather than
in power when cultures interact relying on others. We also decided
but instead more fundamentally to not to allow others to export to us
suggest that cultural exchange is so that our own producers could
rarely one way. learn to make things. This
‘protectionism’ generated its own
problems. While some advances
‘Gosh, an Indian again!’
were made in certain arenas,
critical sectors such as health,
housing and primary education
An insider’s view of a call centre job
did not receive the attention they
Working in a call centre, in fact, can be enlightening in its deserved. India had a fairly
own way. As you handle calls from Americans, you get an sluggish rate of economic growth.
insight into the true American culture. An average American
comes out as more lively and honest than we imagine… In 1991, responding to a
financial crisis and to the desire
However, not all calls and conversations are pleasant. You for higher rates of economic
can also receive irate and abusive callers. Sometimes the
growth, India embarked on a
hatred that they exhibit in their tone on knowing that their
programme of economic reforms
call has been routed to India is very stressful. Americans tend
that has sought increasingly to
to perceive every Indian as one who has denied them their
rightful job... de-regulate various sectors including
trade and foreign investment.
One can receive a call, beginning on the lines of “I spoke While it may be too early to say
to a South African a few minutes ago and now I’m speaking
how good this has been for India,
to an Indian!” or “Oh gosh, an Indian again! Connect me to
the ultimate test is not high growth
an American please...”. It’s difficult to find the right response
rates as making sure that the
in situations of this kind.
benefits of growth are shared so
Source: Report by Ranjeetha Urs in The Hindu, 10 January 2005. that everyone is better off.

--- PAGE 147 ---
Globalisation 145
R
ESISTANCE TO
G
LOBALISATION
We have already noted that
globalisation is a very contentious
subject and has invited strong
criticism all over the globe. Critics
of globalisation make a variety of
arguments. Those on the left argue
that contemporary globalisation It is true sometimes
I like the new songs.
represents a particular phase of
Didn’t we all like to
global capitalism that makes the
dance a bit? Does it
rich richer (and fewer) and the poor
really matter if it is
poorer. Weakening of the state
influenced by
leads to a reduction in the capacity western music?
of the state to protect the interest
of its poor. Critics of globalisation
from the political right express
anxiety over the political, economic
and cultural effects. In political
terms, they also fear the weakening
of the state. Economically, they
want a return to self-reliance and
protectionism, at least in certain
areas of the economy. Culturally,
they are worried that traditional
culture will be harmed and people
will lose their age-old values and
ways.
It is important to note here
that anti-globalisation movements
too participate in global networks,
allying with those who feel like
them in other countries. Many
anti-globalisation movements are
not opposed to the idea of
globalisation per se as much as
they are opposed to a specific
programme of globalisation,
which they see as a form of
imperialism.
In 1999, at the World Trade
Organisation (WTO) Ministerial
Meeting there were widespread

--- PAGE 148 ---
146 Contemporary World Politics
The activity enables students to understand how
globalisation has penetrated our lives and the
impact the all-inclusive nature of globalisation has
on an individual, a community and a nation as a
whole.
STEPS
(cid:139) Students are to list the names of products — food
products, white goods, and luxuries, they are
familiar with.
(cid:139) Students are to write down their favourite TV
programmes.
(cid:139) The teacher is to collect the list and consolidate.
(cid:139) Divide the classroom (into convenient groups) and
assign each group a number of items (depends
on how exhaustive the list is) and TV programmes.
(cid:139) Let students find out who are the manufacturers of
the products they use everyday and the makers/
sponsors of their favourite TV programmes.
(cid:139) The teacher is to (by involving students) classify the
names of manufacturers and makers/sponsors
collected by students into three categories:
exclusive foreign companies; exclusive Indian
companies; and companies working in
collaboration.
Ideas for the Teacher
(cid:13) The teacher is to debrief the students focussing on:
How globalisation has been impacting our lives.
(cid:13) Drawing the attention of the students to different faces of
globalisation. As we use more foreign goods, our own small-scale
industries have been losing their customers and are closing down.
(cid:13) The activity could be concluded by introducing students to the
ongoing debates about the impact of globalisation on the
developing and developed countries.

--- PAGE 149 ---
Globalisation 147
protests at Seattle alleging unfair around them and finding ways to
trading practices by the deal with matters that trouble
economically powerful states. It them. Resistance to globalisation
was argued that the interests of in India has come from different
the developing world were not quarters. There have been left
given sufficient importance in the wing protests to economic
evolving global economic system. liberalisation voiced through
political parties as well as through
The World Social Forum (WSF)
forums like the Indian Social
is another global platform, which
Forum. Trade unions of industrial
brings together a wide coalition
workforce as well as those
composed of human rights
representing farmer interests have
activists, environmentalists,
organised protests against the
labour, youth and women activists
entry of multinationals. The
opposed to neo-liberal globalisation.
patenting of certain plants like
The first WSF meeting was
Neem by American and European
organised in Porto Alegre, Brazil
firms has also generated
in 2001. The fourth WSF meeting
considerable opposition.
was held in Mumbai in 2004. The
seventh WSF meeting was held in Resistance to globalisation has
Nairobi, Kenya in January 2007. also come from the political right.
This has taken the form of
objecting particularly to various
I R
NDIA AND ESISTANCE TO
cultural influences — ranging from
G LOBALISATION the availability of foreign T.V.
channels provided by cable
What has been India’s experience networks, celebration of Valentine’s
in resisting globalisation? Social Day, and westernisation of the
movements play a role in helping dress tastes of girl students in
people make sense of the world schools and colleges. E
x
1. Which of the statements are TRUE about globalisation?
e
a. Globalisation is purely an economic phenomenon.
r
b. Globalisation began in 1991.
c. Globalisation is the same thing as westernisation.
c
d. Globalisation is a multi-dimensional phenomenon.
2. Which of the statements are TRUE about the impact of globalisation? i
a. Globalisation has been uneven in its impact on states and s
societies.
e
b. Globalisation has had a uniform impact on all states and
societies.
s

--- PAGE 150 ---
148 Contemporary World Politics
c. The impact of globalisation has been confined to the political
sphere.
d. Globalisation inevitably results in cultural homogeneity.
3. Which of the statements are TRUE about the causes of globalisation?
a. Technology is an important cause of globalisation.
b. Globalisation is caused by a particular community of people.
c. Globalisation originated in the US.
d. Economic interdependence alone causes globalisation.
4. Which of the statements are TRUE about globalisation?
a. Globalisation is only about movement of commodities
b. Globalisation does not involve a conflict of values.
c. Services are an insignificant part of globalisation.
d. Globalisation is about worldwide interconnectedness.
5. Which of the statements are FALSE about globalisation?
a. Advocates of globalisation argue that it will result in greater
economic growth.
b. Critics of globalisation argue that it will result in greater
economic disparity.
c. Advocates of globalisation argue that it will result in cultural
homogenisation.
d. Critics of globalisation argue that it will result in cultural
homogenisation.
6. What is worldwide interconnectedness? What are its components?
7. How has technology contributed to globalisation?
8. Critically evaluate the impact of the changing role of the state in
the developing countries in the light of globalisation.
9. What are the economic implications of globalisation? How has
globalisation impacted on India with regard to this particular
dimension?
10. Do you agree with the argument that globalisation leads to cultural
heterogeneity?
11. How has globalisation impacted on India and how is India in turn
impacting on globalisation?
s
e
s
i
c
r
e
x
E

--- PAGE 151 ---
Contemporary World Politics 149

--- PAGE 152 ---
150 Contemporary World Politics
Cartographers follow a convention
that puts North on the top and the
South at the bottom. This symbolic
representation of the ‘upside-down
map’ of South Asia invites us to
change our mental maps of the
region. It changes neither the present
day boundaries nor the locations of
places and peoples within South Asia
but provides new meanings to both.
What strikes you about South Asia
when you look at this map? Does this
map say something about the
significance of the Indian Ocean to
the South Asia region?
That is exciting! What if we
did this not just to South
Asia but to the map of the
Credit: Himal Southasian, The Southasia Trust, Nepal whole world?