--- PAGE 500 ---
18.6 I IndianEconomy
government . A broad category of things that fall having{revenuesurplus) budget.Suchfiscalpolicy
undersuchexpendituresin Indiaare: isconsideredgoodwherethegovernmenthasbeen
(i) Interest payment by the government on able to manage some money out of its revenue
theinternalandexternalloans; budget which could be spent for the creation of
(ii) Salaries, Pension and Provident Fund productiveassets .Yes,anotherthingthatshouldbe
paid by the government to government
keptinmind,ashowthegovernmenthasmanaged
thissurplusand whether the policieswhich made
employees;
this happen are judicious enough or not . In the
(iii) Subsidies forwarded to all sectors by the
Second Plan, India emerged as a revenue-suplus
government;
state, but experts did not appreciate it as it had
(iv) Defenceexpendituresbythegovernment;
many bad impacts on the economy
—
higher
(v) PostalDeficitsof thegovernment; tax rates culminated in tax evasion, corruption,
(vi) Law and order expenditures (i.e., police creation of black money,etc .
& paramilitary); Revenue deficit may be shown in the
(vii) Expenditures on social services (includes quantitative form (as how much_the gross/total
allsocialsectorexpendituresaseducation, deficit is in currency terms) or in percentage
health care, social security, poverty termsof theGDP for that particular year (shown
alleviation, etc .) and general services (tax as percentage of GDP). Usually, it is shown as a
collection,etc .); percentage of the GDP for domestic as well as
(viii) GrantsgivenbythegovernmenttoIndian
internationalanalyses.
statesandforeign countries.
EFFECTIVEREVENUEDEFICIT
REVENUEDEFICIT
Effective revenue deficit (ERD) is a new
—
If the balance of total revenue receipts and total term introduced in the Union Budget 2011
revenueexpendituresturnsout to benegativeit is 12 . Conventionally, ‘revenue deficit’ is the
knownasrevenuedeficit,anewfiscalterminology difference between revenue receipts and revenue
usedsincethefiscal1997 — 98in India.8 expenditures.Here,revenueexpendituresincludes
This shows that the government’s Revenue
all thegrantswhich theUnion Governme
—
ntgives
Budget (see the next topic) is running in losses to the state governments and the UTs some
and the government is earning less revenue and of which create assets (though these assets are
spending more revenues — incurring a deficit. not owned by the Gol but the concerned state
Revenueexpendituresareofimmediatenature(this governments and the UTs). Accordi
—
ng to the
FinanceMinistry(Union Budget 2011 12),such
has to be done) and since theyare consumptive/
non-productive they are considered as a kind of revenueexpenditurescontributeto thegrowth in
the economy and therefore, should not be treated
expenditurewhichsums up to a heinouscrimein
the area of fiscal policy. Governments fulfil the as unproductive in nature like other items in the
gap/deficitwiththemoneywhichcouldhavebeen revenue expenditures. And on this logic, a new
spent/intvested in productiveareas. methodology was introduced to capture the
‘effective revenue deficit’, which is the Revenue
A government might have its revenue
Deficit ‘excluding’ those revenue expenditures of
expenditures less than its revenue receipts, i.e.,
,
8. RajaJ.Chelliah,'TheMeaningandSignificanceoftheFiscalDeficit'inAmareshBaghi(ed.),ReadingsinPublicFinance op.cit.,
pp.387-88.AlsoseeUnionBudget1997 - 98 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 501 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia I 18.7
the Gol which were done in the form of GoCA on plan-development by a government . But the
(grantsforcreationofcapitalassets). receipts might need their diversion to meet other
TheGoCAincludestheGolgrantsforwarded needstotakecareoftherisingrevenueexpenditure
to the states & UTs for the implementation of of a government as thecase had been with India.
the centrally sponsored programmes such as Thecapital receiptsin Indiaincludethefollowing
Pradhan MantriGramSadakYojana,Accelerated capital kind ofaccrualsto thegovernment:
Irrigation Benefit Programme, Jawaharlal Nehru
(i)LoanRecovery
National Urban Renewal Mission, etc ., these
expenses though they are shown by the Gol in This is one source of the capital receipts. The
its Revenue Expenditures they are involved with money the government had lent out in the past
assetcreationandcannotbeconsideredcompletely in India(states, UTs, PSUs,etc .)andabroadtheir
‘unproductive’ like other items put in the basket capital comes back to the government when the
of the Revenue Expenditures — the reason why a borrowers repay them as capital receipts. The
new‘terminology’has been created. interests which come to thegovernment on such
As per the Union Budget 2013-14, by the
loansare partoftherevenuereceipts.
fiscal 2016-17, the Revenue Deficit to be1.5 per
(ii)BorrowingsbytheGovernment
centand the‘effectiverevenuedeficit’to zero per
cent [it means that by that year the total GoCA This includes all long- term loans raised by the
forwarded bytheGol willstandat1.5 percentof government inside the country (i.e., internal
theGDPoftheyear.TheUnionBudgetsof2014- borrowings)andoutsidethecountry(i.e.,external
15 (Full) and 2015 — 16 do not mention anything borrowings). Internal borrowings might include
about thisconcept . the borrowings from the RBI, Indian banks,
financial institutions, etc . Similarly, external
REVENUEBUDGET borrowings might include the loans from the
World Bank, the IMF, foreign banks, foreign
T
an
h
d
ep
ex
ar
p
t
e
o
n
f
d
t
i
h
t
e
ur
B
e
u
o
d
f
g
r
e
e
t
v
w
en
h
u
ic
e
h
b
d
y
ea
th
ls
e
w
g
i
o
th
ve
th
rn
e
m
in
e
c
n
o
t
m
.
e governments,foreign financialinstitutions,etc .
This presents the annual financial statement (Hi) OtherReceipts by theGovernments
of thetotal revenuereceiptsand thetotal revenue
— This includes many long- term capital accruals
expenditure ifthebalanceemergestobepositive
to the government through the Provident Fund
it isa revenuesurplus budget,and if it comesout
(PF), Postal Deposits, various small saving
to benegative, it isa revenuedeficit budget.
schemes (SSSs) and the government bonds sold
CAPITALBUDGET to the public (as Indira Vikas Patra, Kisan Vikas
Patra, Market Stabilisation Bond, etc .). Such
ThepartoftheBudgetwhichdealswiththereceipts receipts are nothing but a kind of loan on which
and expendituresof thecapital bythegovernment . the government needs to pay interests on their
Thisshowsthemeansbywhichthecapitalismanaged maturities. But they play a role in capital raising
andtheareaswherecapitalisspent . processbythegovernment .
CAPITALRECEIPTS CAPITALEXPENDITURE
All non-revenue reciepts of a government are Alltheareaswhichgetcapitalfromthegovernment
known as capital receipts. Such receipts are for are part of the capital expenditure. It includesso
—
investment purposes and supposed to be spent manyheadsin India

--- PAGE 502 ---
18.8 i IndianEconomy
(i) LoanDisbursals by theGovernment thegovernmentsinthepast .Howmuch payment
liabilities in which year also depends on the fact
Theloansforwarded bythegovernment might be
internal(i.e.,tothestates,UTs,PSUs,FIs,etc .)or
astowhichyearsin thepast thegovernmentshad
other receipts and for what duration of maturity
external (i.e., to foreign countries, foreign banks,
periods.Asforexample,thePFliabilitieswerenot
purchaseofforeign bonds,loansto IMFandWB,
etc
.). an item of such liabilities for almost first three
decades after the independence. But once the
(it) Loan Repayments by the Government of government employees started retiring, it went
theBorrowingsMadeinthePast on increasing. Future India (specially 1960s and
1970s) saw expansion of the PSUs and excessive
Againloanpaymentsmightbeinternalaswell
asexternal.Thisconsistsofonlythecapitalpartof employment generation in them (devoid of the
logic of labour requirement). We see the PF
the loan repayment as the element of interest on
loansareshownasapartoftherevenueexpenditure. liabilit
—
ies expanding extensively throughout the
1990s thegovernmentshadbeen underpressure
(Hi) PlanExpenditureoftheGovernment
to manage thissegment either bycutting interest
Thisconsistsofalltheexpendituresincurredbythe on PF or at present trying to make it a matter of
government to finance the planned development market economy.Same thing happened with the
ofIndiaaswellasthecentralgovernmentfinancial elementofpensionandwehavebeenabletodevise
supports to thestatesfor their plan requirements. a market mechanism for it once pension reforms
(iv) Capital Expenditures on Defence by the took placeand thearrival of a pension regulatory
Government
authorityfor thearea.
This consists of all kinds of capital expenses to CAPITALDEFICIT
maintain the defence forces, the equipment
purchased for them as well as the modernisation There is no such term in public finance or in
expenditures. It should be kept in mind that economics as such. But in practice one usually
defenceisanon-planexpenditurewhichhascapital hears the use of the term capital crunch, scarcity
as well as revenue expenditures element in its of capital in day- to -day economic news items.
maintenance.The revenue part of expenditure in Basically, the government in the news is facing
the problem of managingas muchfunds, money,
thedefenceiscountedintherevenueexpenditures
bythegovernment . capitalasis required byitfor publicexpenditure.
Such expenditure might be of revenue kind or
(v)GeneralServices capital kind. Such difficulties have always been
with the developingeconomies due to their high
These also need huge capital expenditure by the
— level requirement of capital expenditures. Had
government the railways, postal department,
watersupply,education, ruralextension,etc . t
n
h
a
e
tu
re
ra
b
ll
e
y
en
ha
a
v
t
e
er
b
m
een
to
C
s
a
h
p
o
i
w
ta
t
l
h
D
is
ef
s
i
i
c
t
i
u
t.
ation, it would
(vi)OtherLiabilitiesoftheGovernment
Basically,thisincludesalltherepaymentliabilities FISCALDEFICIT
of the government on the items of the Other When balance of the government’s total
Receipts. The level of liabilities depends on the receipts (i.e., revenue + capital reeipts) and total
fact as to how much such receipts were made by expenditures (i.e., revenue + capitalexpenditures)

--- PAGE 503 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia I 18.9
turnsout to be negative, itshows thesituation of year the government depended more on loans,
fiscal deficit, a concept being usedsince thefiscal the reasons behind higher or lower fiscal deficits,
1997-98in India.9 whether thefiscal deficits havegonedown due to
Thesituationoffiscaldeficitindicatesthatthe fallinginterestliabilitiesorsomeotherfactors,etc .
government isspending beyond its means.To be
MONETISEDDEFICIT
moresimple, we maysay that the government is
spendingmorethanitsincome(thoughinpractice The part of the fiscal deficit which was provided
all receipts of the government are not income. bythe RBI to thegovernment in a particular year
Basically, receiptsareallformsofmoneyaccruing is Monetised Deficit, this is a new term adopted
to thegovernment, beitincomeor borrowings). since 1997-98 in India.11 This is shown in both
—
Fiscaldeficitmaybeshowninthequantitative theforms inquantitativeaswellasa percentage
form (i.e., the total currency value of the deficit) of theGDPfor that particularfinancialyear.
or in the percentage form of the GDP for that It is an innovation in the fiscal management
particular year (percentage of GDP). In general, which brings in more transparency in the
the percentage form is used for domestic or government’s expenditure behaviour and also
international(i.e.,comparativeeconomics)studies in its capabilities concerning its dependence
andanalyses. on market borrowings by the RBI. Basically,
Indiahasbeenacountryofnotonlyregularbut every year both central and state governments
higher fiscal deficits. Moreover, the composition in India had been depending heavily on market
ofitsfiscaldeficithasbeenmorepronetocriticism borrowings (internal) for its long- term capital
(we will see this in the forthcoming sub-title requirements. Market borrowings of the
ahead). government are done and managed by the RBI.
Besides, the RBI is also the primary customer
PRIMARYDEFICIT for government securities — yet another means
The fiscal deficit excluding the interest liabilities of the government to raise long- term capital.
for a year is the primary deficit, a term India This has been a major area of fiscal concern in
India. After the process of fiscal co_n_solidation
started usingsince the fiscal 1997-98.10 It shows
thefiscaldeficitfortheyearinwhichtheeconomy
wasstartedbythegovernmentbytheearly1990s,
we see a visible improvement in this area. This
had not to fulfil any interest payments on the
different loans and liabilities which it is obliged term isitselfarrivedasthepartoffiscalreformsin
— India(wewillvisittheissueoffiscalconsolidation
to shown bothinquantitativeandpercentageof
GDPforms. in India in thecomingpages).
This is considered a very handy tool in the DEFICITANDSURPLUSBUDGET
process of bringing in more transparency in the
government’sexpenditure pattern .Anytwo years When the budgetary proposals of a government
for example might be compared and so many for a particular year proposes higher expenditures
things can be found out clearly such as, which than the receipts, it is known as a deficit budget.
9. RajaJ.Chelliah,op.cit.,pp.381&387.AlsoseeUnionBudget1997 - 98 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
10. UnionBudget1997 - 98 , op.cit.
11. RajaJ.Chelliah,op.cit.,P.389.AlsoseeUnionBudget1997 - 98 , op.cit.

--- PAGE 504 ---
18.10 < IndianEconomy
Opposite to this, if the budget proposes lesser might need to follow deficit financing route for
expenditures than thereceipts, then it is a surplus many years to come as required by the firm to
budget}1 makeitcomeoutofthered (i.e.,doingawaywith
In practice, governments the world over
thelosses).
usually do not present a surplus budget as it Need of Deficit Financing: It was in the late
symbolises government’s lower concerns towards 1920s that the idea and need of deficit financing
development.Butat timesasa politicalweapon a was felt. It is when government needs to spend
government might come out with such a budget more money than it was expected to earn or
—
(for example the Uttranchal Budget for 2006 07 generatein a particular period, togo for adesired
was a surplus budget). How can a government levelofgrowthanddevelopment.Had therebeen
propose for a surplus budget in a developing some means to go for moreexpenditurewith less
state when even developed countries still need income and receipts, socio-political goals could
development and are going for deficit budgets? have been realised as per the aspirations of the
The Union Budget in India had never been public policy And once the growth had taken
presentedasasurplusbudget.
place the extra money spent above the income
would havebeen reimbursedor repaid.Thiswasa
|
DEFICIT FINANCING
good public/government wish which wasfulfilled
bytheevolutionoftheideaofdeficitfinancing.
The act/process of financing/supporting a deficit
budgetbyagovernmentisdeficitfinancing.Inthis Itwasbytheearly1930sthattheUSfirsttried
process, the government knows well in advance its hand at deficit financing soon to be followed
thatitstotalexpendituresaregoingto turnout to by the whole Euro-American governments .14
be more than its total receipts and enacts/follows Through this route thedeveloped world was able
such financial policies so that it can sustain the
tocomeoutofthemenaceoftheGreatDepression
burden of thedeficits proposed byit. (1929).15 The idea became popular around
the world by the 1960s. India tried its hand at
First used in thearea of publicfinancein the
deficit financing in 1969 and since the 1970s it
early1930sin USA,13todaythetermisbeingused
becamearoutinephenomenon,tillitbecamewild
by the corporatesector, too and such a financial and illogical, demanding immediate redressal.
management of a firm might be followed by it
as part of its businessstrategy . Again, a sick firm The fiscal deficits in India did not only peak to
12. Inthe USeconomy if tax revenuefallsshortof governmentexpenditures,thegovernment hasafiscaldeficit,and
it meansthatthegovernment needsto borrow inthecapital markettocoverthedifference.Oppositetoit,ifthe
governmentrunsafiscalsurplus(i.e.itstaxrevenuesexceeditsexpenditure)thenthegovernment,likethehousehold
sector,will bea netsaverandwillrepresentasourceofsavingfortheeconomy(seeStiglitzand Walsh,Economics,
op.cit.,p.549)
13. J.K.Galbraith,AHistoryofEconomics,PenguinBooks,London,1987,p.226.(ThewholeChapterXVIIonJ.M.Keynes
pp.221-36isinterestingtoreferonthetopic.)
14. ForadetaileddiscussiononthetopiconemayrefertoJoseph.E.Stiglitz,EconomicsofthePublicSector,W.W.Norton,
3rdEd.,NewYork,2000.
15. Itshouldbenotedherethatalthoughthegovernmentshadrundeficits(i.e.,budgetdeficit)evenbeforetheKeynesian
idea of the deficit, the pre- Keynesian thinking was that in peacetime the budget should generally be balanced
(i.e., neitherdeficit norsurplus),oreven insurplussothatthegovernmentdebtcreated bywartimedeficitscould
be paid off.Forfurther referenceonthetopicand itsconstraints,Stanley Fischerand William Easterly,Economics
oftheGovernment Budget Constraints, World Bank Research Observer, Vol.5, No.2,July1990, pp.127 - 42see
(alsoreproducedinAmareshBagchi(ed.),ReadingsinPublicFinance,op.cit.,pp.301 - 19).

--- PAGE 505 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.11
unsustainable levels but its composition was also suitably higher to neutralise the negative
notjustifiedandnotbasedonsoundfundamentals impacts of the higher fiscal deficit than
of economics. Finally, India headed for a slow thesuggestedlevels (4.5 per cent).
but confident processoffiscal reforms that isalso ExternalGrantsareevenbetterelement
knownastheprocessoffiscalconsolidation (to be in this case (which comes free — neither
discussed in thecomingpages). interest noranyrepayments) butiteither
Means of Deficit Financing: Once deficit did not come to India (since 1975, the
financing became an established part of public year of the first Pokhran testings) or
financearound theworld, themeansofgoingfor Indiadidnotacceptit(ashappenedpost-
it were also evolved by that time. These means, Tsunami, arguing grants/aids coming
basically are the ways in which the government with a tag/conditions). That is why here
may utilise the amount of money created as the this segment has not been discussed as a
deficit to sustain its budget for developmental or meansto managedeficit.
political needs. These means are given below in (ii) External Borrowings17 are the next best
order of theirsuggestedand tried preferences. way to manage fiscal deficit with the
(i) External Aids16 are the best money as condition that the external loans are
a means to fulfil a government’s deficit comparativelycheaperand long- term .
requirements even if it is coming with Though external loans are considered
soft interest. If they are coming without an erosion in the nations sovereign
interest nothingcould bebetter. decision makingprocess, thishasitsown
When India went to borrowfrom the benefit and is considered better than the
IMF in the wake of the financial crisis internal borrowingsdueto two reasons:
—
of 1990 91, the body advised India to (a) External borrowing bring in foreign
keep its fiscal deficit to the tune of 4.5 currency/hard currency which gives
per cent of its GDP and noted it to be extraedgetothegovernmentspending
sustainable for the economy. What was as by this the government may fulfil
the rationale behind this data? Basically, itsdevelopmentalrequirementsinside
in those times with the foreign aids (soft the country as well as from outside
loanseitherfromtheWBorfromtheAid thecountry .
IndiaForum)Indiawasabletomanageits (b) It is prefered over the internal
budget to the tune of 4.5 per cent of its borrowings due to ‘crowding out
GDP.In 2002,when India’sfiscaldeficit effect’. If the government itself goes
was around 6 per cent (5.7 per cent to on borrowing from the banks of
be precise) the IMF validated it to be the country, from where will others
—
sustainable, the reasons were two first, borrowfor investment purposes?
India was able to show a check on fiscal (iii) Internal Borrowings18 comes as the
deficit and secondly, at the same time third preferred route of fiscal deficit
the forex reserves of the country were management . But going for it in a huge
16. Ibid.(AmareshBagchied.op.cit.,pp.305 - 10).
17. Ibid.
18. Ibid.

--- PAGE 506 ---
18.12 < IndianEconomy
way hampers the investment prospects Now, it remains a matter of choice and
of the publicand thecorporatesector . It availability of the above-given means, and
has the same impact on the expenditure which means a government adopts and in what
pattern in the economy. Ultimately, proportion,for fulfillingitsdeficit req . uirement.
economy heads for a double negative
impact
—
lower investment (leading to
COMPOSITIONOFFISCALDEFICIT
lower production, lower GDPs and The Keynesian idea of deficit financing, though
lower per capita income, etc .) and he advocated it, had a catch in it also which
lower demands (by the general public was usually missed by third world economies or
as well as by the corporate world) in the intentionally overlooked by them. The catch is
—
economy the economy moves either related to the question as to why an economy
for stagnationor for a slowdown(onecan wants togo for fiscal deficit.And thusit becomes
see them happening in India repeatedly essentialtogoforananalysisofthecomposition20
throughout the 1960s, 1970s, 1980s). of thefiscaldeficitofagovernment .
The situation improved after the mid-
Outofthetwobroadexpenditureobligations
1990s. —
of a government revenue expenditure and
(iv) Printing Currency is the last resort for capital expenditure — the following combinations
thegovernmentin managingitsdeficit.19 ofexpenditurecompositionaresuggested:
But it has the biggest handicap that with
(i) A fiscal deficit with a surplus revenue
it the government cannot go for the budget or a zero revenue expenditure
expenditureswhichareto bemadein the
is the best composition of fiscal deficit
foreigncurrency.Evenifthegovernment
and the most suitable time for deficit
is satisfied on this front, printing fresh financing.
currencies does have other damaging
(ii) The deficit requirements for lower
effectson theeconomy:
revenue expenditures and higher capital
(a) It increases inflation proportionally.
expenditures are the next best situation
(India regularly went for it since the for deficit financing, provided revenue
early 1970s and usually had to bear deficitiseliminatedsoon.
doubledigitinflations.)
(iii) The last could be the situation when
(b) It brings in regular pressure and
major part of deficit financing is to fulfil
obligation on the government
revenue expenditures and a minor part
for upward revision in wages a — nd to go for capital expenditures. The total
salaries of government employees money of the deficit might go to fulfil
ultimatelyincreasingthegovernment
revenueexpenditure, which could be the
expenditures necessitating further worstformofit.
printing of currency and further
— Basically, thereshould be a judicious mix of
inflation a vicious cycle into which
plan and non-plan expenditureaswellas revenue
economiesentanglethemselves.
19. L.N.Rangarajan,op.cit.,pp.259-62.
20. J.Cullisand P.Jones,PublicFinanceandPublicChoice,OxfordUniversityPress,NewYork,2ndEd.,1998.

--- PAGE 507 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.13
andcapitalexpendituresin India.Lessernon-plan Fiscal policy is also defined as ‘changes in
expenditureor higher plan-expenditureare better government expenditures and taxes that are
reasons behind deficit financingin India (though designedtoachievemacroeconomicpolicygoals’25
India has a typical feature of capital expenditure (such as growth, employment, investment, etc .).
whichmakesthiscombinationofdeficitfinancing Therefore,wesaythat‘fiscalpolicydenotestheuse
not asuggestedform — discussedahead). of taxesandgovernmentexpenditures’.26
Third world economies (including India) How the taxes and the government
though went for higher and higher fiscal deficits expenditures influence the overall economy, has
and deficit financing, they either did not address been explained in a brief discussion here.27 Let
or failed to address the composition of deficit us first discuss the taxesand their impact on the
favourable towards capital and non-revenue economy:
expenditures.
(i) Taxes have a direct bearing on people’s
incomeaffectingtheirlevelsofdisposable
|
FISCAL POLICY
incomes, purchaseofgoods andservices,
consumption and ultimately their
Therealmeaning,significanceandimpactoffiscal
standardofliving;
policyemergedinthewakeoftheGreatDepression
andtheSecondWorldWar.Fiscalpolicyhasbeen (ii) Taxes directly affect the savings of
individuals, families and firms which
defined as ‘the policy of the government with —
regard to the level of government purchases, the affect investment in the economy as
leveloftransfers,andthetaxstructure’ — probably investment affects the output (GDP)
thebestandthemostacclaimeddefinitionamong
therebyinfluencingthepercapitaincome;
experts .21 Later, the impact of fiscal policy on (iii) Taxes affect the prices of goods and
macro-economywasbeautifullyanalysed.22Asthe servicesasfactorcost (productioncost)is
policyhasadeepimpactontheoverallperformance affected thereby affecting incentives and
of the economy, fiscal policy is also defined as behaviourofeconomicactivities,etc .
the policywhich handles public expenditure and Government expenditures affect/influence the
tax to direct and stimulate the level of economic economyin two ways:
activity (numerically denoted by the Gross
(i) There are some expenditure on
Domestic Product).23 It was J. M. Keynes, the
government purchases of goods and
first economist who developed a theory linking
services, for example construction of
fiscalpolicyandeconomicperformance.24
roads, railways, ports,foodgrains, etc ., in
21. TheacclaimeddefinitionfirstcameupinthewidelyusedworkMacroeconomicsbyDornbuschandFisherwhichisnow
availableasR.S.Dornbusch,S.FisherandRichardStartz,Microeconomics,TataMcGraw -Hill,N.Delhi,8thEd.,2002.
22. John Hicks,theBritish Nobel Laureatedidshowitreferringchangesintaxesandgovernmentexpenditureusingthe
frameworkofthefamousIS -LMmodel(Ibid) .
23. S.R.Maheshwari,ADictionaryofPublicAdministration,OrientLongman,N.Delhi,2002,p.227.
24. InhisacclaimedworkTheGeneralTheoryof Employment , InterestandMoney,1936.
25. StiglitzandWalsh,Economics,op.cit.,p.729.
26. Samuelsonand Nordhaus,Economics,op.cit.,p.412.
27. BasedontheelaborationbySamuelsonand Nordhaus,Economics,op.cit.,pp.412 - 13.

--- PAGE 508 ---
18.14 < IndianEconomy
the goods category and salary payments abletoemergeasasurplusrevenuebudget
to government employees in theservices economy. But huge cost was paid in the
category;and form of tax evasion, rise in corruption,
(ii) There are some expenditure due to stagnatingstandardoflifeandaneglected
government’s income support, to socialsector .
the poor, unemployed and old-age (iii) Taking recourse to heavy borrowings
people (known as government transfer from the RBI and finally nationalisation
payments). of banks so that their money could be
used by the government to support
DEFICITFINANCINGININDIA the plans. This not only increased the
India was declared to be a planned economy interest burden of the governments but
right after Independence. As development also ruptured the whole financial system
—
responsibilitiesofthegovernmentwereveryhigh, in coming years banks did not remain
therewasa need of hugefundsin rupeeaswellas commercial entities and became part of
inforeigncurrencyforms.Indiafacedcontinuous thegovernment’s politicalstatement .
crisesinmanagingtherequiredfundtosupportits (iv) Establishing giant PSUs with higher
—
FiveYear Plans neither foreign funds came nor revenue expenditures (salaries) which
internal resourcescould bemobilised insufficient increasedtherevenueexpendituresofthe
amount . (Due to lower tax collections, weaker future governments when the pensions
banks that too privately owned, and negligible and the PFs needed to beserviced.
savingrate,etc .)28 (v) Unable to go for the required level of
By the late 1960s, the government headed investment even after taking recourse to
fordeficitfinancingandfromthe1970sonwards, all theabovegiven means.
India started going for higher and higher fiscal -
THESECONDPHASE(1970 1991)
deficitsandbecamemoreandmoredependenton
increased deficit financing with every fresh year. This is considered the period of deficit financing,
We may classify dificit financing in India into follow upof unsoundfundamentalsofeconomics
three phases. andfinallyculminatinginseverefinancialcrisisby
- theyear 1990 — 91.Major highlights of this phase
THEFIRSTPHASE(1947 1970) —
maybesummed upasfollows
This phase had no concept of deficit financing (i) This phasesaw the nationalisation policy
andthedeficitswereshownasBudgetaryDeficits.
and simultaneous revival of an increased
—
Major aspectsofthisphasewere emphasis on expansion of the PSU (two
—
(i) Tryingtoborrowfrominsideandoutside points should be noted here specially
the economy but unable to meet the first, many of the South East Asian
target . economies have, officially declared their
(ii) In the1950s,aseriousattemptwasmade
acceptanceofcapitalismandprivatisation.
to increase tax collections and check Secondly, China had declared that
revenue expenditures to be ultimately
investmentinthegovernment-controlled
28. Fordata-baseddetaileddiscussion refertoSudiptoMundleand M.GovindaRao,'IssuesinFiscalPolicy'inBimalJalan(ed.),
TheIndianEconomy:ProblemsandProspects , PenguinBooks,N.Delhi,RevisedEdition,2004,pp.258-85.

--- PAGE 509 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.15
companies are a loss of money at this (vi) Theplanexpenditurewhichgovernments
time). weregoingfor werethroughinvestments
(ii) Upcoming PSUs increased the total in the PSUs which were not committed
expenditureof thegovernment’s revenue to profit motive, deficitfinancingfor the
aswellascapital. PSUswasnotbasedonsoundeconomics.
Majority of the plan expenditure in a
(iii) Existing PSUs were taking their own
due from the economy — the illogical sense turned out to be non-economic,
employment creation excessively
i.e., non-planexpenditureat theend.
increased the burdenofsalaries, pensions Due to theabove-given reasons, it was tough
and PF; many of them had started to saywhether it was sound to go for huge fiscal
fetching huge losses by this time; as the deficitsin India.29
public sector does not have profit as its
THETHIRDPHASE(1991ONWARDS)
primary goal; there was a lack of profit
and loss analysis; as the PSUs had no This started with the initiation of the economic
connection between their need of labour reforms process under the conditionalities put
force and the existing labour force. forth by the IMF (controlling fiscal deficit was
Ultimately, the responsibility of profit oneamongst them).Astheeconomymovedfrom
or loss did not remain the onus of the government dominance to market dominance,
officers, thus making them centres of things needed a restructuring and public finance
intentionallossesandan institutionalised also needed a touch of rationality. Till date, the
centreofcorruption;etc . government had been doing pure politics with
(iv) The governments have failed on both the public money in the name of development.
the fronts — checking population rise Now the IMF dictated and the economy headed
and mass employment generation — the towards greater and greater fiscal responsibility
burden of different subsidies went on in the coming times. India is better todayin this
increasing making them unmanageable regard but we cannot say that public finance is
and highly illogical. Self-employment basedtodayonthesoundprinciplesofeconomics.
programmes could not pick up, or Buttherigorousprocessoffiscalreformsaimingat
better said, it was politically suitable to fiscalconsolidationstartedin India.
go for piece-meal wage-employment
programmeswithdifferent names. INDIAN FISCAL SITUATION:
ASUMMARY
(v) Planned development remained highly
centralised and devoid of any place for
— In December 1985, the Government of India
local aspirations frustrations of masses
presented a discussion paper in the Parliament
startedshowing upin theform extremist
titled‘Long-
term
FiscalPolicy’.Itwasforthefirst
and radical organisations raising their
timeinthefiscalhistoryofIndiathatweseealong
¬
heads creating a law and order problem
term perspective coming on the fiscal issue from
and excessive expenditure on them. The
thegovernment .This also included the policyof
outcomewasaburdenedpoliceforceand
government expenditure. The paper was bold
lagging judicialset up.
29. Thiswasthegeneralfeelingamongtheexperts,policymakersandtheIMF,alike.

--- PAGE 510 ---
18.16 < IndianEconomy
enough to recognise the deterioration in India’s cent of the GDP till the 1970s started
fiscal position and accepted it among the most climbing up by being 3.77 per cent in
— — —
important challenges of the eighties the paper 1980 81, 8.47 per cent in 1986 87
—
set specific targets and policies to set the things ending up at 7.85 per cent in 1990 91
right.This paper was followed bya country-wide afterbeingabove7percentinthesecond
debate on the issue and it was in 1987 that the halfof the1980s.31
government came ahead with two bold steps in (ii) The revenue (i.e., current) expenditure
—
thedirection of the government (Centre and states
(i) a virtual freeze was announced on combined) increased from 11.8 per cent
governmentexpenditure,and of GDP to 23 per cent between I960
(ii) aceilingon thebudgetarydeficit. and 1990. The revenue receipts of the
The above steps had a positive impact on government also went up — on an average
1 th 9 e 88 situ th a e tio s n itu b a u t t io i n t w a a g s ai t n em s p ta o r r t a e r d y d as et s e i r n i c o e ra m tin id g - . c o e f n 1 t 4 in .6 1 p 9 e 8 r 6 — ce 1 n 9 t 90 in .B 1 u 9 t 7 t 1 he 7 g 5 ap to be 2 t 0 we p e e n r
revenue receipts and expenditures
The BoP crisis at the end of 1990 was generated —
remained negative financed largely
partly by the alarmingly high fiscaldeficit30 and
due to a high level of external borrowings. The by domestic borrowings (as a result the
IMF support to fight the crisis came in but with interest payments on domestic debt
manymacro-economicconditionalities, checking increased from 0.5 to 2.5 per cent of the
—
GDP during 1975 90.32 The revenue
the fiscal meance being a major one among
—
them. With the process of economic reforms deficit went on increasingafter 1979 80
— and reached the highest level of3.26 per
which started in 1991 92, the government also
announceditscommitmenttoreducefiscaldeficit
centof theGDPin1990-91.33
to3 — 4percent(ofGDP) bythemid-1990s(from (iii) The fiscal situation of the states was not
the level of about 8 per cent during 1987 — 90). good either. State governments which
This step was among the many measures which are primarily responsible for health,
the government started with the objective of education and other social services had
stabilising the economy. We may have a look at anaggregaterevenueexpenditureof5per
India’s fiscal situation upto the 1990 — 91 in the centofGDPontheseaccountswhiletheir
followingway: capitalexpenditureaccountedfor2.5per
(i) The fiscal deficits of the central cent on social and other sectors .34 The
government, after averaging below 4 per states’ expenditure on the social sector
went down whiletheir interest payments
30. Theproximatecauseofthepaymentcrisisinthemainstreamperspective,wasfaultymacroeconomicpolicies,specially
largefiscaldeficitsof thegovernmentduring1984 - 91,deficitsthatspilled overincountry'scurrentaccountof the
balanceofpayment.(MihirRakshit,TheMicro - economicAdjustmentProgramme:ACritique',EconomicandPolitical
Weekly26,no.34(August),quoted byMihirRakshit,'SomeMicroeconomicsof India'sReformExperience'inKaushik
Basu(ed.),India'sEmergingEconomy:PerformanceandProspectsinthe1990sandBeyond , OxfordUniversityPress,
N.Delhi,2004,p.84.
31. S.D.TendulkarandT.A.Bavani,UnderstandingReforms , Oxford UniversityPress,N.Delhi,2007,p.73.
32. BimalJalan,India’sEconomicPolicy , PenguinBooks,N.Delhi,1992,p.48.
33. HandbookofStatisticsontheEconomy2002 - 03 , RBI,Table221(citedbyTendulkarandBhavani,2007,op.cit.,p.74)
34. BimalJalan,1992,op.cit.,p.50

--- PAGE 511 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.17
had increasedduringthe1980s.35 programmes, employment generation
As per the experts, the debt situation in the programmes,education,healthandsocial
states would have been even worse, but for the services. The logic for such expenditure
fact that the states, unlike the Centre, did not comesfromtheideathatthegovernment
have independent powers to borrow either from should function as protector of the poor
the RBI or the market because of the statutory and provider of jobs for them implying
overdraft regulatoryscheme.36Thus, their deficits that such government expenditures
have been self-limiting — whenever the states benefit the poor.
tried to cut down their deficits the care of the It was in 2000 that the double menace
socialsector and capital expendituresuffered and of revenue and fiscal deficits got attention
development prospectsin thestatesalsosuffered. from the government at the Centre and some
Now the question arises that why the constitutional/statutory safeguards looked
government has not been able to check the
necessary.Consequently,theFiscalResponsibility
menace of fiscal deficits even though there has andBudgetManagementBill,2000wasproposed
been a consensus to do so? There are reasons37 in the Parliament.
whichcan becitedforit:
FRBMACT ,2003
(i) Politicalfactor:Thepoliticallobbiesand
sectional politics as well as the subsidies The fiscal policy of an economy has been
are supposed to be one big factor for considered as the building block for
rising government expenditure. We see enabling macro-environment by economists,
thisonahigherscaleifthereisaprobable policymakersand theIMF,alike.Itdoesnotonly
mid- term election or closer to a general provide stability and predictability to the policy
election. regime, but also ensures that national resources
(ii) Institutionalfactor: The administrative are allocated in terms of their defined priorities
size combined with the processes of
through thetaxtransfer mechanism.
reporting, accounting, supervising and Unproductive government expenditures, tax
monitoring getting greater importance distortionsandhighdeficitsareconsideredtohave
than the production and delivery of constrained the Indian economy from realising
goodsandservices.38 its full growth potential. At the begining of the
(Hi) Ethicalfactor: This is a more powerful fiscal reforms in 1991, the fiscal imbalance was
factor as it easily generates wide public identified as the rootcauseof the twin problems
support for thegovernmentexpenditure. of inflation and the difficult balanceof payments
Therearemanyheadsofsuchexpenditures
(BoPs) position.39 Since then the medium-term
such assubsidies (food, power, fertilizer, fiscal policy stance of the government has been
irrigation, etc .) poverty alleviation on thefollowinglines:40
35. TheReportofTenthFinanceCommission , N.Delhi,1994(quotedbyBimalJalan,1992,op.cit.,p.50).
36. Thisschemehaschangednow.Aftertheimplementationofthesuggestionsofthe12thFinanceCommissionstatesarenow
allowedtogoformarketborrowingstotakecareoftheirplanexpendituresoncetheyhavepassedandenactedtheirFiscal
ResponsibilityActs(FRAs)inconsonancewiththeFRBMAct,2003.
37. BasedonthepointsraisedbyBimalJalan,1992,op.cit.,p.49.
38. Thisfactorseemsgettingredressalwiththestartingofoutcomeand performancebudgeting2004-05onwards.
39. EconomicSurvey2006 - 07 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi,p.18.
40. Ibid.

--- PAGE 512 ---
18.18 4 IndianEconomy
(i) reducingthedeficits (revenueandfiscal); calamityor on exceptionalgrounds.
(ii) prioritising expenditure and ensuring (iv) Gol not to borrow from RBI except by
that theseresultedinintendedoutcomes; Waysand MeansAdvances (WMAs).
and (v) RBI not tosubscribeto the primaryissue
—
(iii) augumenting resources by widening tax of the Gol securities from 2006 07 (it
baseandimprovingtax -compliancewhile means that these government bonds/
maintainingmoderaterates . papers will become market — based
The fiscal consolidation which followed in instrument to raise long- term funds by
1991 failed to give the desired results as there
thegovernment).
was no defined mandatefor it. Neither was there (vi) Steps to be taken to ensure greater
any statutory obligation to do so.41 This is why transparencyin fiscaloperations.
the Fiscal Reforms and Budget Management (vii) Alongwith theBudgetand Demandsfor
Act (FRBMA) was enacted on August 26, 2003 Grants,theGoltolaythefollowingthree
to provide the support of a strong institutional/ statementsbeforetheParliamentineach
statutory mechanism. Designed for the purpose financialyear:
ofmedium- term managementof thefiscaldeficit, (a) Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement
theFRBMAcameinto effectonJuly3, 2004.
(FPSS);
The FRBM Bill, 2000 was passed by the (b) Medium Term Fiscal Policy
Parliament with all political parties voting in
Statement (MTFPS);and
favour, and is considered a watershed in the area
(c) Macroeconomic Framework
offiscalreformsinthecountry .Mainhighlightsof
Statement (MFS).
theFRBMA,2003areasgiven below:42
(viii) The Finance Minister to make quarterly
(i) Gol to takemeasuresto reducefiscaland _
review of trends in receipts and
revenuedeficitso asto eliminaterevenue
expenditurein relationtotheBudgetand
deficit by March 31, 2008 (which was
placethereview beforethe Parliament.
revised by the UPA Government to
-
March31, 2009) and thereafter build up FOLLOWUPTOTHEFRBMA
adequaterevenuesurplus.
Theprocessoffiscalconsolidation under FRBMA
(ii) RulestobemadeundertheActtospecify
hasbeencontinuousandessentiallyanincremental
annualtargetsfor thereduction offiscal
one.Someof theimportant fiscal measures43that
deficit (FD) and revenue deficit (RD)
are being implemented by thegovernment are as
contingent liabilities and total liabilities
given below:
(RDtobecutby0.5percentperannum
andFDby0.3percentp.a.). (i) reducingthepeak ratesofcustom duties;
(iii) FD and RD mayexceed the targets only
(ii) rectifying anomalies like inverted duty
on thegroundssuch as nationalsecurity, structure;
41
. Ibid.
42 . EconomicSurvey2003 - 04 , MoF,Gol,N .Delhi.
43 . EconomicSurvey2006 - 07 , op . cit .,p . 18 .

--- PAGE 513 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia I 18.19
(iii) rationalising excise duties with a scheme offiscal transfers to states suggested by
movement towardsa mediumCENVAT theTFCappearstohavesucceeded.)45
rate;
|
(iv) revisitingthetaxexemptions; LIMITINGGOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE
(v) relying on voluntary tax compliance Elected governments are composed of different
through taxpayerfacilitation; interest groups and lobbies. At times, such
(vi) introduction of state -level VAT for governments might intend to use its economic
achieving a non-cascading, self- policiesinahighlypopulistwayforgreaterpolitical
enforcing, and harmonised commodity mileagewithoutcaringforthenationalexchequer.
taxregime; Such acts might force the governments to go in
(vii) increasing productivity of expenditure for excessive internal and external borrowing
through an outcome budget framework and printing of currency.Governmentsgenerally
(which seeks to translate outlays into avoid to increase tax or impose new taxes for
better outcomes through monitorable their revenue increase as such acts are politically
performanceindicators); unpopular. On the other hand, borrowings
(viii) innovative financing mechanism like and printing of currency impose no immediate
creationofSpecialPurposeVehicle(SPV) economic or political costs . A government in
forinfrastructureprojects;and the election-year usually spends money frugally
by borrowings (from the RBI in India) because
(ix) states have also joined the process of
fiscal consolidation in line with the it is the coming government after the elections
Twelfth Finance Commission’s (TFC) who is supposed to repay them. Government
recommendationsandarecomplementing
expendituresremainhigherandexpandingdueto
—
theeffortsof thecentralgovernment . some economic reasons also by doing so extra
— employment is generated and the output (GDP)
In 2006 07, in case of the central
oftheeconomyisalso boosted.Ifgovernmentsgo
government, proposed reduction in revenue and
foranti-expansionaryfiscaland monetarypolicies
fiscal deficits were put at 0.6 per cent and 0.5
with the objective of reducing its expenditures
per cent, respectively (higher than the FRBMA
— the employment as well as the GDP both will
Rules),thoughthereductionsufferedin 2005 06
be hampered. This is considered a bias in the
o d n ue ac to co h u i n g t h o er ft d h e e v T ol F u C tio r n ec t o o m st m at e e d s a b ti y on th s. e 44 Centre economic policies of the elected governments .
But there has always been a consensus among
Statesalsoshowedconsiderableimprovement
the experts and policymakers that an external
(infact,even betterthenthecentralgovernment). (i.e.,outsidethegovernment)andsomeformofa
Thefiscal deficit of thestates declined by 1.6 per
statutory check must be over thegovernment on
cent post FRBMAfrom 4.5 per cent in 2003-04 its powersof moneycreation (i.e., by borrowings
to2.6percentin2006-07oftheirGDP.Revenue
or printing).With the objective of removing the
deficit,onan aggreg
—
atebasis, was budgeted toget bias — tomakefiscalpolicylesssensitivetoelectoral
eliminated by 2006 07, two years ahead of the considerations, several countries had introduced
target . (A strong incentive-based restructuring somelegalprovisionsontheirgovernmentsbefore
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid.

--- PAGE 514 ---
18.20 4 IndianEconomy
India enacted its FRBMA. We see mainly three supplyisnotallowedtoexceedgrowthin
variantsofitaround theworld: theforeign assets .48
(i) It was New Zealand which first It was in 1994 that India took the first step
introduced such a legal binding on the in this direction when the central government
government’s powers of moneycreation. had a formal agreement with the RBI to limit
Here the central bank is legally bound its borrowing through ad hoc treasury bills to a
to ensure that money creation by the predeterminedamount(Rs.6,000croresin1994 —
government does not increase the rate 95).49However,itwasahighlyliberalarrangement
—
of inflation target it means that the with thegovernment having the ultimate powers
centralbankhastheoverridingpowerson to revise the aforesaid predetermined amount by
thegovernment therein thearea ofextra a fresh agreement with the RBI.The importance
moneycreation.46 thisbeginninghadwasfinallyin theenactmentof
—
(ii) Thesecondvariantis puttingsomefirm theFRBMA2003 a historicachievementin the
legal or constitutional limit on the size areaoffiscal prudencein thecountry .
of government deficits or the power of
|
thegovernmentto borrow.Germanyand FISCAL CONSOLIDATIONININmA
—
Chile had such an arrangement today
The average combined fiscal deficits, of the
Germany is bound to the fiscal limits
prescribed by the Maastricht Treaty. In C pe e r nt c r e e n a t n o d f s t t h a e tes G a D fte P r t 1 i 9 ll 7 2 3 0 , 0 h 0 a — d 0 b 1 e . en M a o b r o e v t e h 1 an 0
the late 1990s, an upper limit on the
half of it had been due to huge revenue deficits.
government’spowerstocreatedeficitwas
The governments were cautioned by the RBI,
introduced.47
the Planning Commission as well as by the IMF
(iii) Some countries introduced the so-called and the WB about the unsustainability of the
‘Currency Board’ type of
—
arrangement fiscaldeficits.It wasat the behest of theIMF that
to serve the same purpose this is the India started the politically and socially painful
third variant. In this arrangement,
process of fiscal reforms, a step towards fiscal
moneysupplyin theeconomyis directly consolidation.50Anumber ofstepswere taken by
linked
—
tochangesin thesupplyofforeign
thegovernmentattheCentreinthisdirectionand
assets neither the government nor the there had been incessant attempts to do thesame
centralbankhasanyindependentpowers inthestates’publicfinancestoo .Major highlights
to create money, as growth in money inthisdirectioncanbesummedupasgivenbelow:
46. Oppositetoit,intheU.K.,thegovernmenthasoverridingpowersonthecentralbankandthereisabsenceofanylegal
checkson moneycreationpowersofthegovernment.OncetheUKbecomespartoftheEuropeanUnionitwillcome
undersuchacheckthroughtheMaastrichtTreaty.BeforetheenactmentoftheFRBMA,2003.IndiawasliketheU.K,
however,theConstitutionof India hasa provisionforimposingastatutorylimitonthecentre's borrowing powers
underArticle292 . ButtheArticleisnotmandatoryandhasnotbeeninvokedbyanyofthegovernmentstilldate.
47. BytheCongresspassingtheBalancedBudgetAct,1997whichpromisedtoeliminatefederaldeficitspendingby2002
(seeNicholasHenry,PublicAdministrationandPublicPolicy , Prentice -Hall,N.Delhi,8thEd.,2003,p.217).
48. Argentinaintroducedthisarrangementinthelate1990s.
49. EconomicSurvey1994 - 95 , MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
50. IMFimposedsomemacro- economicconditionsontheeconomywhileIndiaborrowedfromitforitsBoPcorrectionin
1990 - 91.Oneamongtheconditionswascuttingdownthegovernmentexpenditure(i.e.,salaries,pensions,interest
andsubsidies,etc.)by10percenteveryyear.

--- PAGE 515 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.21
.
1 Policy initiatives towards cutting revenue (h) Postal deficits to be checked by
deficits: involving the post offices in other
(i) Cuttingdown expenditure — areasofprofit;
(a) Cutting down the burden ofsalaries, (i) Highereducationdeclaredasnon ¬
pensions and the PFs (down-sizing/ prioritysector; fees of institutions of
right-sizing of the government, out professional courses revised upward;
.
of every 3 vacancies 1 to be filled etc
-
up, interest cut on the PF, pension (ii) Increasingrevenuereceipts .
reforms-PFRDA,etc .); (a) Tax reforms initiated (Cenvat, VAT,
(b) Cutting down the subsidies ServiceTax,GST proposed,etc .);
(Administered Price Mechanism in (b) The PSUs to bedisinvested and even
petroleum, fertilizers, sugar, drugs privatised (if a political concensus
to be rationalised, it was done with reachedwhichalludestoday);
mixedsuccesses);
(c) Surplus forex reserves to be used in
(c) Interest burden to be cut down (by external lending and purchasing
goingforlesserandlesserborrowings, foreign highqualitysovereign bonds,
pre-payment of external debts, debt
etc
.
swaps, promoting external lending,
(d) State governments allowed to go
minimal dependence on costlier
for market borrowing for their plan
externalborrowings,etc .); expenditure,etc .
(d) Defence beingone major item of the .
2 Theborrowingprogrammeofthegovernment:
expenditure bilateral negotiations
(i) TheWays and MeansAdvances (WMA)
initiated with China and Pakistan
schemecommencedin1997underwhich
(the historical and psychological
thegovernmentcommitstotheRBIabout
enemies against whom the Indian
theamount of moneyit will give as part
defence preparedness was directed
of its market-borrowing programme, to
to, as supposed) so that the defence
bring transparencyin publicexpenditure
force cut could be completed on the
borders,etc . ; and to put p
.
olitical responsibilityon the
government
(e) Budgetary supports to the loss ¬ (ii) TheRBIwillnotbetheprimarysubscriber
makingPSUstobeanexceptionthan —
to government securities in the future
a rule;
committed waybackin 1997.
(f) Expenditure reform started by the .
3 Thefiscal responsibilityon thegovernments:
governments in different areas and
(i) The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
departments;
Management (FRBM) Act was passed
(g) General Services to be motivated
in 2003 (voted by all political parties)
towardsprofitwithsubsidisedservices
which puts constitutional obligation
to the needy only (railways, power,
water,etc .); on the government to commit so many

--- PAGE 516 ---
18.22 4 IndianEconomy
-
things as fiscal responsibility comes |
ZERO BASE BUDGETING
—
in the public finance fixing annual
targets to cut revenue and fiscal deficits; Theidea ofzero-base budgeting (ZBB) first came
the government not to borrow from the totheprivatelyownedorganisationoftheUSAby
RBI except by the WMA; government the1960s.Thisbasicallybelonged toa longlistof
to bring in greater transparency in fiscal guidelines for managerial excellence and success,
operations; along with the Budget the others beingManagement byObjectives (MBO),
government to lay statements regarding Matrix Management, Portfolio Management,
fiscal policy strategy in the House and etc to name a few.51 It was the US financial
Quarterly Review of trends of receipts expert Peter Phyrr who first proposed this idea
andexpendituresof thegovernment . for government budgeting and Jimmy Carter,
(ii) A mechanism (to include state Govornor of Georgia, USAwas thefirst elected52
governments under the umbrella of executive to introduce ZBB to the publicsector .
fiscal responsibility) was advised (now When he presentedtheUS Budget in 1979asthe
implemented, too) by the 12th Finance USPresidentitwasthefirst useoftheZBBforany
Commission which allows the state nationstate .Sincethen manygovernmentsofthe
governments togo for market borrowing world havegoneforsuch budgeting.
(without central permission) for their Zero-base budgeting is the allocation of
need of plan development provided they resources to agencies based on periodic re-
passtheirfiscalresponsibilityacts (FRAs) evaluation by those agencies of the need for all
and commit to the fiscal responsibility the programmes for which they are responsible,
regardingcuttingtheir revenueandfiscal justifying thecontinuanceor termination ofeach
deficits.Asmanyas19stateshavealready
programme in the agency budget proposal
—
in
passed their FRAs bynow. other words,an agencyreassesseswhat it isdoing
At present, wecannotconcludethatoncethe from top to bottom from a hypothetical zero
.
FRBM Act is passed the fiscal abberations will base53
be automatically checked. At the same time, we There are three essential principles of ZBB.
cannotsaywhetheritwillhamperthesocialcause.
Some experts say it in a different way, there are
But experts agree upon that at least a legislative threeessentialquestionswhich must beanswered
beginning has taken place and the opposition objectivelybeforegoingforanyexpenditureasper
in the House must have got a tool (and so the thetechniquesof ZBB:
people) to create enough democratic pressure (i) Should wespend?
on the governments of the time regarding fiscal
(ii) Howmuchshould wespend?
prudence.
(iii) Whereshould wespend?
51. GeorgeR.TerryandStephenG.Franklin,PrinciplesofManagement,AITBS,N.Delhi,8thEd.,2002,pp.9 - 10.
52. See Peter A. Phyrr, The Zero Base Approach toGovernment Budgeting, Public Administration Review, 37 (Jan./
Feb.,1977),p.7andThomasP.Lauth,Zero-BaseBudgetinginGeorgiaStateGovernment:MythandReality,Public
Administration Review,38(Sept./Oct.,1978) pp.420 - 30(cited in NicholarHenry,PublicAdministrationand Public
Affairs,Prentice -Hall,N.Delhi,8thEd.,2003,p.217).
53. NicholasHenry,2003,op.cit.,p.218.

--- PAGE 517 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia I 18.23
There are three special features of this (i) There are certain expenditures upon
budgeting which distinguishes it from the which the government/parliament does
traditional budgeting.Thesefeatures, in brief,are not have the power of scrutiny (as the
as under: ‘Charged Expenditure’in India).
(i) The conventional aggregate approach (ii) There are certains public services which
—
is not applied in it, in which each defy the cost -benefit analysis defence,
department of the government prepares lawand order,foreign relations,etc .
their own budget for many activities (iii) Scrutinyisasubjectivematterandso this
in the aggregate and composite form, might become preyto bias.Again, if the
making it difficult to scrutinise each scrutinisers have a complete utilitarian
and every activity. In place of it every view many long- term objectives of
department needs to justify its existence budgeting and public policy might get
andcontinuanceinthebudgetdocument marginalised.
by using the mathematical technique of
(iv) It has scope for emergence of the
econometrics, i.e., cost -benefit analysis. Ministry of Finance as the all-powerful
In a nutshell, every activity of each
institution dictatingother ministriesand
department is ‘X-rayed’ and once the departments.
justificationisvalidatedtheyareallocated
thefunds. (v) Bureaucracy does not praise it as it
evaluatestheirdecisionsandperformances
(ii) Economyinpublicexpenditureistheraison ina highlyobjectiveway.
d’etre of this budgeting. This is why the
Despitetheabove-givenstronglimitation,the
ZBB has provisions of closeexamination
ZBB has a sound logicand should be considered
and scrutiny of each programme and
public spending. Finally, the public a long- term budgetary reform process. The basic
idea of this form of budgeting is to optimise the
spending is cut without affecting the
benefits of expenditure in every area of activity
s c e u r r v r i e c n e t s l a e c v c e r l u o in f g be to ne t f h it e s p o u f b v l a ic r . ious public and in this sense it is exceptional. To the extent
thecorporate world is concerned, this has been a
(iii) Prioritising the competing needs is verysuccessfulfinancial management tool.
another special feature of ZBB. Before
In India, it is believed to be in practicesince
allocating funds to the different needs 1997 — 99.Wecannotsaythat Indiaisasuccessin
of the economy, an order of priority is
ZBB, but manyof the profit-fetching PSUs have
prepared with utmost objectivity. As the
been able to useitsuccessfullyand optimisetheir
resources/funds are always scarce, in the
profits.
processofprioritisedallocation,theitem/
items at the bottom might not get any | RESULTS - FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD)
funds.
Side by side its benefits, there are certain In September 2009, the Indian PM approved
limitations too before the ZBB which prohibits the outline of a Performance Monitoring and
its assumed success, according to experts . These Evaluation System (PMES) for government
limitationshavemadeitsubjectto criticisms.The ministries/departments. Under PMES, each
limitationsareasgiven below: ministry/department is required to prepare a

--- PAGE 518 ---
18.24 4 IndianEconomy
Results-FrameworkDocument(RFD).Ithasbeen implementation of agreed actions, RFD may
adopted by the Gol to monitor the performance also include necessary operational autonomy . In
management of various ministries/departments. the case of the Responsibility Centres (attached
TheRFDsystem is beingimplementedinvarious offices, subordinate offices, and autonomous
—
ministries/departments in phased manner was organisations), theRFDwill representa recordof
implementedto59ministries/departmentsforthe understanding between the parent department/
year2009 — 10,increasingeveryyearin2013 — 14it ministryand theResponsibilityCentre.TheRFD
willgetimplementedin84ministries/departments. seeks toaddressthreebasicquestions:
PerformanceManagementin thegovernment is (i) What are organisation’s main objectives
a new conceptwhich determines the performance for theyear?
index based upon the agreed objectives, policies,
(ii) What actions are proposed to achieve
programme and projects/schemes. To ensure the
theseobjectives?
success in achieving the agreed objectives and
(iii) How would someone know at the end
implementing agreed policies, programme and
of the year the degree of progress made
projects, the RFD also includes a commitment
in implementing these actions? That is,
for required resources and necessary operational
what are the relevant success indicators
.
autonomy
and their targets?
‘RFD provides a summary of the most
The RFD should contain the following five
important results that an organisation expects to -
sections.
achieve during the financial year’.Thedocument
(i) Organisation’svision, mission,objectives
hastwo main purposes:
andfunctions.
(i) Move the focus of the organisation
‘from process-orientation to results- (ii) Inter se priorities among key objectives,
orientation’;and successindicatorsand targets .
(iii) Trendvaluesof thesuccessindicators.
(ii) provide an objective and fair basis
to evaluate the organisation’s overall (iv) Description and definition of success
performanceat theyear-end. indicators and proposed measurement
methodology.
The RFD Guidelines are divided into
three broad sections: 1 . Format of RFD; 2 . (v) Specific performance requirements from
MethodologyforEvaluation;and3 . RFDProcess other departments/organisations thatare
andTimelines criticalfor deliveringagreed results.
1.FormatofRFD 2.EvaluationMethodology
An RFD is essentially a record of understanding At the end of the year, the parent ministry/
between a department/ministry representing the department will look at the achievements of the
people’smandate,andtheheadoftheorganisation organisation, compare them with thetargets, and
responsible for implementing this mandate. This determine the composite score. The composite
documentcontainsnotonlytheagreedobjectives, scoreshowsthedegreetowhichtheorganisationin
policies, programmeand projects but alsosuccess
questionwasabletomeetitspromisedresults,i.e.,
indicators and targets to measure progress in objective. Variousagencieswillhavediversesetsof
implementing them. To ensure the successful objectives and corresponding success indicators.

--- PAGE 519 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.25
Yet, at theend of theyear everyorganisation will higher performance in its ministries/departments
beabletocomputeitscompositescoreforthepast together with ‘transparency’, ‘accountability’
year. and ‘responsibility’. This is in the series of
other such initiatives like ‘Outcome Budgeting’
3.RFDProcessandTimelines and ‘Performance Budgeting’. The ‘Zero-Base
Beginningofthe Year:At the beginningof each Budgeting’ was a similar and first such initiative
financial year, each organisation to prepare a in thisdirection taken bytheGol in mid-1990s.
RFD.And as per the prioritieslisted in the RFD,
|
CHARGED EXPENDITURE
proposedactivities and thecorrespondingsuccess
indicators to be approved. The RFDs draft has
It is the public expenditure which is beyond the
to be completed by 5th of March for feedback
— voting power of the Parliament and is directly
andfinalised by31st March everyyear thefinal
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of
versionsofall RFDs to be put on thewebsites by India.54TheemolumentsofthePresident,Speaker
15th of April each year. The final RFD to take
and DeputySpeakeroftheLokSabha,Chairman
into account budget provisions and in particular
andDeputyChairmanoftheRajyaSabha,Judges
s
th
u
e
ch
O
m
ut
a
c
n
o
n
m
e
e
r
B
th
u
a
d
t
g
q
e
u
t.
a
T
rt
h
e
e
rl
R
y
F
m
D
o
s
ni
t
t
o
or
b
i
e
ng
dr
i
a
s
w
po
n
ss
u
i
p
bl
i
e
n
.
of theSupremeCourtand the High Courts,etc .,
in India,for example.
Duringthe Year: After six months, the Results-
Framework as well as the achievements to be | TYPESOF BUDGETS
—
reviewed the RFDs may be reviewed and the
goals reset, taking into account the priorities GOLDENRULE
at that point of time (this will enable to factor
in unforeseen circumstances such as drought
Thepropositionthatagovernmentshouldborrow
conditions, natural calamities or epidemics). onlytoinvest (i.e., planexpenditurein India)and
Cabinet Secretariat to select about 24 RFDs not to finance current spending (i.e., revenue
using a stratified random sampling procedure to expenditure in India) is known as the golden
examinethem. rule of public finance. This rule is undoubtedly
prudent but provided spending is honestly
EndoftheYear:At theend of theyear,all RFDs
described as investment, investments areefficient
to be reviewed, a report listing the achievements
and does not crowd out the important private
oftheir respectiveorganisationsagainsttheagreed
sectorinvestments.55
results in the prescribed format. This report is
required to be finalised by 1st of Mayeach year. BALANCEDBUDGET
After scrutiny by the concerned administrative
ministry/department, these results will be placed
Abudgetissaidtobeabalancedbudgetwhentotal
on thewebsite by1stofJuneeachyear. public- sector spending equals total government
income(revenuereceipts) duringthesame period
The RFD is among the attempts by which from taxes and charges for public services.56 In
the government have been trying to bring in
54. IntheConstitutionofIndiaitis—deliberatedintheArticle112(3),a-gwhereitisreferredas'expenditurecharged'on
theconsolidatedfundof India popularasthe'chargedexpenditure’(seeTheConstitutionofIndia,Ministryof Law,
JusticeandCompanyAffairs,Gol,N.Delhi,1999,pp.38 - 39).
55. SeeSamuelsonand Nordhaus,Economics,op.cit.,p.710;StiglitzandWalsh,Economics,op.cit.,pp.552 - 54.
56. MathewBishop,PocketEconomist,op.cit.,p.104.

--- PAGE 520 ---
18.26 4 IndianEconomy
other terms, a budget with zero revenue deficit is |
CUTMOTION
balancedbudget.Suchbudgetmakingispopularly
knownasbalancedbudgeting.
In democratic political systems, there is a
provisionofCutMotionintheHouse/Parliament
GENDERBUDGETING
(usually it is the opposition but floor might be
A general budget by the government which crossed by members of the House belonging
allocates funds and reponsibilities on the basis to the government due to presence of inner-
of gender is gender budgeting. It is done in an party politics). In the US, the budget provisions
economy where socio-economic disparities are presented by the government must be passed by
chronic and clearly visible on a sex basis (as in the Congress. Only then they can be enacted.
India). Unlike this, in the British parliamentary system
Gender budgeting started in India with the
though the budget of thegovernment isvoted by
Union Budget 2006 — 07 which proposed an the House usually this is considered a political
oudayof Rs.28,737crorededicated to the cause document and passed unchanged. India has
of women and created gender budgeting cells in mixed provisions of voting on the budget after
32 ministriesand departments.57 discussionin both theHouses.Therearedifferent
constitutionalprovisionsbywhichtheParliament
OUTCOMEANDPERFORMANCE starts discussion to reduce the demands, grants,
BUDGETS etc
.proposedbythegovernmentintheBudget59 —
(i) TokenCutsThismotionintendsto‘reduce
Theconceptsarepartofresult-orientedbudgeting.
the demand by Rs. 100’. Such a motion
While outcome budget is presented by different is moved in order to express a specific
departments and divisions of a ministry or the
grievance which is within the sphere of
government, theperformancebudgetis presented
the responsibility of the Government of
by the Ministry of Finance on behalf of the —
India the discussion remains confined
government . Both go for ‘quantitative’ as well as totheparticulargrievancespecifiedinthe
‘qualitative’ progress reports of the performance. motion.
Theoutcomebudgetisa microlevelprocesswhile
(ii) Economy Cuts This motion intends
performance budget is a macro level process in
budgeting. There are many outcome budgets in to ‘reduce the demand by a specified
amount’ representing the economy (in
anyone performance budget.
expenditure) that can be affected. Such
The basic objective of such budgeting is to specifiedamountmaybeeitherlumpsum
bring in transparency and thereby making the reduction in the demand or omission or
government more and more responsible to the reduction of an item in thedemnd — the
House and the public. Naturally, they bring in
discussionremainsconfinedtothematter
prudence and optimisation elements in public in which theeconomycan beaffected.
spending (also see entry ‘Outcome Budget’ in
(iii) DisapprovalofPolicyCutsThismotion
Chapter 23).
intends to ‘reduce the demand to Re. 1’.
57. UnionBudget2006 - 07,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi.
58. BasedonthenotesreleasedbytheMinistryofFinance,Gol,October2006whilereleasingtheQuarterlyReviewoftheUnion
Budget2006-07.
59. RulesofProcedureandConduct of BusinessinLokSabha,Parliament Secretariat,N.Dehli.

--- PAGE 521 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.27
This represents disapproval of the policy newsmakingones:
—
underlying the demand the discussion (i) The ‘financial stability trilemma’ put
remainsconfined to the particular policy forward by Dirk Schoenmaker60 (2008),
and is open to members to advocate an explains the incompatibility within the
alternate policy. Eurozoneof:(a)astablefinancialsystem,
(iv) Guillotine is the process in which the (b)anintegratedfinancialsystem,and(c)
Speakerputsalltheoutstandingdemands nationalfinancialstabilitypolicies.
made by the Budget directly to vote in (ii) By far the most high profile current
—
the House ending further discussions trilemma of the Eurozone (by Edward
(intended to cut short the discussion on Chancellor61) was believed to be the
the Budget). Through this, the Speaker seemingirreconcilabilitybetweenitsthree
may put the whole Budegt to vote (i.e., wishes,namely, (a) asinglecurrency,(b)
allowing‘nodiscussion’ontheBudgetby minimal fiscal contribution to bail outs,
theHouse).Inrecentyears,thisroutewas
and (c) the ECB’s commitment to low
taken timeandagain bytheGovernment inflation.
of India, to avoid theaggressivemood of (iii) Martin Wolf62 spoke about the US
theOpposition.
Republican Party’s fiscal policy
Though, thisisa short routeto get the trilemma: (a) large budget deficits are
Budget passed by the House (avoiding ruinous; (b) a continuedeagerness to cut
criticism by the Opposition benches), taxes; and (c) an utter lack of interest in
it may turn out to be very dangerous spendingcutsona largeenoughscale.
—
as the voting process may take the (iv) Then we have the Earth Trilemma
form of ‘no confidence motion’ and the
(EEE),whichpositsthatfor:(a)economic
government
mayberoutedoutofpower.
development (E), (b) we need increased
But, till date, Guillotines never resulted energyexpenditure(E), (c) but thisraises
into routing a government out of power theenvironmentalissue (E).
in India (as India follows the British
Modelof Parliamentarysystem). (v) Above all these more recent trilemmas
in economics, the prima donna of all of
| them is Mundell’s ‘impossible trinity’.
TRILEMMAS
This old trilemma asserts that a country
Putting the right kind of fiscal policy has always cannot maintain, simultaneously, all
—
been the most challenging policy decision to be three policy goals of (a) free capital
taken by the democratic governments around flows, (b) a fixed exchange rate, and
the world, there are some famous ‘trilemmas’ (c) an independent monetary policy.
related to this aspect . Economics have by now The impossible trinity, has seen enough
many ‘trilemmas’ developed and articulated by watersflowingdownthetimesinceitwas
economistsfromtimeto timeandtheprocessstill articulatedalmostfivedecadesagowhich
continues. Let us see some highly popular and hasastrongtheoreticalfoundationin the
60. DirkSchoenmaker,"ANewFinancialStabilityFrameworkforEurope",TheFinancialRegulator,Vol.13(3),2009.
61. EdwardChancellor,"Germany'sEurozonetrilemma",FinancialTimes,Nov.6,2011.
62. MartinWolf,"Thepoliticalgeniusofsupplysideeconomics",FinancialTimes,July25,2010.

--- PAGE 522 ---
18.28 4 IndianEconomy
Mundell-FlemingModeldeveloped in the deliverysystems, helpbringabout betterfinancial
1960s. management along with improved quality
Dani Rodrik63argued thatifacountrywants of governance in states and UTs. The overall
moreofglobalisation,it musteithergive upsome
estimatedcostoftheschemeisRs.626croreatRs.
democracy or some national sovereignty. Niall 1 crore per district in existence on April 1, 2011.
Ferguson64 highlighted the trilemma of a choice Financialsupportisupto75percent(90percent
between commitment to globalisation, to social in case of northeastern states) of the individual
order and to a smallstate (meaning limited state project cost of admissible components limited to
intervention). Rs. 75 lakh per district (Rs. 90 lakh per district
for north- easternstates).Fundswillbe releasedas
| TREASURYCOMPUTERISATIONOF STATE central assistance in three instalments of 40 per
cent,30percent,and30percenteach,subjectto
GOVERNMENTS satisfactoryreceiptof utilisation certificates.
Aschemeforimplementationofthemissionmode | CRISOF INDIA
project65‘ComputerisationofStateTreasuries’was
put in place by the Gol in June 2010 under the The FinanceMinistryof India hasdevelopedand
Nationale-GovemancePlan(NeGP).Thestates released (January 31, 2012) the Comparative
—
andUTsarerequiredtocompletetheirprojectsin Rating Index of Sovereigns (CRIS) a new
about three years beginning 2010 — 11.The funds index of sovereign credit rating . Together with
are released against deliverables.The scheme will it, the ministry has also released an estimation
support states and UTs to fill the existing gaps of CRIS over the last five years, for different
in their treasury computerisation, upgradation, nationsbelongingtodifferentblocksoftheglobal
expansion and interface requirements, apart economy.
from supporting basic computerisation. The Major credit rating agencies give out the
scheme covers installation of suitable hardware sovereigncreditratingofeachnationasanabsolute
and application software systems in a networked grade.Howothernationsfaredoesnotmatterina
environment on a wide area basis and building particular nation’s ratingscore.The CRIS is very
of interfaces for data sharing among various different from a comparative rating. An example
stakeholders.
of comparative ratingis the percentilescore
—
the
The scheme for treasury computerisation is way GRE (Graduate Record Examination) results
expected to make the budgeting process more are at times given. If a student is described as
efficient,improvecashflowmanagement,promote belonging to the 99th percentile, it clearly says
real-time reconciliation of accounts, strengthen something about this student’s performance vis-
managementinformationsystems(MIS),improve a-visotherstudents.
accuracy and timeliness in accounts preparation, It is arguable that even for sovereign credit
bringabout transparencyand efficiencyin public ratings, thereisa casefor providingsomekind of
63. Dani Rodrik,"The inescapabletrilemma of theworld economy",June27, 2007,(rodrik.typepad.com/dani_rodriks_
weblog.)
64. NiallFerguson,"ConservatismandtheCrisis:ATransatlanticTrilemma",CentreforPolicyStudies,RuttenbergLecture,
March24,2009.
65. EconomicSurvey2011-12,op.cit.,p.69

--- PAGE 523 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.29
a comparative score. When an investor searches (iii) eliminatewaste,
across nations for a place to put her money, the (iv) controlexpenditure,and
relativeratingofnationsisimportant.Ifnationy’s
(v) facilitatereforms.
rating remaining thesame, other nations’ ratings
Electronic transfer of benefits is a simple
improve over time, there may well be a case to
. designchangeandtransfersthatarealreadytaking
investlessin nationy
place through paper and cash mode will now be
The computation of CRIS is based on done through electronic transfers. This has been
nothing apart from Moody’s ratings and data enabled by rapid roll out of Aadhar (Unique
on the GDPs of different nations asgiven by the
Identity) now covering 200 million people and
IMF.In the paper, theministrydefines theCRIS
rapidlygrowing to cover 600 million (nearlyhalf
formally and then track how nations have done
of our population), with the NationalPopulation
over time. In order to capture this impact, the Register (NPR) covering the other half of the
Ministry of Finance developed a new system for populace.The DBT in tandem withsuch unique
comparing the relative ratings of sovereign debt
identification will ensure that the benefits reach
based on the historical evolution of their ratings
the target groups faster and minimize ‘inclusion’
over five years and the volumeof their economic
and ‘exclusion’ errors as well as ‘corruption’ that
activity as measured by their GDP (not adjusted areassociatedwith manual processes.
for Purchasing Power Parity(PPP)).The Finance
Ministrydevelopsa relativeratingindexand rank EXPENDITUREMANAGEMENT
101economiesaccordingtothisfortheyears2007
COMMISSION
to2011.TheindexusesexternaldataonGDPand
ratings combined in terms of pure mathematical ByearlySeptember 2014, theGolconstitutedan
and statistical methods without interventions or Expenditure Management Commission (EMC)
interpretations. through a Resolution. The EMC will look into
various aspects of expenditure reforms to be
| "
DIRECTBENEFITTRANSFER (MT) undertaken by the Government and other issues
concerningPublicExpenditureManagement.The
The DBT plan was introduced on January 1,
Commission hasonefull time, one part timeand
2013withsevenschemesin20districts.Indiahas
one ex-officio members other than Chairman (of
embarked on a DBT scheme in selected districts Cabinetrank).DrBimaljalanisitsfirstChairman.
wherein it has been envisaged that benefits such
The terms of reference of the Commission are as
as scholarships, pensions, and MGNREGA
given below:
(Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
(i) Review the major areas of Central
Guarantee Act) wages will be ‘directly credited’
Governmentexpenditure, and tosuggest
to the bank or post office accounts of identified
beneficiaries.The DBTscheme willnotsubstitute ways of creating fiscal space required to
entirelyfor deliveryof publicservices for now. It meet developmental expenditure needs,
without compromising the commitment
will replace neither food and kerosene subsidies
under theTPDS nor fertilizersubsidies.TheDBT to
fiscaldiscipline.
isdesignedto — (ii) Review the institutional arrangement,
including budgeting process and FRBM
(i) improvetargeting,
rules, for enforcing aggregate fiscal
(ii) reducecorruption,

--- PAGE 524 ---
18.30 4 IndianEconomy
discipline and suggest improvements latter reflecting the enhancements recommended
theirin; bythe13thFinanceCommission.However,some
(iii) Suggest measures to improve allocative deterioration in state government finances was
—
efficiencies in the existing expenditure seenin 2013 14, whileimprovementis budgeted
classification system, including focus on in 2014 — 13.The fiscal performance of states has
capitalexpenditure; been as given below (as per the Economic Survey
2014-15) .
(iv) Design a framework to imrpove '
operational efficiency of expenditures (cid:127) Revenuesurplus asa proportion of GDP
—
through focus on utilization, targets and during 2013 14 (RE) was negligible
outcomes; compared to the previous year’s 0.2
(v) Suggest an effectivestrategy for meeting per cent . For the year 2014 — 15, the
consolidated revenuesurplus is projected
reasonable proportion of expenditure on
servicesthrough user charges; to increaseto 0.4 per cent of theGDP.
(cid:127) Capital outlay-GDP ratio during
(vi) Suggest measures to achieve reduction —
2013 14 (RE) increased marginally
in financial costs through better Cash
ManagementSsystem; by 0.4 per cent over the previous year,
indicatingimprovement in thequalityof
(vii) Suggest greater use of IT tools for expenditure.
expendituremanagement;
(cid:127) Gross fiscal deficit (GFD) and primary
(viii) Suggest improved financial reporting
deficit as proportions to GDP are
systems in terms of accounting,
budgeting,etc .,and budgeted to decline to 2.3 per — cent and
0.8percentrespectivelyin2014 15from
(ix) Consider any other relevant issue
2.4 per centand 0.9 per cent respectively
concerning Public Expenditure —
in 2013 14 (RE) pointingout theintent
Management in Central Government for fiscalconsolidation bystates .
and makesuitablerecommendations.
(cid:127) TheprojecteddeclineinGFD-GDPratio
The Commission submitted its interim —
— in 2014 15 is mainly due to an increase
report before the Union Budget 2015 16 (as per
in the revenue receipts resulting from
s th u e bm m i a tt n e d d at b e ef g o i r v e en th t e o U it n ). io T n h B e u f d in g a e l t2 re 0 p 1 o 6 rt — i 1 s 7 t . o be current transfersfrom thecentre .
(cid:127) The expenditure pattern shows that
| STAlis the committed expenditure-GDP
FISCAL PERFORMANCEOF
ratio (comprising interest payments,
Stateshavebeen performing66betterontheirfiscal administrativeservices, and pension) will
—
frontssincetheyputin placetheirrespectivefiscal broadlyremain unchangedduring2014
responsibilityacts (FRAs). Fiscalconsolidation of 15 (BE), while overall expenditure as a
states during recent years was largely revenue-led, ratio to GDPis budgeted to increase.
withsignificantincreasesin bothown taxrevenue After the recommendations of the 14th
as well as current transfers from the centre, the Finance Commission are implemented, the fiscal
66. BasedonBudgetsof26states(fivebasedonVoteonAccount.).Source:EconomicSurvey2014 - 15 .

--- PAGE 525 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.31
space and performance of states are expected to oftheeconomy.Theimplementationofa
getstrengthened. well-designedGSTandothertaxreforms
would also play a crucial role in this
| CONSOLIDATEDGENERAL GOVERNMENT regard.
4. Expenditure rationalization is the need
Thefiscalperformanceoftheeconomy(centreand
of the hour. In this regard, the subsidy
states taken together) have shown improvements regime of India needs ‘overhauling’.The
in recentyears.Thefiscaldeficitof thecentrewas
estimated to be 4.6 per cent in 2013 — 14. With followin — gstepscanplayabigroletowards
thisaim
the fiscal deficit ofstates at 2.4 per cent of GDP
in RE 2013 — 14, the fiscal deficit of consolidated (a) Further reduction in fuel (LPG and
Kerosene)subsidies,
generalgovernment (centreandstatescombined)
was placed at 7.0 per cent of GDP in 2013 — 14 (b) Tacklingfertilizersubsidies,and
(RE) and estimated to decline to 6.4 per cent of (c) Moving toAadhaar-based directcash
GDPin 2014-13(BE). transfers of food subsidy and other
transfers.
| -
MAJOR ISSUES IN 2015 16 5. Fiscal consolidation is a necessity but the
As per the Economic Survey 2014 — 15, the quality of consolidation is imperative
to make it sustainable. To achieve this
following concerns and prospects in the area of
— end, it would be necessary to put in
PublicFinancein thefiscal2015 16:
place a medium- to -long- term fiscal
1. The Gol
—
adhered to fiscal consolidation policy framework with explicit revenue,
in 2013 14, despite domesticchallenges expenditure,and deficit targets .
and external vulnerabilities. The 4.1
—
per cent fiscal deficit target of 2014 15 NEED OF PUBLIC INVESTMENT
seems achievable in spite ofslowgrowth
of revenues and delayed disinvestment. We see the new government at the Centre
Though, to meet this target, the some initiating several reforms. Together with the
expenditure compression might be experts, the Gol also believe that this has revived
needed(whichhasbeenseenintheUnion theinvestorsentiment .Butarealinvestmentflowis
Budget2015 — 16) . yet to pick-up, especiallyfrom the privatesector .
2. Fuel subsidy bill is expected to fall in Thecauseforsuch asituation has been identified
2015 — 16, led bythefollowingfactors: as the “balance sheet syndrome with Indian
characteristics”. The Economic Survey 2014 — 15
(a) decliningglobaloil prices,
hasanalysed thissituation ingreater details.
(b) diesel-pricederegulationand
In such a scenario, together with other
(c) direct transfer of domestic LPG
measures, the most important action which has
subsidiesto bankaccounts,
beensuggestedis“boostingthepublicinvestment”.
(d) inncreased revenues via increase in
Merit of such an action has been emphasised by
excisedutieson petroleumanddiesel. the Mid Year Economic Analysis 2014 — 15, too .
3. Enhanced revenuegenerationis a priority The document says that reviving‘targeted public
for thegovernment .Tosomeextent this investment’ will work as an engine of growth
will be helped byraising thegrowth rate in short- term and will lead to investment flows

--- PAGE 526 ---
18.32 4 IndianEconomy
coming in from the private sector . It has not 2. The World Economic Outlook-2014
suggested public investment as a substitute for (an IMF report)68 noted that increases
privateinvestment butasa meanstocomplement in public infrastructure investment,
and kickstartinvestmentflowsfrom thelatter. if efficiently implemented, affects the
economyin two ways:
ROLEOFPUBLICINVESTMENT
(i) In the short run it boosts
Severalrecentstudies,fromIndiaandabroad,have aggregate demand and crowds in
—
beenquoted bytheEconomicSurvey2014 15 to (increases) private investment due
—
suggest an increase in the public investment in to the complementary nature of
atargetedway.Here,‘tergeted’publicinvestment infrastructureservices.
means, government investment in the sector (ii) In the long run, a supply side effect
whichcangeneratethelargest‘spillovereffects’to alsokicksinastheinfrastructurebuilt
the economy. In present time, the Railways has feeds into the productive capacity of
that levelofspillover potential.TheSurveyagrres theeconomy(infrastructurebeingthe
with the famous observation of W. W. Rostow lifeline of an economy that bringing
—
‘the introduction of the railways has been positiveeffects toallsectors).
historically the most powerful single initiator of The studies of the IMF confirm that
take-offs’67.The rational for such a policy action increase in public investment can have
has been emphasised byreferringto thefollwoing positive effects on output .The medium-
documentsandstudies:
term public investment multiplier for
1. It has been found that there has been developing economies is estimated to
a ‘link’ between public and private be between 0.5 and 0.9, however, the
investment in past which caused either magnitudes depend on the efficiency of
riseorfallinthegrowthrate .TheCentral implementation.
StatisticsOffice(CSO) dataindicatethat 3. In order of boosting public investment
a‘boom’in privatecorporateinvestment thereare thetwochallengesin this regard
—
inthehighgrowth phaseof2004 08was —
are
accompanied by an increase in public
(i) Mobilisationofthefinancialresources
investment byabout 1.5 percent .
toenhance publicinvestment,and
Similarily,adeclinein publicinvestment
(ii) Implementationcapacity.
bymorethan1percentagepointbetween
2008
—
13, is accompanied by a general
To theextentimplementationcapacityis
concerned, a sector with the maximum
decline in private corporate investment
positive ‘spillovers’ together with
bymorethan8 percentagepoints (except
— — proven capacity for investing quickly
an increase during 2009 10 and 2010
and efficiently, can serve the purpose.
11).
Two such sectors are: rural roads and
67. W.W.Rostow,TheProcessofEconomicGrowth,Oxford,ClarendonPress,2dedition,1960,pp.302 - 303citedinB.R.
Mitchell,TheComingof theRailwayand United Kingdom EconomicGrowth,TheJournalof EconomicHistory , 24(3),
September1964.
68. World Economic Outlook - 2014, IMF, Is it Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public
Investment,Chapter3,October2014.

--- PAGE 527 ---
PublicFinanceinIndia t 18.33
railways. Enhancing road connectivity resultsofthestudyindicatethatallowing
can have a huge positive spillover on for the appropriate lag (of around five
—
the economy this has been shown by years) between public infrastructure
—
recent studies69 the examples in case spending and growth, the former can
aretheNationalHighways Development explain around 1.5-2.9 percentofoverall
Project and the PM Gram Sadak Yojana growth.
of early 2000s. These public investment 5. Astudy72 bytheRBI reportsthelongrun
moves encouraged rurl employment and multiplier (ofcapitaloutlaysonGDP) to
earnings. be 2.4. Thestudy also confirms that the
The Survey believes that the present effect of revenue expenditure on GDP,
government should encourage public though high, fades out after the first
investment in the hetherto neglected year,suggestinggainsfrom reprioritizing
railways sector — it has the potential to expenditures.
have similar effects on the economy as Thus, theSurveyhasemphasised abig roleof
theroadsector could do in past .Thishas enhancingpublicinvestmentintherailwayssector .
the potential to crowd in greater private Itcould bestartedasonlypublicinvestment. But
investment and without jeopardising soon, the impetus given by the government will
India’s publicdebt dynamics. generateenoughavenuesandnewpossibilitiesthat
4. Public investment has direct positive thesector willstart attractingenough investment
bearings on the growth prospects, as per flows from the privates sector . Once such an
theempiricalstudies.India’sproductivity effect is visible then there are several possible
—
surge around 1980 was due to boost in alternatives to promote investment the PPP to
productivity led by enhanced public dedicated private inevstments. Railways being a
investments in the infrastructure sector lead infrastructure sector it will bring in multi ¬
(in contrast to the demand creating dimensional positive spillovers in the economy.
effects).70 The study analyses the effects Linking people and places has great potential in
on overall growth using a framework71 creating great many numbers of openings in the
wheregovernment infrastructureservices economy.
areaninputinto privateproduction.The
69. Asher,Sam&PaulNovosad,TheEmploymentEffectsofRoadConstructioninRuralIndia,2014,WorkingPaper,quoted
bytheEconomicsurvey2014-15.
70. Rodrik,D.&A.Subramanian,From'HinduGrowth'toProductivitySurge:TheMysteryoftheIndianGrowthTransition,
2005,IMFStaffPapers,52(2).
71. RobertBarro("GovernmentSpendinginaSimpleModelof EndogenousGrowth",1990,JournalofPoliticalEconomy,
98(5))
72. ReserveBankofIndia,FiscalMultipliersinIndia,Box11.16,AnnualReport2011-12.

--- PAGE 529 ---
C H A P T E R
-
Km
i
-
Sa &
tr
C 'm r :' v k
i
. i
^
SUSTAINABILITY 1
*
AND CLIMATE
.
/
CHANGE: INDIA
:: % (cid:127) <
AND THE WORLD
"... this is the only home we have and,
as environmentalistsarefondofsaying,
MotherNaturedoesn't do bailouts...so
=> Introduction .
webetterfinda better way togrow ”*
<=> SustainableDevelopmentandClimate
ChangeintheIndianContext
=> ClimateChangeata Glance
=> InternationalCollaborationAndEfforts
^ Rio+20
* COP20atLima
=> IPCCAssessmentReport
<> FinancingClimateChange
=> Problems& Prospects
=> Epilogue
*Thomas L. Friedman, Hot, Flat, & Crowded, Penguin Books, London,
2009,p . 23

--- PAGE 530 ---
19.2 < IndianEconomy
| (sited , bytheEconomicSurvey2014 — 15) .However,
INTRODUCTION
the challenges are also formidable, especially in
Improvinglivingstandardsfor mankind has been the context of finding the matching resources
of the required magnitude given the economic
the single minded goal of all nations and world
bodies. After defining development in numerous conditions. Climate science has rightly taken
up an important position in the public debate.
ways for over two decades, there seems to be a
consensus on ‘Human Development’. While a Even as the science of climate change grapples
with uncertainties, the world is witnessing more
large popculation on the earth is still to get the
‘bare minimum’for development, humanityisat extreme events . With rising extreme events, and
risingcitizen demand, theworld has littleoption
thecrossroadswhereitisfacedwith thefirstofits
kindchallenge — thechallengeof‘climatechange’. but to listen to the voice of evolvingscience and
respond adequately with strategies and policy
The dilemma is that whatever we can do for our
rooted in the principles of multilateralism with
development, there has to be a repercussion on
nature .An even bigger dilemma is in achievinga
equitableandfair burdensharing.1
—
global consensus on how to check or restrict and The Economic Survey 2011 12, for the
finallyreversethe processofclimatechange. first time, introduced a new chapter entitled
‘Sustainable Development and Climate Change’.
We may consider the year 2012, arguably,
These topics remained headline news with
a high water mark in the field of environment
and sustainable development initiatives. The
extremeweathereventsbothathomeandabroad.
global community met at the UN Conference on Efforts to arrive at a consensus on what to do at
Sustainable Development that took place in Rio
home and abroad gathered momentum, even
inJune 2012, also marking the 20th anniversary as they sailed through some rough waters and
of the first Earth Summit held in 1992. The fickleseasin manyrespects . In 2012,scienceand
conferencereviewedtheprogressmade,identified nature voiced a sense of urgency for action. Yet
implementation gaps, and assessed new and the relevant statistics have a mixed story to tell.
emergingchallenges, which resulted in a political It strongly accepts science but weakly reflects on
outcome called the ‘The Future We Want’. In thecorrespondingmultilateralactions,suggesting
India, the Twelfth Five Year Plan was launched that a lot remains to be done on the latter. Till
with a focus on sustainable growth. This along theworldstopsto introspectsandacceptsthat we
area productoftheecologicalsurroundingweare
with sustainable development policies and
programmes, which are being followed signalled living in, there seems no durable outcome from
theinternationaldeliberations.
to citizens at home and the world at large that
India is committed to sustainable development A volatile mix of erratic weather, natural
with equal emphasis on its three dimensions — disastersandenormouspressureontheavailability
social,economicandenvironmental. of clean air, water, and energy together with the
A survey of the global comparative opinion problems of poverty and hunger continues to be
shows that people in India and indeed all of great concern for policymakers particularly
in the developing countries. There was building
countries,haveamarkedandrisingconcernabout
sustainable development and climate change of the forward momentum both globally and
domesticallywith three high-profileeventsin the
1. OliverMortonin'Megachange:TheWorldin2050',editedbyDanielFranklin&JohnAndrews,TheEconomist,London,2012,
pp.92-110.

--- PAGE 531 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld I 19.3
ClimateChangeataGlance
Since the industrial revolution, manmade activities have added significant quantities of greenhouse
gases (GHG)2 into the atmosphere.Climatechange is a global negative externality primarily caused
bythe buildingup of GHG emissionsin the atmosphere.Theefforts needed toaddress theclimate
changeincludemitigationof GHGemissionsontheonehand,andbuildingof adaptivecapacitiesto
copewiththeadverseimpactsof climatechangeontheother.Fromadevelopingcountryperspective,
adaptationisof utmostimportanceastheyaretheoneswhoaremostvulnerabletotheadverseimpacts
of climatechange.
Theincrementalimpactof atonof GHGonclimatechangeisindependentof whereintheworldit
isemitted.Theseemissionsimposeacostonboththepresentandfuturegenerations,whicharenotfully
recoupedfromtheemittersof theseemissions.Thisformedthestartingpointforagloballycoordinated
policy action and the need for an internationalclimate change negotiating regime. UNFCCC,set up in
1992,althoughglobal in scope,differentiates the commitments/responsibilities of parties on the basis
of historic responsibilities,economicstructures,andon thebasisof theprincipleof ‘equity’andCBDR
whichisatthecoreof theclimatechangedebate.
The largestshare of historicaland currentglobalemissions of GHGs has originated in developed
countries.Scientistsattributetheglobalproblemof climatechangenottothecurrentof GHGemissions
buttothestockof historicalGHGemissions.Mostof thecountries,particularlytheindustrialisedcountries,
havinglargecurrentemissionsarealsothelargesthistoricemittersandtheprincipalcontributorstoclimate
change. The convention therefore lays down legally bindingcommitments for the developed countries,
takingintoaccounttheirhistoricalresponsibilitiesandalsosquarelyputstheresponsibilitiesondeveloped
countriesforprovidingfinancialresources,includingforthetransferof technolog)’,neededbythedeveloping
countries. The conventionalsoacknowledges that climate change actions taken bydevelopingcountries
arecontingenton theresourcesmadeavailabletothem.
global arena in 2012 and launch of the Twelfth has sustainability as a prominent focus. The
Five Year Plan at home. The Earth Summit in Twelfth Plan outlined lower carbon growth
Rio also popularly known as Rio+20 celebrated strategies adding momentum to the ongoing
its 20th anniversary, next the 11th session of policies and programmes of the government on
the Conference of Parties (COP 11) to the environmentand climatechange.To add to this,
Convention on Bio Diversity (CBD), hosted by StateAction Planson ClimateChange(SAPCC),
India in Hyderabad, and finally the year closed a recent initiative, will tune national initiatives
with the 18th session of the COP to the United on the National Action Plan on ClimateChange
Nations Framework Convention on Climate (NAPCC) to regional, socio- economic and
Change (UNFCCC) in Doha in December. ecological conditions.TheSAPCC is expected to
These international collaborations came out with takeoffaspartoftheplanschemeforstates .With
balanced packages thoughshort on ambition but these developments, it is clear that sustainable
proceedingon efforts.At home, welaunched the development and climate change issues are being
Twelfth FiveYear Plan whoseexplicit themewas addressedon a prioritybasis.
a ‘faster, more inclusive and sustainable growth’ The course for international development
process. It is the first time that a five year plan and environmental policy agenda for the global
2. 'Megachange:TheWorldin2050',op.cit.,pp.94 - 96.

--- PAGE 532 ---
19.4 i IndianEconomy
community for the next fifteen years is being in the run-up to the post 2015 climate change
decided in theyear 2015.Thenegotiations under agreement . The announcement is expected to
the United Nations Framework Convention provide a boost to the renewable energy sector
on Climate Change (UNFCCC) are expected globally.
to result in a global agreement by December India has also taken several measures to
2015, applicable to all countries, to take action addressclimatechange.Mostimportantly,India’s
on climate change from 2020. Simultaneously, national solar mission is being scaled up fivefold
governmentsareduetoagreeona new post2015 from 20,000 MWto 100,000 MW by2022.The
developmentagendaincludingasetofSustainable cleanenergycessoncoalhasalso beendoubled to
Development Goals (SDGs), replacing the Rs. 100/tonne in 2014. India has set a target of
MillenniumDevelopmentGoals,whicharecoming producinggreen energyof 1,75,000 MW by the
to an end in 2015. year2022.
A major development attracting attention
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENTAND
worldwide has been the Joint Announcement on
Climate Change by the UnitedStates & China CLIMATE CHANGE INTHE INDIAN
— theworld’s two largestemitters — in November CONTEXT
2014.As per this announcement, the US intends
In the past two decades, the key environmental
to achieve an econ — omy-wide target of reducing challenges in India have been sharper. The State
its emissions by 26 28 per cent below its 2005 oftheEnvironment Reportbythe MoEF clubs the
levelin2025andto makebesteffortstoreduceits
issues under fivekeychallengesfaced byIndia
—
emissionsby28percent .Chinaintendstoachieve
(i) ClimateChange,
the peaking of carbon dioxide emissions around
(ii) FoodSecurity,
2030 and to make best efforts to peak early and
intends to increasetheshareof non-fossilfuelsin (iii) WaterSecurity,
primary energy consumption to around 20 per (iv) EnergySecurity,and
cent by2030.This hasgreat politicalsignificance (v) ManagingUrbanisation.
SAPCC(StateActionPlansonClimateChange)
After the NAPCC was launched,3 there have been serious efforts to dovetail national programmes of
actiontoregionalandlocallevelsconsistentwithvaryingsocio - economicandecologicalconditions.Atthe
Conferenceof StateEnvironmentMinistersheldon18August2009,thePrimeMinisterof Indiarequested
allstategovernmentstoprepareSAPCCs.TheStateActionPlans tooktheirleadfrom NationalMission
documentswhileformulatingmitigation/adaptationstrategies.Sofar,21stateshaveprepareddocumentson
theSAPCCfocusedonapproachesthataresectoralbutwithregionalramifications.TheStateActionPlans
includestrategiesandalistof possiblesectoralactionsthatwouldhelpthestatesachievetheiradaptation
and mitigation objectives. The common threads that bind theseState Plans together are the principles
of territorial approach to climate change, sub-national planning, building capacities for vulnerability'
assessment,and identifyinginvestmentopportunities basedonstate priorities.This frameworkprovides
a broad,systematic,andstep-wiseprocess for thepreparationof SAPCCsand advocatesa participatory
approachsothatstateshaveenoughownershipof theprocessandfinalplan.Themajorsectorsforwhich
adaptationstrategiesenvisagedareagriculture,water,forests,coastalzone,and health.
3. NAPCC,Ministryof Forest&Environment,Gol,FinalDraftMarch31,2011,N.Delhi.

--- PAGE 533 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld I 19.5
Climate change is disturbing the natural Togetherwiththenationaleffortsindifferent
ecosystems and is expected to have substantial sectors, India also recognises that rural areas are
adverseeffectsin India, mainlyonagriculture(on equallypronetostressand pressuresfrom natural
which 58 per cent of the populationstilldepends resourceexploitation.In thiscontext,schemesfor
for livelihood), water storage in the Himalayan rural development and livelihood programmes
glaciers which are the source of major rivers and are very relevant. A vast majority of the works
groundwater recharge, sea-level rise, and threats under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
to a long coastline and habitations. Climate Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
change will also cause increased frequency of are linked to land, soil, and water .Thereare also
extreme events such as floods, and droughts. programmesfornon-timberforestproduce-based
These in turn will impact India’s food security livelihood,promotionoforganicandlow-chemical
problems and water security. As per the Second agriculture, and increased soil health and fertility
National Communication submitted by India to to sustain agriculture-based livelihoods. These
the UNFCCC, it is projected that the annual schemes help mobilise and develop capacities of
mean surface air temperature rise by the end communityinstitutionstoutilisenaturalresources
of the century ranges from 3.5° C to 4.3° C, inasustainablemannerand their potentialcan be
whereas the sea level along the Indian coast has furtherdeveloped.
been rising at the rate of about 1.3 mm/year on Alongwitheffortstoincorporatesustainability
an average. These climate change projections are in the rural development process, India is
likelyto impact human health, agriculture, water increasingly making efforts to integrate the three
resources, naturalecosystemsand biodiversity. pillarsofsustainabledevelopmentintoitsnational
Concerned of the threatsimposed byclimate policy space. In fact, environment protection
change and pressures on natural resources, is enshrined in our Constitution (Articles 48 A
sustainability and environment are increasingly and 51A [g]).Various policymeasures are being
taking centrestage in the Indian policy domain. implemented across the domains of forestry,
India has been part of94 multilateral environmental pollution control, water management, clean
agreements . India has also voluntarily agreed to energy, and marine and coastal environment.
—
reduceitsemissionintensityofitsGDPby20 25 Some of these are policies like Joint Forest
per cent over 2005 levels by2020, and emissions Management, Green Rating for Integrated
from the agriculture sector would not form Habitat Assessment, Coastal Zone Regulation
part of the assessment of its emissions intensity. Zone, Eco Labelling and Energy Efficiency
Indian economy is already moving along a lower Labelling, Fuel Efficiency Standards etc . Over a
carbon andsustainable pathin termsofdeclining period of time, a stable organisational structure
carbon intensity of its GDP which is expected has been developed for environment protection.
to fall further through lower carbon strategies. The country has been making fast progress in
It is estimated that India’s per capita emission in increasing its renewable energy capacity and has
2031willstill be lower than theglobal per capita displayed thefastestexpansion rateof investment
emission in 2005 (in 2031, India’s per capita of any large renewables market in the world in
GHG emissionswill be under4tonnesofcarbon 2011, with a 62 per cent increase to $12 billion
dioxideequivalent(CO2eq.)whichislowerthan (Frankfurt School of Finance and Management
theglobal per capita emissions of 4.22 tonnes of Global Trends in Renewable Energy investment
C02eq.in 2005). 2012) . The12th Plan with a prominent focus on

--- PAGE 534 ---
19.6 I IndianEconomy
sustainability makes provision and provides for education, and women’s empowerment . As per
manymoreopportunitieslikethese. theCensus2011, manyparameterson thisfront
Working on the social and economic pillars have shown improvement, however, India is still
—
(sustainable development policies, programmes notontargettomeetsomekeyMDGsby2015
and targeted schemes) have been introduced to (i) Thepovertyhead- count ratio declined by
—
eradicate povertyeither through adirectfocuson 7.3 percentage points from 2004 05 to
economicindicatorslikeemploymentgeneration, 2009-10;
youth mobilisation, and building up assets of the (ii) The MMR (maternal mortality rate)
poor; or indirectly through social indicators of droppedfrom301per100,000livebirths
human development with emphasis on health, in 2001-13to 212in 2007-09;and
Sustainable Developmentand LowerCarbonStrategiesof the 12th Plan
TheTwelfth Planstrategy'suggeststhattherearesignificant‘co-benefits’(orclimateactionwithinclusive
and sustainable growth. Indiaas a large responsible player with very low income has also toensure that
theseeffortsarematched byequitableand fairburdensharingamongcountries, takinginto account the
historicalresponsibilitiesforemissions.Theseissuesarebeingdiscussedin theUNFCCC.
India’s approach to a lower-carbon growth strategy explicitly recognises that policies have to be
inclusiveand differentiated acrosssectorsaccording to national priorities,soas to lower the transaction
costs of implementing the policy, and conform with a nationally fair burden-sharing mechanism. An
ExpertGrouponLowCarbonStrategiesappointedbythe PlanningCommissionhasoutlined thelower
carbonstrategiesformajorpotentialcarbonmitigationsectors.
(i) Power:Onthesupplyside,adoptsuper-criticaltechnologiesincoal-basedthermalpowerplants;use
gasincombinedheatandpowersystems;investinrenewabletechnologies;anddevelophydropower
in asustainable manner.On thedemandside, accelerateadoptionofsuper-efficient electrical
appliancesthroughmarketand regulatorymechanisms;enhanceefficiencyofagricultural pump
sets and industrial equipmentwith better technology; modernisetransmissionand distribution
to bring technical and commercial losses down to world average levels; universalise access to
electricity;andacceleratepower-sectorreforms.
(ii) Transport: Increase the share of rail in overall freight transport; improve the efficiency of rail
freight transport; make it pricecompetitive by bringingdown the levelsof cross-subsidisation
between freight and passenger transport; complete dedicated rail corridor; improve share and
efficiencyofpublictransportsystem;and improvefuelefficiencyofvehiclesthroughboth
market-basedand regulatorymechanisms.
(iii) Industry:Greenfieldplantsintheironandsteeland cementsectors adoptbestavailabletechnology;
existingplants,particularlysmallandmediumones,modernizeandadoptgreen technologyat
anaccelerated pace, with transparentfinancingmechanisms.
(iv) Buildings:Evolveandinstitutionalisegreenbuildingcodes at all levelsofgovernment.
(v) Forestry:‘Green India Mission’ to regenerateat least 4 million ha ofdegraded forest; increase
density of forest cover on 2 million ha of moderately dense forest; and overall increase the
density offorestand treecoveron 10millionhaofforest,waste,andcommunitylands.
4. TwelfthFiveYearPlan2012 - 17,PlanningCommission,Gol,NDelhi,2012.

--- PAGE 535 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld t 19.7
(iii) literacy rates have been constantly rising INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION AND
andareestimatedtobe82.14percentfor
EFFORTS
men and65.46 per centforwomen.
Overtheyears,argumentsinfavouroflooking Admitting the well-founded concerns on the
beyond the conventional measure of GDP and need to redress environmental problems, there
taking into account the environmental damage were global calls for cooperation, action, and
caused by production of goods and services innovation. World leaders in 2012 continued
received attention. An expert group under the to engage and deliberate in international forums
chairmanshipofProfSirParthaDasguptahasbeen dedicated to climate and environment and
setuptodevelopaframeworkfor‘GreenNational also in forums like the G20 where sustainable
Accounts’for India. In fact, theCentralStatistics developmentand climatechangewerean integral
Office (CSO) under the Ministry of Statistics & partofthediscussions.Ambitionorgoalsettingto
Programme Implementation (MOSPI) has been reach targets, provisionoffinanceand technology
publishing comprehensive environment statistics for developing countries, and institutions and
since1997.Theprocessofputtinginplaceasystem mechanisms for capacity building were the
for natural resources accounting was initiated by commonthreadsofnegotiationsrunningthrough
MOSPI waybackin 2002. all these forums.Some of the high-profile events
Despite all these efforts, the reality that whichtheworldwaswatchingarediscussedinthe
confrontsusontheenvironmentalfrontcontinues followingparagraphs.
to be harsh and complex. Increasing population,
|
urbanisation, and growingdemand for water and Rio+20
land resources haveseverelyimpacted the quality
The United Nations Conference on Sustainable
andavailabilityofwaterandsoilresources.Rising
Development (UNCSD), was held in June
energy needs is another area of concern. Besides,
2012, at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, (also known as
rapid growth will require corresponding growth
inenergysupply. Rio+20) and was attended at the heads of states
level. The objective of the Rio+20 Conference
Presently,a largeshareofourenergydemand
was to secure renewed political commitment for
is met through coal and oil and this trend will sustainable development, review progress made
continue, given the unprecedented surge in
andidentifyimplementationgaps,and assessnew
energy demand and resource constraints. Energy
and emerging challengessince the UNCSD held
issues become more complex with existing 20 years ago in Rio deJaneiro in 1992.Towards
energy poverty and rise in energy prices. There theend, theConferencehad two themes—
is considerable scope for increasing efficiency in
(i) Green economy in the context of
theuseofenergyandwaterin Indiatogetherwith
sustainable development & poverty
otherdevelopmentindicatorslikeinfantmortality
eradication;and
rate, MMR, sanitation facilities, and public
healthservices.Economicinstruments, regulatory (ii) Institutional framework for sustainable
development.
measures, and market mechanisms can play an
important rolein helpingtoachievedevelopment The most significant outcomes of the
andgrowthin asustainablemanner. Rio Summit have been the restoration of

--- PAGE 536 ---
19.8 < IndianEconomy
the principles of equity and of common but specifies that while it could provide options for
differentiated responsibilities (CBDR) in the policymakingitshould not bea rigidset of rules.
global environmental discourse and placing The outcome document clearlystates what green
poverty eradication at the centre of the global economy policiesshould result in and what they
development agenda. The outcome also ensures should not . It is a matter of satisfaction that the
the required domestic policy space to countries document firmly rejects prescriptive policies,
onagreeneconomyandlaunchedfour processes/ unilateral measures, and trade barriers as well as
mechanisms, i.e., developing SDGs, financing unwarranted conditionality on ODA (Official
strategy, technology transfer, and defining the DevelopmentalAssistance) in thiscontext .
formatandorganisationalaspectsof the proposed The Rio+20 Conference will also be
high- level political forum to follow up on the remembered for kick-starting the process on
implementationofsustainabledevelopment. developing SDGs. The SDGs would address
‘Fairness’as an issue received attention. It is and incorporate in a balanced way, all the three
a matterofsatisfactionandachievementfor India dimensions ofsustainable development and their
that the Rio outcome document reaffirms equity inter-linkages. The SDGs would be universal,
and the principle of CBDR among other Rio global, and voluntary. Since the SDGs are
principles. India together with other developing expected to become a part of the post-2015 UN
countries played an instrumental role in this. developmentagenda, theywould hopefullyguide
CBDR is especially important for developing the international community towards inclusive
countries, as it implies that while all countries sustainabledevelopment.
should take sustainable development actions, From India’s point of view, SDGs need to
the developed countries have to take the leading bring together development and environment
role in environmental protection, as they have into a single set of targets . The fault line, as
contributed themost toenvironmental problems. ever in global conferences, is the inappropriate
Also they should support developing countries balance between environment and development.
with finance and technology in their sustainable Developing countries do not want any bindings
developmentefforts.Indiahasalwaysheldthatthe
on their efforts towards poverty eradication or
eradication of povertyshould be the overarching any agreement that comes with such a price
goal of sustainable development. This was given tag . Therefore, we could also view the SDGs
due recognition in the deliberations at the Rio and the post 2015 agenda as an opportunity for
Summitand in theoutcomedocument. revisiting and fine-tuning the MDG framework
On the issue of Green Economy, the andsustainablyregainingfocusondevelopmental
outcomedocumentaffirmsthattherearedifferent issues. India and many developing countries are
approaches, visions, models, and tools available slow or off track in achieving targets under some
to each country, in accordance with its national of the MDGs, which have concrete areas of
circumstances and priorities, for achieving overlap between environment and development.
sustainable development. It identifies green This is another reason why these MDGs should
economyinthecontextofsustainabledevelopment continue to be a part of the post 2015 global
and poverty eradication as one of the important policyarchitecture.5
tools for achieving sustainable development but
- ,
5. EconomicSurvey201213 MoF,Gol,N.Delhi,p.259.

--- PAGE 537 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld I 19.9
There has been a growing political drive 11. Make cities and human settlements
towardsthepost2015developmentagendaduefor inclusive,safe, resilient,andsustainable
agreementinSeptember2015.Inthisdirection,the 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and
thirty-member Open Working Group mandated production patterns
—
by the — Outcome Document The Future We 13. Take urgent action to combat climate
Want” of the UN Conference on Sustainable
changeand itsimpacts
Development (Rio+20) held inJune2012at Rio
14. Conserveandsustainablyusetheoceans,
cameoutwithasetof17SDGsinJuly2014.The
seas,and marineresourcesforsustainable
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) cover
development
a broad range of sustainable development issues
and themeansof thierimplementation.Theseare 15. Protect, restore and promote sustainable
expectedtobeintegratedintotheUN’spost-2015 use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably
Development Agenda. At present, the post-2015 manage forests, combat desertification,
andhaltandreverselanddegradationand
agenda and SDG processes are moving rapidly
towards their conclusion in 2015.The 17SDGs halt biodiversityloss
areasgiven below: 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies
1. End povertyinallitsformseverywhere for sustainable development, provide
2. End hunger, achieve food security
accessto justiceforall,andbuildeffective,
accountable and inclusive institutions at
and improved nutrition, and promote
alllevels
sustainableagriculture
17. Strengthen themeansofimplementation
3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well ¬ and revitalise the global partnership for
beingfor allat allages
sustainabledevelopment.
4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality
educationand promotelife-longlearning |
CQP20ATLIMA
opportunitiesfor all
5. Achievegenderequalityandempower all The 20th Session of the Conference of Parties to
womenandgirls the UNFCCC (COP20) in December 2014 in
6. Ensure availability and sustainable
Lima,Peru,wasanimportantmilestoneasitcame
management of water and sanitation for out with a ‘Lima Call for Climate Action’ after
longdeliberationsand intensenegotiations.With
all
7. Ensure access to affordable, reliable, less than a year left to conclude the deal in Paris
later this year, nations are working hard towards
sustainable,and modernenergyfor all
finalizingtheagreementbyDecember2015atthe
8. Promote sustained, inclusive and
COP21sessionin Paris.
sustainable economic growth, full and
The UNFCCC negotiations focused on the
productive employment, and decent
finalization of elements of the draft negotiating
workfor all
textforthe2015Parisagreement,identificationof
9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote information to besubmitted byParties under the
inclusiveandsustainableindustrialisation,
Intended Nationally Determined Contributions
andfoster innovation (INDCs), and enhancement of pre 2020 actions.
10. Reduce inequality within and among Some of the important outcomes of the Lima
countries Conferencearethefollowing:

--- PAGE 538 ---
19.10 4 IndianEconomy
1. The Lima Conference has decided that countries todevelopingcountries.
the new agreement will be under the 6. On the issue of finance, developed
UNFCCC and will reflect the principle countries have been invited to provide
of CBDR in the light of different clarity on reaching the US$ 100 billion
national circumstances. It also addresses goal by 2020, by way of enhanced
all elements, i.e., mitigation, adaptation, information and greater transparency
finance, technology development and predictability for scaling up climate
and transfer, capacity building, and finance. On the Green Climate Fund
transparency of action and support in a (GCF), pledges amounting to US$ 10.2
balanced manner. billion for initial capitalization of the
2. The draft text has to be finalized by Fund have been acknowledged. It was
May 2015 in order to be placed for further decided to urge contributors to
consideration and adoption of Parties at confirmthesepledgesin theformoffully
COP21. executedcontributionagreementsso that
3. Another key decision was that countries at least 50 per cent of pledges made till
shouldnotbackslidefromcurrentpledges November 2014 are reflected as fully
under the INDCs (Intended Nationally executed contribution agreements by
Determined Contributions) and their
April2015.
contribution has to be more than their
current commitments.Thefinal decision
INDIASSTANDATLIMA
successfully ensured that countries can India has been following action-oriented policies
include adaptation, finance, technology to bring rapid development to its people while
development and transfer, capacity purposefullyaddressingclimatechange.India has
building, and transparencyof action and been one of the foremost advocates of long- term
support also in their INDCs, in addition global cooperation in combating climate change
to mitigation. There is also no ‘ex- ante in accordance with the principles and provisions
assessment’to be undergone. of theUNFCCC.
4. Now countries have to submit Climatechangeimpactsbeingwitnessedtoday
quantifiableinformationonthereference are a result of the total accumulated greenhouse
point (baseyear), timeframes,scopeand emissions for which the major responsibility lies
planningprocess,assessments,etc .related with thedevelopednations .Moreover, despite the
to the INDCs.Thiswill be published on fast growth registered bysome of the developing
the UNFCCC website and a Synthesis countries, a large proportion of people in these
Report of the aggregate effect of the countriesstill livein extreme poverty .The Indian
INDCsprepared. stance in the climate change negotiations has
5. It was decided to accelerate action on been guided by the principle of CBDR. India
enhancingthepre-2020actionslikeearly thus believes that the climate change agreement
ratification of the Kyoto Protocolsecond of 2015 should take into consideration a whole
commitment period, revisiting of targets gamut of issues including adaptation, finance,
and conditionalities associated with it, technology development and transfer, capacity
andprovisionoffinance,technology,and building, transparencyof action andsupport in a
capacity building support by developed balancedmanner,andlossanddamageinaddition

--- PAGE 539 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld I 19.11
to mitigation.As per the Economic Survey2014 — Technologytransfer:Technologyformsa major
15, the broad parameters of India’s stand on the component of any move towards combating
climatechangeissueareasgiven below: climatechange.Theimportantissuein thisregard
is that while the developed countries are the
Mitigation: Historical responsibilities of
frontrunners in clean technology, the developing
developedcountriesandequityinaccesstoglobal
atmospheric resources should continue to be countriesdo not possesseithersufficienttechnical
the basis of defining mitigation commitments. capability or the financial resources to develop
clean technologies. Appropriate mechanisms for
The 2015 agreement must ensure that the
smoothtransferoftechnologyfromthedeveloped
developing countries be given their fair share of
carbon and developmentspace.Thecontribution to developing countries have to be agreed upon.
of developing countries to mitigation efforts The intellectual property rights price-tag should
is far greater than that of developed countries not comein thewayofsuch technologytransfer.
and could be further enhanced if developed
|
IPCCASSESSMENT REPORT
countries effectively implement and significantly
increasetheir commitmentsof providingfinance,
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
technology, and capacity building support to Change (IPCC) reviews and assesses the most
developingcountries.
recent scientific, technical, and socio-economic
Adaptation: Equal weightage has to be given information produced worldwide relevant to
to adaptation as it is essential for reducing climate change. The IPCC in its recent report
vulnerabilities of communities to climatechange. the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5), published
This assumes more importance in view of the in 2014, has observed that there has been an
fact that the developing countries are the most increasing trend in the anthropogenic emissions
vulnerable to climate change. However, both of greenhouse gases (GHG) since the advent of
global action and finance flows have been biased the industrial revolution, with about half of the
in favour of mitigation.Thedevelopingcountries anthropogenicC02emissionsduring this period
are pushing hard to include adaptation in a occurringin thelastfortyyears.Theperiod1983 —
comprehensiveand balanced manner in the2015 2012islikelytohavebeenthewarmestthirtyyear
agreement
. periodofthelast1400years.C02emissionsfrom
fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes
Finance:Theresponsibilityof providingfinancial
have contributed a major portion of total GHG
assistance to the developing countries lies with emissions during the period 1970 — 2010. Two
the developed countries and this has been clearly
—
articulated in theUNFCCC. India together with majorfindingsof thereportare
other developing countries continue to urge the (i) Contribution (%) by different countries
developedcountriesto honour their obligation to to cumulativeGlobalC02: USA (21.2);
providenew,additional,and predictablefinancial EU (18.4); China (10.7); Russia (7.4);
support to developing countries in a measurable, Brazil (4.4); Jappan (3.3); India (2.8);
reportable, and verifiable manner. In thiscontext Canada (2.2); and Rest of the World
ambitious capitalization of the GCF assumes
(28.7).
significance.Developedcountrieshavebeenurged (ii) Sectoral emissions (percentage) to
to provide clear timelines and pathways to reach Global Green House Gases: Electricity
theUS$100billionannualcommitmentmadeby & Heat production (25); AFOLU, i.e.,
themin 2010. agriculture, forestry and other land use

--- PAGE 540 ---
19.12 4 IndianEconomy
(24); Industry (21); Other energy (9.6); 2020; $630 billion between 2020 and 2030; and
and Buildings (6.4). $760billion between 2030and 2050.
| FINANCING CLIMATECHANGE DOMESTICRESOURCESAND
MECHANISMS
The idea of a global budget for carbon and its
correspondingfinancingstemsfrom theobjective TheUNFCCC(Thelatestavailabledataofactual
of stabilising the GHG concentrations in the emissions available is upto 2010 only) notes that
atmosphereatalevelthatwouldpreventdangerous Kazakhstan, Cyprus, Malta, and Belarus did not
anthropogenic interference with the climate have reduction commitments for 2008-2012
system . There has already been a 0.8°C increase under the KP.Canada,Japan, New Zealand and
in global mean temperature . It is widely believed Russia are not Parties to thesecond commitment
thatwearefastapproachingthe2°Ctemperature period to the KP (Kyoto Protocol): Countries
risewithinwhichtheglobalcommunityisstriving that are undergoing the process of transition to a
to limititself.Thisindicatesthatonlyasmalland market economy. For any representative country
fast closing window of opportunity exists for the sayfor Australia, the tableshows that in the first
international community to take actions and commitment period, Australia could collectively
ensurethatweavoid reachingthispoint. increase emissions by 8 per cent between 2008-
Yet thequestion remains that howto finance 2012 (taking the base year as 1990), whereas for
actions to achieve this target .6 A UNFCCC the second KP round, Australia would need to
paper (2007) estimated a requirement of US$ reduce its emissions by 0.5 per cent collectively
200 — 210 billion in additional annual investment between 2013 — 2020.Thelast twocolumnsofthe
in 2030 to return GHG emissions to current tablemeasure progress towardsthefirst KP target
levels. Further, additional investme nt needed which shows that Australia’s actual emissions
worldwide for adaptation was estimated to be increased by 30 per cent between 2008 — 10.This
—
annually US$ 60 — 182 billion in 2030. However, indicates that for the period between 2010 12,
with the passage of time and inadequate action, Australia’semissionshould have been reduced by
these estimates are being revised upwards. Most 22 percentfor it to bewithin thetarget .
recent estimates presented at the UNFCCC’s Theassessmentandquantificationofthecosts
workshop on Long- term Finance (July 2012), of adaptation and mitigation is a difficult task.
point to an even more enormous scale of funds, However, it isclear that thesecostsaresignificant
—
in the range of $600 $1300 billion a year, that andwilllikelybehigherin thefutureasinitiatives
would be needed by developing countries for are taken in line with the goals outlined in the
mitigation and adaptation. This amount is at NAPCC. The preliminary estimates indicate a
least 5 — 10 times the prospective financing flows sum of Rs. 230,000 crore to fulfill the mission
of US$100 billion per year by2020 agreed upon objectives under the NAPCC alone, let alone
as thegoal under the UNFCCC. Representatives other lower carbon strategies and environment
from theInternationalEnergyAgencyreportedat policiesand programmesof thegovernment .
this workshop that annualglobal investments for The most obvious source of financing for
powergenerationalone,ina2°Ctemperaturerise climate change action is government budgetary
scenario,wouldinvolve$370billionfrom2010to
support
.Mostofitwouldcomeassectoralfinance
6 . EconomicSurvey2012-13,MoF,Gol,N .Delhi,p . 262 .

--- PAGE 541 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld t 19.13
CarbonTaxesandEnvironmentalSubsidies
A recentstudy‘PreliminaryModelingStudiesonCarbonTaxesandGDPLoss’wasconductedbythe
Ministryof EnvironmentandForest,Gol.Theresultsof thestudyaregivenasbelow—
UndiscountedcumulativeGDPloss:Carbontaxisrerenuepositivewhenitinvolvesnoadjustmentto
other taxratesintheeconomy.Itis rerenueneutralwhenothertaxratesareadjustedsothattherevenue
inflow fromcarbontaxisexactlybalancedby anequalreductioninyields fromreducedtaxes.
GolExpenditureonEnvironmentPromotingSubsidies
Environment-promotingSubsidies Exp.in2008-09
(Rs.crore)
Sewerage&sanitation 1,236.06
Soil&waterconservation 26.04
Fisheries 221.52
Forestry&wildlife 696.36
Agriculturalresearch&education 365.11
Specialareasdevelopmentprog. 1,560.29
Floodcontrol&drainage 175.28
Non-conventionalenergy 477.21
Ecology&environment 473.80
Total 5,231.67
Source:A TechnicalPaper on 'EnvironmentalSubsidiesin India:Rol — e and Reforms’by the Madras School of
Economics(january2012),asquotedby the EconomicSurrey2012 13,p.264.
since some of the resources for adaptation and environment-relatedtaxeshaveanimportantrole
mitigationarebuiltintotheongoingschemesand to playin fundinggreen initiatives . At the same
programmes . Although mitigation is sometimes time,anygovernmentmustusethesepolicytools
an important co-benefit, the deployment of after serious consideration and analysis as they
resources for such purposes is largely guided by may have serious repercussions on other sectors
the overall availability of resources . The Finance oftheeconomy .Preliminarymodellingstudiesby
Bill2010-11createdacorpuscalledtheNational theMinistryofEnvironmentandForestsindicate
Clean Energy Fund (NCEF) out of a cess at thatevenamodestrevenue-neutraleconomy-wide
the rate of Rs . 50 per tonne of coal to invest in CarbontaxofUS$10per tonofGHG emissions
entrepreneurialventures andresearchin the field inIndiawouldresultinaGDPlossofaroundUS$
of clean energy technologies. The government 632billionat 2005 prices . At thesame time,the
expects to collect Rs . 10,000 crore under the governmentcontinuestousesubsidiestopromote
NCEF by 2015 . Governments have a range of theenvironment .
policyinstruments and variables at their disposal Carbon taxes and subsidy may not be relied
to use for generating the enormous resource solelyasthemostviablepolicyoption .Therefore,
requirements in this field. This includes a set of Indiaisexperimentingwithacarefulmixofmarket
price signals, direct andindirect taxes , subsidies, mechanisms together with fiscalinstruments and
and export and import levies. Theoretically, regulatoryinterventions . Ononehand,wherethe

--- PAGE 542 ---
19.14 4 IndianEconomy
cessoncoalisa typeofcarbon taxbeinglevied in implement policiesand measuresthatcanachieve
India,PAT(PerformAchieveandTrade)andRPO specific mitigation outcomes in the individual
(Renewable Purchase Obligation) are examples sectors . So far, three grants of Rs. 5,000 crore
of cap and trade market mechanisms promoting each, for forest cover, renewable energy, and
energyefficiencyand the useof renewableenergy the water sector, have been recommended by
respectivelyin India. the 13th Finance Commission for the state
.
The Twelfth Plan, in the particular context, governments
lowercarbonstrategieswillrequirecapitalfinance Considering the large resource requirement,
for improvements in technology and enhanced argumentsinfavourofsettingupaNationalGreen
deployment of renewable and clean energy Fundtofinancepublicandprivatesectorprojects/
technologies. Some of these objectives may be activities aimed at protecting environment in
met through regulatory interventions and use of accordancewith theTwelfth Plan objectives have
market mechanisms, in which case the required found support .The Fund could also be a vehicle
budgetary support may be small. In other cases, forreceivinginternationalsupportthroughagreed
adequate financial outlays will be needed to bilateral and multilateralsources and can finance
PATandRPO
The PAT (perform - achieve - trade) is a scheme for trading energy -efficiency certificates in large
—
energy - intensiveindustriesunder the NationalMissionfor Enhanced EnergyEfficiency
(i) Identified industriesarerequired toimprovetheirspecificenergyconsumption (SEC)within
thespecified period of threeyearsor facepenaltyprovisions.
(ii) At the same time this mechanism facilitates efficient industries to trade their additional
certifiedenergysavings(thatgobeyond theassigned target)withotherdesignatedconsumers
whocould usethesecertificates tocomplywith theirSEC -reduction targets .
(iii) In theTwelfth FiveYear Plan, the PATschemeislikelyto achieveabout15 million tonnes
oilequivalentofannualsavingsin coal,oil,gas,andelectricity(including6.686 million ton
ofoil-equivalentenergysavingsoffirstphase) .
Similarly, the RPO (Renewable Purchase Obligation) is creating domestic markets for
renewableenergy through regulatoryinterventionsatstatelevel.
(iv) TheRPOistheminimumlevelofrenewableenergy(outoftotalconsumption)theobligated
entities (DISCOMs, Captive Power Plants, and Open Access Consumers) are entitled to
purchasein theareaofadistributionlicensee.
(v) Theobligation ismandated by theState Electricity RegulatoryCommission (SERC).Since
the renewable energy sources are not evenly spread across India, SERCs cannot specify a
linearlevelof RPOsforallstates .
(vi) Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) under the RPO mechanism is an instrument that
enablestheobligatedentitiestomeettheirRenewablePurchaseObligationbytradingsurplus
or deficit RECs among themselves with theowner of the REC being ableto claim to have
purchased renewableenergy.
Source:EconomicSurvey2012-13,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi,p.265.

--- PAGE 543 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld I 19.15
actions not onlyat national level but also atstate 2010 and 2012 as FSF (Fast Start Finance) and
levelforagreed prioritiesand thrust areas. US$ 100 billion annually by 2020 as long- term
Carbonoffsettingand its requisitefinancing finance. These were the two finance figures that
require global effort and process. Markets that the developed world collectively pledged as
are operating take signals from international climate change finance in 2009. These pledges
negotiations. Domestic markets and mechanisms need tobenewandadditional.Theterm‘newand
aloneareneithersufficientforgeneratingresources additional’in thecontextof provision of finances
of the required scale nor efficient enough for bydevelopedcountriescanbetracedrightfromthe
reaching the set level of targets and therefore textoftheConvention tovariousCOPdecisions.
rely heavily on international policy architecture. In this sense ‘new and additional’ refers to
The second commitment period of the KP has provisionoffinancialresourcesthatrepresentnew
broughtsome respiteand certaintyto the carbon commitment, rather than those that are diverted
markets; however, due to lack of ambition the from flows that have already been earmarked for
future of carbon markets could still be in an someotherform ofdevelopmentassistance.
indeterminate state . India’s actions for climate However,intheabsenceofanagreeddefinition
changewill, therefore, need to befinancedfrom a of additionalityin climatefinance, thedeveloped
poolofresourcesconsistingofdomesticresources, anddevelopingcountrieshavedivergingviews.In
international carbon finance, and multilateral the backdrop of these differences, together with
funds. great uncertaintyinfinanceflows,complexwebof
channels, and lack of transparencyand reporting
INTERNATIONALSOURCESANDISSUES practices, the actual additionality on FSF turned
India, primarily out of its own concerns, has outtobea matterofgreatcontention(givenbelow
chalkedoutambitiousplansand policiesto tackle inthebox) . Thesedifferences more recentlyled to
climatechangeandenvironmentissuesthatreflect demand from developing countries on the need
India’s strong will to address this global public for a mechanism to MRV (measure, report, and
good. However, given the scarcity of resources verify) climatefinanceflows.
and competing demands, finding the matching Asa partofthefinancepackagein the Doha
resources is a challenge. The ‘Expert Group on Conference,theMRVoffinancewasanimportant
Low Carbon Strategies’ has also stated in its elementofthedeal.Itissatisfyingthatelementsof
Interim Report that aggressive mitigation cannot MRVwillbetakenupbytheStandingCommittee
be achieved without substantial international on Finance under theCOP.TheCommitteewill
financial support, both in terms of financial consider ways of strengthening methodologies
resources and technology transfer. The Indian for reporting, measuring, and tracking climate
PM also echoed similar sentiment in his Rio+20 finance.Talkingaboutotherfinanceelements,the
Summit speech:‘Many countries coulddo moreif Conferencedid not takeambitiousor meaningful
additional finance and technology were available. decisions especially on the demand for finance
Unfortunately,thereisnotenoughevidenceofsupport for the period between 2013and 2020.Thefinal
fromtheindustrialisedcountriesintheseareas.’ decision encourages developed country Parties to
In the context of making finances available increaseeffortsforatleastmaintainingtheaverage
to developingcountries, in the recent past, much annual 2010-12 level of finance between 2013
of thetalks under theUNFCCCrevolvedaround and2013.On theother hand,itisreassuringthat
two numbers, namely US$ 30 billion between theworkprogrammeonlong- termfinancestarted

--- PAGE 544 ---
19.16 4 IndianEconomy
—
in COP17 in Durban has been extended with a Investment Fund) a collaborative effort among
view to continuing discussion on likely sources the multilateraldevelopment banks is offeringits
of finance in the long term . To sum up, finance fundsto be usedforclimateactionon thebasisof
negotiations and outcomes at Doha were in the agreed termsand conditions. India hasagreed‘in
natureofsmallslowstepsrather than bigstrides. principle’ to accessing theCIF, provided it is not
Simultaneously, there have been efforts to treatedas partoftheclimatechangefinanceflows
build therequisiteinfrastructureforenablingand under the Convention and no GHG emission
facilitatingtheflowsof climatefinance under the reduction related conditionalities are associated
Convention. This is because only scaling up of with the funds. The Trust Fund Committee in
financewill notsuffice.Themoneyshould be put May2012 hasapproved theallocation of thefirst
toefficient useandgenerateresults.To thiseffect, tranche amounting to US$ 263 million for four
work on operationalising the GCF progressed. projectscontained in India’s Investment Plan.
The Republic of Korea has been selected as the
host country to house its secretariat. The GCF
CARBONMARKETSANDPRIVATESECTOR
is expected to be instrumental in channelling a VisibledisappointmentswiththeDohaoutcomes
significantshare of the US$ 100 billion expected on finance, many observers warned that we are
annually to be mobilised to developing countries heading towards a climate fiscal cliff. In this
by2020foraddressingclimatechange.Thevision, context, the private sector and global carbon
structure, and strategy of the Fund to carry out marketsarebeingincreasinglyemphasised.While
its function are a crucial priority on the agenda notsufficientinthemselves,theprivatesectorand
of the GCF Board. The Board should not rush carbon markets have shown significant potential
with the‘standard’solutionssometimesproposed inmobilisingfinanceforclimatechangeespecially
by outside interests but focus on ultimate goals for mitigation action.
andresultson thegroundwithaccountabilityand As per the UNFCCC report on long- term
.
transparency finance, of the estimated current international
Meanwhile, there are other Funds under climate financial flows, US$ 55 billion per year
the UNFCCC which continue to function. was generated from the private sector . Likewise,
Collectively, the climate focal area of Global carbon markets help developing countries to
Environment Facility(GEF), theSpecialClimate find financial resources to proceed on their
Change Fund, the Least Developed Countries sustainabilityefforts.TheCDM (the KP’smarket
Fund, and theAdaptation Fund disbursearound mechanism) as the world’s largest carbon market
less than US$ 1 billion per year (Report on the has helped mobilise more than US$ 215 billion
workshop of the work programme on long ¬ collectively so far in investments in developing
term finance 2012). The GEF, which is also an countries (CDM Policy Dialogue Report). India
operating entity of the financial mechanism of has been an active player in theCDM, with over
the UNFCCC like the GCF, provides project 2000 projects having been accorded host country
grants for addressing global environmental approval,whichhasthepotentialoffacilitatingan
issues while supporting national development overall inflow of approximately US$7.07 billion
initiatives.Tilldate,IndiahasaccessedaboutUS$ ifall theprojectsget registered.
438 million of GEF grant of which US$ 269.3 Both these sources, at the same time, have
million is for projects under the climate change serious limitations in terms of predictability and
focal area. At the same time, the CIF (Climate adequacyof flows. It is absolutelyclear that they

--- PAGE 545 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld t 19.17
willnotdeliveronthehardestthings:equity,public safeguard the interests of developing countries in
goods, and adaptation such as climate resiliency future deliberations. Some of the challenges and
—
inagricultureoroffgriddistributedrenewablesfor deliverablesfrom India’s pointofvieware
poor regions. They will instead prove useful for (i) Follow up and action on the Rio+
market-ledgoodsandservicesforthebetter,such 20 outcome document, and the four
asgrid-basedsolar and wind power, where public processes/mechanisms that were as part
subsidiesinoneformoranotherwillbedemanded.
of it, especiallyon developingSDGsand
Also private sector investment is guided by risk the processes on the financing strategy
return . This explains the strong inclination of and technologytransfer.
the private sector towards mitigation projects. (ii) Taking forward the climate change
Adaptation financing continues to be a concern discussions at Doha, the keyquestion to
for all developing countries with insignificant
be addressed is to articulate equality in
private participation as adaptation usually does
the evolving arrangements that will be
not yield returnson investment. applicable to all in the post 2020 period.
Carbon markets on the other hand are We have to ensure that domestic goals
volatile, where success is contingent on the level continue to be nationally determined
of collective mitigation of ambition of nations. evenaswecontributetotheglobalefforts
The end of the first phase of the KP saw the according to the principleof CBDRand
CDM market collapsing with carbon prices respectivecapabilities.
declining around 70 per cent in the past year (iii) Takingconcretedecisionson thesectoral
alone. Moreover, unilateral restrictions imposed
framework for such actions closing the
by the authorities in some of the major carbon
possibility of both unilateral measures
marketssuchasEUoncarboncreditsfrom major
and actions being initiated in sectors by
developing countries such as India have not therespectiveinternationalorganisations
helped matters . The prices of carbon credits are like ICAOor IMOon their own.
likelytoremaininatrapuntiltheglobalambition
(iv) Equity,fairburdensharing,andequitable
improves and new market mechanisms emerges
to take into account the pledge based emissions. access to global atmospheric resources
haveto be protectedandaddressed more
Both thecarbon marketsand privatemoneyneed
adequatelyunder the DP, Indiawillhave
clear and targeted signals from public policies
to fight for its fair share of carbon and
to address the institutional and market barriers developmentspace.
confrontingthem.
Thesources and channels of providing long
¬
| PROBLEMS8C PROSPECTS term finance by developed countries have not
yet been clearly identified. With no certainty
Though multilateral efforts on sustainable on funding in the coming years, it is absolutely
development and climate change have led to necessary to expeditiously mobilise finance and
several positive outcomes, there are still areas provideinitialcapitaltotheGCFforitsoperations.
of concern where further work is needed to

--- PAGE 546 ---
19.18 4 IndianEconomy
Basedonhistoricemissionsandresponsibilities, time. We must remember that the clock is now
developedcountriesshould takethelead.However, tickingontheneededglobalactiontocombatand
according to a June 2011 Study7, developing contain thisdecay.Thisactionshould befair, just
countries are pledging greater cuts in their GHG and equitable for all countries so that our future
emissionsthandevelopedcountries. hasecologicalandeconomicspaceforsustainable
India is also proactive in this regard with
developmentforall”.8
its intentions and ambition firmly in place in Moreover, mankind is faced with a situation
its policies and programmes. One may rightly when, by all means, it develops and selects the
argue that with the Twelfth Plan’s focus on kindof’technologies’whichhavetheminimumor
‘environmental sustainability’, India is on the least‘fallouts’onoureoclogyandenvironmentin
right track with the right enabling environment the process of promoting the cause of mankind’s
and has a number of achievements to its credit. development.Absenceofglobalconcensuscannot
However, the challenge while India is growing is be cited by the individual nations as a refuge to
to identifythekeydriversandenablersofgrowth sit idle and continue in the mode of ‘business
beit — as usual’. Before it is too late, the conscience of
(i) Infrastructure humanitymustawakenfrom itsinertia.
(ii) Transportationsector
|
EPILOGUE
(iii) Housing,or
(iv) Agriculture Hardly anything makes economic sense unless
And finally, to make the above-given sectors its continuance for a long time can be projected
growsustainably.Thisleadsustothenextandmost without running into absurdities. Growth and
vitalissueoffindingandraisingnewandadditional development can happen to a ‘limited objective’,
resources for meetingeconomicwell-being needs but it cannot be stretched upto an ‘unlimited
with greater environmental sustainability. More extent’. How can the ‘finite’ earth support
—
often, it is the resource crunch which is the mankind’s‘infinite’ physical needs? long before
stumbling block for developing countries like this was postulated by the ‘Club of Rome’ in
India. While it makes efforts to efficiently and 1972,exactlythesamethingGandhijihadsaidin
expeditiously bring pricesignals and other policy latethirtiesitself,‘Earthprovidesenoughtosatisfy
instrumentsinto play, Indiacoulddo muchmore everyman’s need, but not for everyman’sgreed’.
if newand additional financeand technologyare Mankind needs to introspect not only about its
madeavailablethrough multilateral processes. present needs but the way those needs are being
.
“Be it national or global, environmental met
decline and global warming occurred gradually Besides,wealsoneedto‘differentiate’between
over decades and centuries, picking up pacewith our ‘needs’ and ‘aspirations’. Our physical needs
7. Stockholm EnvironmentInstitute,'ComparisonofAnnex1and non- Annex1pledgesundertheCancunAgreements',
ascited bytheEconomicSurvey2012-13,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi,p.268.
8. EconomicSurvey2012-13,MoF,Gol,N.Delhi,p.268.

--- PAGE 547 ---
SustainabilityandClimateChange:IndiaandTheWorld t 19.19
have a direct ‘link’ with the resources we have survive and prosper, we need to be aware of the
at our disposal to meet them. If mankind is to repercussionsofouractivitieson Mother nature . 9
9 . Thesevirtuousopinionscanbeseeninanumberofcontemporarythinkersandwriterssince1970s:
E.F.Schumacher,'TheEconomicsofPermanence',Resurgence,VolumeS,No.1,May/June1970,(reprintedinRobinClarke,
Editor,'NotesfortheFuture:AnAlternativeHistoryofthePastDecade',Thames&Hudson,London,1975).Schumacher
invokedGandhiwhileadvocatingforthe'economicsofpermanence'.
JefferySachs,'CommonWealth:EconomicsforaCrowdedEarth',PenguinBooks,GreatBritain(GB),London,2009,pp. 29-
35,55-155.
JefferySachs,'TheEndofPoverty',PenguinBooks,GB,London,2005,pp.280-284.
TimHarford,'TheUndercoverEconomist',Abacus,GB,London,2006,pp.90-104.
ThomasL.Friedman,'TheWorldisFlat',PenguinBooks,GB,London,2006,pp.383-385,495-504
RamachandraGuha,'TheEcologyofAffluence'in'TheRamachandraGuhaOmnibus',OxfordUniversityPress,N.Delhi,2005,
pp.69-97.

--- PAGE 549 ---
C H A P T E R
-
V * <0
1
IK
*
& '
K
I
PREPARING
FOR THE *
l
DEMOGRAPHIC :
DIVIDEND
Indiaisaglaringexampleofdemographic
dilemma-whilerateofpopulationgrowth
isamatterofconcernatonehand,atthe
=> Introduction other italsounfoldsopportunity because
=> ComparingGrowthandTrade children and youth accountfor a large
=> ReasonsBehindLessCreativeJobs shareofthisgrowth . It is an advantage
=> Informalityof Employment inIndia for India now because the country is
=> ServicesNotCreatingEnoughJobs
enteringthedemographicdividendphase
while China is exiting it-demographic
Needof FormalApprenticeships
dividend refers to aperiod, usually,20
=> Way toEvidence-BasedBetter Policy
to30years,whenagreaterproportionof
(cid:127)=> WaytoPolicy
peopleareyoungandintheworkingage-
>=t> CautionstoPreparedness group.Thiscutsspendingondependants,
spurring
economicgrowth.
India hopes
thatby thetimethisdividendphaseends
around2045,it would haveachieveda
stableand
balancedpopulation.
*
* See different reports of the United Nations Population Fund,
United Nations Children's Fund together with the EconomicSurveys of
2010-11to2014-15.

--- PAGE 550 ---
20.2 i IndianEconomy
| INTRODUCTION and services, besides improving productivity in
agriculture.The benefit of rising to the challenge
Asthedevelopedworldisintheprocessofgreying isdecadesofstronginclusivegrowth”.
and are heading for a crunch in the ‘working
population’, nations with growing population in OPTIMISMVSPESSIMISM
theworkingage-groupsee this as an opportunity Experts with optimistic views are confident in
to employ their surplus manpower in there India’s demographicdividend because of the fact
nations. In case of India, the situation has been that India’sdependencyratio,as measured bythe
consideredtobehighlyfavourablebyinternational
shareof theyoungand theelderlyasafraction of
as well as Indian experts . But these are mere the population, will come down moresharplyin
aspirations. To reap real diridends, we need to thecomingdecades.Moreworkingagepeoplewill
provide the required ‘quality’ to the quantity mean more workers, especially in the productive
of our population. We need to strengthen our age groups, more incomes, more savings, more
humanresourcedevelopmentcapabilitieskeeping capital per worker, and more growth. Also,
in mind the future requirements. Only then the
because demographic change is associated with
dividend ofdemographywill bein India’sfavour.
fertility declines, the transition period may be
TheEconomicSurvey2012 — 13, on theIndia’s accompanied by greater female participation in
prospects of garnering demographic dividend, thelabourforce*.
says, “Policymakers are usuallyfocused on short- As per the IMF, every fast-growing Asian
run economic management issues. But the short economy in recent years has accelerated as it
run hasto bea bridgeto thelongrun.Thecentral underwent a demographic transition. In India2
long-run question facing India is ‘Where will itself, the high growth states (Tamil Nadu,
good jobs come from?’ Productive jobs are vital Karnataka,andGujarat)intheperiod1991 — 2001
for growth. And a good job is the best form of had adependencyratio whichwas8.7 percentage
inclusion.Morethanhalfourpopulationdepends
points lower than that of the low growth states
onagriculture,buttheexperienceofothercountries
(Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and Uttar Pradesh)
suggests that the number of people dependent and an average annual growth rate that was 4.3
on agriculture will have to shrink for per capita percentage points higher. Looking ahead, the
incomes in agriculture to go up substantially. low growth states will benefit more from the
While industry is creating jobs, too many such demographic dividend, as higher incomes and
jobs are low productivity non-contractual jobs lower fertility alter demographics. Indeed, over
in the unorganized sector, offering low incomes, the period 2001 — 11, the hitherto laggard states
little protection, and no benefits. Service jobs have grown at an average of around 3 per cent
haverelativelyhighproductivity,butemployment annually. The difference between their growth
growth in services has been slow in recent years. and that of the leaders in the period 2001 — 11 is
India’s challenge is to create the conditions just 1.5 percentage . So demographic transition
for faster growth of productive jobs outside
seems to be correlated with growth, with some
agriculture,especiallyinorganised manufacturing
1 . Bailey,M . J .(20061,'MorePowertothePill:The Impactof ContraceptiveFreedomonWomen'sLifeCycle Labor
Supply' , QuarterlyJournalofEconomics , No . 121,pp . 289-320 .
2 . S . AiyarandA .Mody(2011),'TheDemographicDividend:EvidencefromtheIndianStates',IMFWorkingPaper11/38,
Feb.
2011
.