Indian Constitution
at Work
Textbook in Political Science for Class XI

Rationalised 2023-24

11102 – INDIAN CONSTITUTION AT WORK

ISBN 81-7450-550-4

Textbook for Class 11
First Edition
March 2006 Chaitra 1928

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q

Reprinted
February 2007 Magha 1928
December 2007 Pausa 1929
December 2008 Pausa 1930
January 2010 Magha 1931
November 2010 Kartika 1932
November 2013 Kartika 1935
December 2014 Pausa 1936
December 2015 Agrahayana 1937
January 2017 Pausa 1938
January 2018 Magha 1939
February 2019 Magha 1940
January 2020 Magha 1941
August 2021 Shravana 1943
November 2021 Agrahayana 1943
October 2022 Kartika 1944

q

q

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent,
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price
indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and
should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT

PD 50T RPS
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006

` 145.00

NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016

Phone : 011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085

Phone : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014

Phone : 079-27541446

CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114

Phone : 033-25530454

CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021

Phone : 0361-2674869

Publication Team

The cartoons on the cover have
been taken from the works of –
Shankar
R.K. Laxman

Printed on 80 GSM paper with
NCERT watermark
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo M arg, New Delhi
110 016 and printed Taj Printers,
69/6A Najafgarh Road Industrial
Area, Near Kirti Nagar Metro Station,
New Delhi - 110 015

Head, Publication
Division

: Anup Kumar Rajput

Chief Production
Officer

: Arun Chitkara

Chief Business
Manager

: Vipin Dewan

Chief Editor
(In charge)

: Bijnan Sutar

Assistant Editor

: Shashi Chadha

Assistant Production : Deepak Jaiswal
Officer

Rationalised 2023-24

Cover and Layout
Shweta Rao
Sketches
Rajeev Kumar
Cartoons
Irfaan

FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea.
They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance
of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a childcentred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must
recognise that given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by
adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as
receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and
mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary
as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required
number of teaching days is actually devoted to teaching. The methods
used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective
this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy
experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by
restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for
teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving
higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development
committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the

Rationalised 2023-24

iv
Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari
Vasudevan and the Chief Advisors for this book, Professor Suhas
Palshikar and Professor Yogendra Yadav for guiding the work of this
committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this
textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this possible.
We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development
under the Chairmanship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes
comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.

New Delhi
20 December 2005

Director
National Council of Educational
Research and Training

Rationalised 2023-24

A LETTER TO YOU
Dear Students,
Looking at the title of this book, you may wonder: “why am I studying
Indian Constitution again? Didn’t I study it in the previous classes?”
Yes, you have studied the broad structure of the Indian government
and some bits of the Constitution. But this book takes you to
something different from what you have already studied.
You have now chosen Political Science and will study this subject
for the next two years. What better way can there be to get introduced
to Political Science than through politics of our own country? That
is what this book does. The study of the working of the Indian
Constitution here is a gateway to studying politics in India. The study
of Indian politics is a window to understanding politics in other
societies. We hope that through the study of institutions and the
politics of power surrounding them, you would come to know about
the principles and theories of politics. Thus this book will tell you
about the way our Constitution has been working and the way it
shapes politics in our country. This book is not about legal provisions
and technical details in the Constitution. It is about how institutions
are shaped through interaction with actual politics.
We were inspired to write this different kind of a textbook by the
National Curriculum Framework 2005. It says that instead of just
memorisation and repetition, emphasis should be laid on ‘developing
concepts and the ability to analyse socio-political realities’. The
Foreword to this book by the Director of NCERT explains the vision
of this new curriculum. The new syllabi for Political Science recognise
the need to deepen the student’s understanding of the provisions
and the working of the Constitution of India.
That is why you would find more focus on the rationale and the
real life consequences of the Constitution than just more and more
information on the Constitution. This textbook will introduce you to
the idea of constitution and the story of the making and working of
the Indian Constitution. We certainly talk about the various key
provisions of the Constitution. But we have added three new features.

Rationalised 2023-24

vi

In the first place, this textbook responds to your curiosity about
why a particular arrangement in the Constitution was adopted and
why not some other. Secondly, it allows you to see how institutions
grow in the company of actual politics. That is why chapters in this
book do not stop at 1950. They in fact start off at 1950 and take you
to some instances drawn from the political history of the last fifty
years or more. We hope that this book will create an appetite for
more information about Indian politics; it will prepare you for the
course on Indian politics that you will study next year. Thirdly, this
book allows you to compare India and its Constitution to other
countries in the world having many similar concerns and different
answers. So, wherever possible this textbook tells you about what
has happened elsewhere in the world. We hope you will develop a
habit of comparing any one institution to other institutions
and other social situations.
We have also introduced a number of aides for you to get
more interested in the subject that you are studying. In
each chapter, there will be some example of an article from
Articles
the Constitution itself. This will give you a feel of the exact
wording, the vocabulary of our Constitution. You will also
find some quotations in each chapter. Most of these are
from the debates in
the Constituent Assembly.
Quotations from
The purpose is to introduce
Constituent
Assembly
you to this extraordinary
Debates (CAD)
heritage
of
political
Source: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in/
intelligence and foresight that
ls/debates/debates.htm
we have inherited and also
the drama that was unfolding
in the making of the Constitution.
Many chapters have cartoons too. But they are not there simply
as comic relief. They tell you about the criticisms, about the weak
spots, about near-failures. We hope that apart from enjoying these
cartoons, you would learn from them, both about politics and about
how to think about politics. Finally, there are these two characters
that keep popping up on the sides of your textbook pages from time
to time. Irfaan, the cartoonist, has especially penned them so that
you would relate to them. They are just like you: inquisitive, curious,

Rationalised 2023-24

vii

often cynical! Some times they are bold—more than what the
authors of this book have been!—enough to ask inconvenient
questions and make comments that make one sit up and think.
We call them Unni and Munni. While writing this book, we
have grown quite fond of them and we hope that they will endear
themselves to you as well. Perhaps, taking inspiration from
them, you would ask more questions to your teachers and
pass on some of these to us.
At the end of each chapter, you would find some interesting
puzzles in the form of exercises. Encouraged and inspired by
the NCF and the hope of the Director of NCERT that textbooks
must help improve the system of assessment, and with the help of
some young friends, we have tried to mix the exercises with some
innovative puzzles. They will make you ‘use your grey cells’! We hope
that in solving these puzzles, you would not feel that you are
answering exam questions.
We have prepared this book with the help of a large team that
kept working for over six months. This included many school and
college teachers, educationists, political scientists and artists. You
would read about this group under the title Textbook Development
Team listed on page ix. Professor Krishna Kumar, Director of NCERT,
supported us through out this effort and kept on guiding us. We
also received support and valuable inputs from Professor Hari
Vasudevan, Professor Gopal Guru, Professor Mrinal Miri, Professor
G.P. Deshpande and members of the National Monitoring Committee.
A large number of people have contributed generously to the
making of this book.We were fortunate to have
the benefit of the expertise of Professors Rajeev
Bhargava, Pratap Mehta, Sandeep Shastri,
Dr. Sanjeeb Mukherji, Dr. Sanjay Lodha,
Dr. Pushkar Raj, Ms. M. Manisha,
Unni
Dr. Shailendra Deolankar and Ms. Chaitra
Redkar in writing these chapters. Pankaj
Pushkar, Manish Jain, Alex George and
M. Manisha formed the backbone of the team.
They did research for this book, spent sleepless
nights in preparing the drafts, the boxes and

Rationalised 2023-24

Munni

viii

other material that you see in this book. Their concern for quality
and their insights into the pedagogy of social science lifted the book
a few notches above what it would otherwise have been. Manish Jain
relentlessly pursued the agenda of improving the quality and
innovativeness of the exercises. Pankaj Pushkar has practically
steered this book through the last six months. Dr. SriRanjani and
Dr. Sanjeer Alam, both at the Lokniti Programme of the CSDS kindly
extended their help in times of urgent need. Amit Ahuja, a doctoral
student at the university of Michigan, extended help in preparing
the boxes with comparative examples.
We are sure that you will appreciate this pleasant design that
Shweta Rao has prepared and the cartoons and Unni-Munni
characters born from the pencil of Irfaan Khan. The Children’s Book
Trust kindly allowed us the use of Shankar’s cartoons. Mr. R. K.
Laxman also gave permission for using cartoons drawn by him. In
short, this is a collective effort to make study of Political Science more
lively, relevant and student-friendly. We must also mention the
generosity of the Lokniti Programme of the CSDS, and Professor Peter
R. De Souza, Director, Lokniti, for literally housing the entire work of
the book at their premises and for providing infrastructure.
You have recently passed a big exam. Now it is our turn to be
examined. Whether this textbook fails or passes in what it tried to do
is for you to evaluate. We would be eagerly waiting for our exam
result with your comments, criticisms and suggestions to make a
better attempt next time.

Suhas Palshikar
Yogendra Yadav
Chief Advisors

Rationalised 2023-24

TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS AT THE SECONDARY
LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of
Calcutta, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISORS
Suhas Palshikar, Professor, Department of Politics and Public
Administration, University of Pune, Pune, Maharashtra
Yogendra Yadav, Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing
Societies, Delhi
MEMBERS
A.K. Verma, Reader, Department of Political Science, Christ Church
College, Kanpur, U.P.
Alex M. George, Independent Researcher, Eruvatty, District Kannur
Kerala
Anju Malhotra, Principal, Kalka Public School, New Delhi
Chaitra Redkar, Sr. Lecturer, SNDT College, Mumbai, Maharashtra
G. Pathak, PGT, Doni-Polo Public School, Itanagar, Arunachal Pradesh
M. Manisha, Sr. Lecturer, Department of Political Science, Loreto
College, Kolkata
Manish Jain, former PGT and a Doctoral student with the Department
of Education, University of Delhi, Delhi
Manisha Priyam, Sr. Lecturer, Gargi College, New Delhi
Pankaj Pushkar, Senior Lecturer, Directorate of Higher Education,
Haldwani, Uttaranchal
Pratap Bhanu Mehta, President, Centre for Policy Research,
New Delhi

Rationalised 2023-24

x

Pushkar Raj, Sr. Lecturer, Department of Politcal Science, Zakir
Hussain College, New Delhi
Rajeev Bhargava, Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing
Societies, Delhi
Rakesh Shukla, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
Sandeep Shastri, Director, International Academy for Creative
Teaching, Bangalore, Karnataka
Sanjay Lodha, Associate Professor, Department of Political Science,
Mohan Lal Sukhadia University, Udaipur, Rajasthan
Sanjeeb Mukherjee, Sr. Lecturer, Department of Political Science,
Calcutta University, Kolkata
Sayed Sabkulla, PGT, Maharanis Government Pre-University College,
Mysore, Karnataka
Shailendra Deolankar, Lecturer, Department of Political Science, Govt.
College, Aurangabad, Maharashtra
Shefali Jha, Associate Professor, Centre for Political Studies, School
of Social Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Srilekha Mukherjee, PGT, St. Paul School, New Delhi
Versha Manku, Vice Principal and PGT, Kulachi Hansraj Model
School, New Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Sanjay Dubey, Reader, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi

Rationalised 2023-24

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Efforts of many persons and organisations have gone into the making
of this book. We appreciate the help extended by the following
institutions and persons:
l
Cagle Cartoons (for the use of cartoons of Chappatte, John
Trever and Ares);
l
The Children’s Book Trust (for the use of Shankar’s
cartoons);
l
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library and Down to Earth
(for the photographs);
l
Sarai, an initiative of the Centre for the Study of Developing
Societies (CSDS), and Nirantar — Centre for Gender and
Education;
l
Lokniti, CSDS (for housing the project of making of this book);
l
R.K. Laxman (for allowing the use of his cartoons);
l
Arvind Sharma and Vikram Rawat (for helping in the
preparation of a foolproof copy);
l
Amit Ahuja, Sriranjani and Sanjeer Alam (for providing
research inputs);
l
Irfaan Khan (for the cartoons and the Unni-Munni
characters);
l
Shweta Rao (for design and layout of the book);
l
Peter Ronald De Souza (for allowing the use of Lokniti
resources);
l
Pankaj Pushkar (for untiring support in the making of this
textbook)
We are thankful to all these institutions and persons.
Suhas Palshikar and Yogendra Yadav, Chief Advisors
The contribution of M.V.S.V. Prasad, Assistant Professor, Department
of Curriculum Studies, NCERT, in reviewing and updating the current
edition is appreciated.

Rationalised 2023-24

Rationalised 2023-24

CONTENTS
Foreword
A letter to you

iii
v

CONSTITUTION:
WHY AND HOW?

1

RIGHTS IN THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION

26

ELECTION AND
REPRESENTATION

51

4.

EXECUTIVE

78

5.

LEGISLATURE

100

6.

JUDICIARY

124

7.

FEDERALISM

150

8.

LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS

176

CONSTITUTION AS A
LIVING DOCUMENT

196

THE PHILOSOPHY OF
THE CONSTITUTION

220

1.

2.

3.

9.

10.

Rationalised 2023-24

Constitution of India
Part IV A (Article 51 A)

Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i)

to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;

(j)

to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;

*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?

1

Chapter One

CONSTITUTION:
WHY AND HOW?

INTRODUCTION
This book is about the working of the Indian Constitution. In the chapters that
follow, you will read information about various aspects of the working of our
Constitution. You will learn about the various institutions of the government in
our country and their relationship with each other.
But before you begin to read about elections, governments, and presidents
and prime ministers, it is necessary to understand that the entire structure of the
government and the various principles that bind the institutions of government
have their origin in the Constitution of India.
After studying this chapter, you will learn:
± what a constitution means;
± what a constitution does to the society;
± how constitutions govern the allocation of power in society; and
± what was the way in which the Constitution of India was made.

Rationalised 2023-24

Indian Constitution at Work

WHY DO WE NEED A CONSTITUTION?
What is a constitution? What are its functions? What role does it
perform for a society? How does a constitution relate to our daily
existence? Answering these questions is not as difficult as you might
think.
Constitution allows coordination and
assurance
Imagine yourself to be a member of a
reasonably large group. Further imagine that
this group has the following characteristics.
The members of this group are diverse in
various ways. They have different religious
allegiances: some are Hindus, some are
Muslims, some Christians and some perhaps
profess no religion at all. They are also varied
in many different respects: they
pursue different professions, have
different abilities, have different
hobbies, different tastes in
everything from films to books. This group is very much like the
Some are rich and some are poor. people of my village.
Some are old, some young.
Imagine further that members of this group are likely to
have disputes over various aspects of life: How much
property should one be allowed to own? Should it be
compulsory that every child be sent to school or should
the parents be allowed to decide? How much should this
Yes, this could be my colony as
group spend on its safety and security? Or should it build
well! Does this apply to your
more parks instead? Should the group be allowed to
village or town or colony too?
discriminate against some of its members? Every question
will elicit a variety of answers from different people. But,
for all their diversity, this group has to live together. They are
dependent upon each other in various ways. They require the
2
cooperation of each other. What will enable the group to live together
peacefully?

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?

One may say that perhaps members of this group can live together
if they can agree on some basic rules. Why will the group need certain
basic rules? Think of what would happen in the absence of some
basic rules. Every individual would be insecure simply because they
would not know what members of this group could do to each other,
who could claim rights over what. Any group will need some basic
rules that are publicly promulgated and known to all members of
that group to achieve a minimal degree of coordination. But these
rules must not only be known, they must also be enforceable. If
citizens have no assurance that others will follow these rules, they
will themselves have no reason to follow these rules. Saying that the
rules are legally enforceable gives an assurance to everybody that
others will follow these, for if they do not do so, they will be punished.
The first function of a constitution is to provide a set of
basic rules that allow for minimal coordination amongst
members of a society.
Activity
Enact the thought experiment of this section in the
classroom. The entire class should discuss and arrive
at some decisions that would apply to everyone for
this entire session. The decision could be about:
± How would the class representatives be chosen?
± Which decisions will the representative be able to
take on behalf of the entire class?
± Are there some decisions that the class
representative cannot take without consulting the
entire class?
± You can add any other items to this list (collection
of common kitty for the class, organisation of picnic
and trips, sharing of common resources, …) as long
as everyone agrees to it. Make sure that you
include those subjects that have led to any
differences in the past.
± How to revise these decisions in case you
need to?

Rationalised 2023-24

3

Indian Constitution at Work
±

4

Write down all these decisions on a paper and put
it up on the notice board. Which problems did you
encounter in this decision? Were there differences
among different students? How did you resolve
these differences? Did the entire class gain
something from this exercise?

Specification of decision making powers
A constitution is a body of fundamental principles according to which
a state is constituted or governed. But what should these
fundamental rules be? And what makes them fundamental? Well,
the first question you will have to decide is who gets to decide what
the laws governing the society should be? You may want rule X, but
others may want rule Y. How do we decide whose rules or preferences
should govern us? You may think the rules you want everyone to
live by are the best; but others think that their rules are the best.
How do we resolve this dispute? So even before you decide what
rules should govern this group you have to decide: Who gets to
decide?
The constitution has to provide an answer to this question. It
specifies the basic allocation of power in a society. It decides who
gets to decide what the laws will be. In principle, this question, who
gets to decide, can be answered in many ways: in a monarchical
constitution, a monarch decides; in some constitutions like the old
Soviet Union, one single party was given the power to decide. But in
democratic constitutions, broadly speaking, the people get to decide.
But this matter is not so simple. Because even if you answer that the
people should decide, it will not answer the question: how should
the people decide? For something to be law, should everyone agree
to it? Should the people directly vote on each matter as the ancient
Greeks did? Or should the people express their preferences by electing
representatives? But if the people act through their representatives,
how should these representatives be elected? How many should there
be?
In the Indian Constitution for example, it is specified that in most
instances, Parliament gets to decide laws and policies, and that
Parliament itself be organised in a particular manner. Before
identifying what the law in any given society is, you have to identify

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?

5

Limitations on the
powers of government
But this is clearly not
enough. Suppose you
decided who had the
authority
to
make
decisions. But then this
authority passed laws that
you thought were patently
Countries of the European Union tried to create a
unfair. It prohibited you
European constitution. The attempt failed. Here is a
from practising your
cartoonist’s impression of this attempt. Does this
religion for instance. Or it
always happen in any constitution making?
enjoined that clothes of a
certain colour were
prohibited, or that you
were not free to sing certain songs or that people who belonged to a
particular group (caste or religion) would always have to serve others
and would not be allowed to retain any property. Or that government
could arbitrarily arrest someone, or that only people of a certain skin
colour would be allowed to draw water from wells. You would obviously
think these laws were unjust and unfair. And even though they were
passed by a government that had come into existence based

Rationalised 2023-24

“European Constitution” by Patrick Chappate, International Herald Tribune, 21SEP04 Copyright Cagle Cartoons.

who has the authority to enact it. If Parliament has the authority to
enact laws, there must be a law that bestows this authority on
Parliament in the first
place. This is the function
of the constitution. It is an
READ A CARTOON
authority that constitutes
government in the first
place.
The second function
of a constitution is to
specify who has the
power
to
make
decisions in a society.
It decides how the
government will be
constituted.

Indian Constitution at Work

Ah! So you first create a monster
and then start worrying about
saving yourself from it! I would
say, why create this monster called
government in the first place?

6

on certain procedures there would be something
obviously unjust about that government enacting these
laws.
So the third function of a constitution is to set
some limits on what a government can impose on
its citizens. These limits are fundamental in the
sense that government may never trespass them.
Constitutions limit the power of government in many
ways. The most common way of limiting the power of
government is to specify certain fundamental rights that
all of us possess as citizens and which no government
can ever be allowed to violate. The exact content and
interpretation of these rights varies from constitution to
constitution. But most constitutions will protect a basic
cluster of rights. Citizens will be protected from being
arrested arbitrarily and for no reason. This is one basic
limitation upon the power of government. Citizens will
normally have the right to some basic liberties: to freedom
of speech, freedom of conscience, freedom of association,
freedom to conduct a trade or business etc. In practice,
these rights can be limited during times of national
emergency and the constitution specifies the
circumstances under which these rights may be
withdrawn.
Aspirations and goals of a society
Most of the older constitutions limited themselves largely
to allocating decision-making power and setting some
limits to government power. But many twentieth century
constitutions, of which the Indian Constitution is the
finest example, also provide an enabling framework for
the government to do certain positive things, to express
the aspirations and goals of society. The Indian
Constitution was particularly innovative in this respect.
Societies with deep entrenched inequalities of various
kinds, will not only have to set limits on the power of
government, they will also have to enable and empower
the government to take positive measures to overcome
forms of inequality or deprivation.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?

For example, India aspires to be a society that is free of caste
discrimination. If this is our society’s aspiration, the government will
have to be enabled or empowered to take all the necessary steps to
achieve this goal. In a country like South Africa, which had a deep
history of racial discrimination, its new constitution had to enable
the government to end racial discrimination. More positively, a
Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.

7

READ A CARTOON

4 December 1949
The constitution makers have to address themselves to very
different aspirations. Here is Nehru trying to balance between
different visions and ideologies. Can you identify what these
different groups stand for? Who do you think prevailed in this
balancing act?

constitution may enshrine the aspirations of a society. The framers
of the Indian Constitution, for example, thought that each
individual in society should have all that is necessary for them to
lead a life of minimal dignity and social self-respect — minimum
material well-being, education etc. The Indian Constitution
enables the government to take positive welfare measures
some of which are legally enforceable. As we go on studying
the Indian Constitution, we shall find that such enabling

Rationalised 2023-24

Indian Constitution at Work

provisions have the support of the Preamble to our
Constitution, and these provisions are found in the section
on Fundamental Rights. The Directive Principles of State
of Policy also enjoin government to fulfil certain
aspirations of the people.
The fourth function of a constitution is to enable
the government to fulfil the aspirations of a society
and create conditions for a just society.

Enabling provisions of the Constitution

What does it take to write nice
things in the constitution?
What is the point in writing
down lofty aspirations and
goals if they cannot change the
life of the people?

8

Constitutions are not only rules and regulations
controlling the powers of the government. They
also give powers to the government for pursuing
collective good of the society.
± Constitution of South Africa assigns many
responsibilities to the government: it wants
the government to take measures to promote
conservation of nature, make efforts to protect
persons or groups subjected to unfair
discrimination, and provides that the
government must progressively ensure
adequate housing to all, health care, etc.
± In the case of Indonesia also, the government
is enjoined to establish and conduct national
education system. The Indonesian Constitution
ensures that the poor and destitute children
will be looked after by the government.

Fundamental identity of a people
Finally, and perhaps even most importantly, a
constitution expresses the fundamental identity of a
people.
This means the people as a collective entity come
into being only through the basic constitution. It is
by agreeing to a basic set of norms about how one
should be governed, and who should be governed that
one forms a collective identity. One has many sets
of identities that exist prior to a constitution. But by

Rationalised 2023-24

agreeing to certain basic norms and principles one constitutes one’s
9
basic political identity. Second, constitutional norms are the overarching
framework within which one pursues individual aspirations, goals and
freedoms. The constitution sets authoritative constraints upon what one
may or may not do. It defines the fundamental values that we may not
trespass. So the constitution also gives one a moral identity. Third and
finally, it may be the case that many basic political and moral values are
now shared across different constitutional traditions.
If one looks at constitutions around the world, they differ in many
respects — in the form of government they enjoin in many procedural
details. But they also share a
good deal. Most modern
READ A CARTOON
constitutions create a form of
government that is democratic
in some respects, most claim
to protect certain basic rights.
But constitutions are different
in the way they embody
conceptions of national
identity. Most nations are an
amalgamation of a complex
set of historical traditions;
they weave together the
diverse groups that reside
within the nation in different
ways. For example, German
identity was constituted by
being ethnically German.
The constitution gave
The writing of the new Iraqi constitution after
expression to this identity.
the collapse of Saddam Hussain’s regime saw
The Indian Constitution, on
a lot of conflict between different ethnic
the other hand, does not
groups in the country. What do these
make ethnic identity a
different people stand for? Compare the
conflict depicted here with that depicted in
criterion for citizenship.
earlier cartoons for the European Union and
Different nations embody
India.
different conceptions of
what the relationship

Rationalised 2023-24

“Iraqi Constitution”, John Trever, Albuquerque Journal, 18AUG05. Copyright. Cagle Cartoons.

Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?

Indian Constitution at Work

between the different regions of a nation and the central government
should be. This relationship constitutes the national identity of a
country.

Check your progress
Here are some provisions of the Indian and other constitutions.
For each of these write the function that this provision
performs.
The government cannot
order any citizen to follow
or not to follow any religion

Limitations on the
power of the
government

The government must try
to reduce inequalities
in income and wealth
The President has the
power to appoint
the Prime Minister
The Constitution is the
supreme law that everyone
has to obey
Indian citizenship is not
limited to people of
any race, caste or religion

10

THE AUTHORITY OF A CONSTITUTION
We have outlined some of the functions a constitution performs. These
functions explain why most societies have a constitution. But there
are three further questions we can ask about constitutions:

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?

a) What is a constitution?
b) How effective is a constitution?
c) Is a constitution just?
In most countries, ‘Constitution’ is a compact
document that comprises a number of articles about the
state, specifying how the state is to be constituted and
what norms it should follow. When we ask for the
constitution of a country we are usually referring to this
document. But some countries, the United Kingdom for
instance, do not have one single document that can be
called the Constitution. Rather they have a series of
documents and decisions that, taken collectively, are
referred to as the constitution. So, we can say that
constitution is the document or set of documents that
seeks to perform the functions that we mentioned above.
But many constitutions around the world exist only
on paper; they are mere words existing on a parchment.
The crucial question is: how effective is a constitution?
What makes it effective? What ensures that it has a real
impact on the lives of people? Making a constitution
effective depends upon many factors.
Mode of promulgation
This refers to how a constitution comes into being. Who
crafted the constitution and how much authority did they
have? In many countries constitutions remain defunct
because they are crafted by military leaders or leaders
who are not popular and do not have the ability to carry
the people with them. The most successful constitutions,
like India, South Africa and the United States, are
constitutions which were created in the aftermath of
popular national movements. Although India’s
Constitution was formally created by a Constituent
Assembly between December 1946 and November
1949, it drew upon a long history of the nationalist
movement that had a remarkable ability to take along
different sections of Indian society together. The
Constitution drew enormous legitimacy from the

Rationalised 2023-24

11

What do people do if they find
out that their constitution is
not just? What happens to
people when a constitution
exists only on paper?

Indian Constitution at Work

fact that it was drawn up by people
who enjoyed immense public
credibility, who had the capacity
to negotiate and command the
respect of a wide cross-section of
society, and who were able to
convince the people that the
constitution was not an instrument
for the aggrandisement of their
personal power. The final
document reflected the broad
national consensus at the time.
Some countries have subjected
their constitution to a full-fledged
referendum, where all the people
vote on the desirability of a
constitution.
The
Indian
Constitution was never subjected
to such a referendum, but
nevertheless carried enormous
public authority, because it had
the consensus and backing of
leaders who were themselves
popular.
Although
the
Constitution itself was not
subjected to a referendum, the
people adopted it as their own by
abiding by its provisions.
Therefore, the authority of people
who enact the constitution helps
determine in part its prospects for
success.

12

The substantive provisions of a
constitution
It is the hallmark of a successful
constitution that it gives everyone
in society some reason to go along
with its provisions. A constitution

Debate over Constitution
making in Nepal:
Making a constitution is not always
an easy and smooth affair. Nepal
is an example of the complicated
nature of constitution making.
Since 1948, Nepal has had five
constitutions, in 1948, 1951, 1959,
1962 and 1990. But all these
constitutions were ‘granted’ by the
King of Nepal. The 1990
constitution introduced a multiparty competition, though the King
continued to hold final powers in
many respects. For many years
Nepal was faced with militant
political agitations for restructuring
the government. The main issue
was the role of the monarchy in the
constitution of Nepal. Some groups
in Nepal wanted to abolish the
institution of monarchy and
establish republican form of
government. Others believed that
it may be useful to shift to limited
monarchy with a reduced role for
the King. The King himself was not
ready to give up powers. He took
over all powers in October 2002.
Many political parties and
organisations demanded the
formation of a new constituent
assembly. The Communist Party of
Nepal (Maoist) was in the forefront
of the struggle for a popularly
elected constituent assembly.
Finally, under pressure of popular
agitation, the King had to install a
government acceptable to the
agitating parties. This government
has stripped the King of almost all
powers. In 2008, Nepal emerged as
a democratic republic after
abolishing the monarchy. Finally,
Nepal adopted a new constitution
in 2015.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?

that, for instance, allowed permanent majorities to oppress minority
groups within society would give minorities no reason to go along
with the provision of the constitution. Or a constitution that
systematically privileged some members at the expense of others, or
that systematically entrenched the power of small groups in society,
would cease to command allegiance. If any group feels their identity
is being stifled, they will have no reason to abide by the constitution.
No constitution by itself achieves perfect justice. But it has to convince
people that it provides the framework for pursuing basic justice.
Do this thought experiment. Ask yourself this question: What
would be the content of some basic rules in society, such that they
gave everyone a reason to go along with them?
The more a constitution preserves the freedom and equality of
all its members, the more likely it is to succeed. Does the Indian
Constitution, broadly speaking, give everyone a reason to go along
with its broad outlines? After studying this book, one should be
able to answer this question in the affirmative.
Balanced institutional design
Constitutions are often subverted, not by the people, but by small
groups, who wish to enhance their own power. Well crafted
constitutions fragment power in society intelligently so that no single
group can subvert the constitution. One way of such intelligent
designing of a constitution is to ensure that no single institution
acquires monopoly of power. This is often done by fragmenting power
across different institutions. The Indian Constitution, for example,
horizontally fragments power across different institutions like the
Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary and even independent
statutory bodies like the Election Commission. This ensures that
even if one institution wants to subvert the Constitution, others can
check its transgressions. An intelligent system of checks and
balances has facilitated the success of the Indian Constitution.
Another important aspect of intelligent institutional design is:
that a constitution must strike the right balance between certain
values, norms and procedures as authoritative, and at the same
time allow enough flexibility in its operations to adapt to changing
needs and circumstances. Too rigid a constitution is likely to break
under the weight of change; a constitution that is, on the other

Rationalised 2023-24

13

“Castle of Cards” , Ares, copyright Cagle Cartoons, SEP05

Indian Constitution at Work

hand, too flexible, will give no security,
predictability or identity to a people.
Successful constitutions strike the right
balance between preserving core values and
adapting them to new circumstances. You
will notice the wisdom of makers of the
Indian Constitution in the chapter on the
Constitution as a living document (Chapter
9). The Indian Constitution is described as
‘a living’ document. By striking a balance
between the possibility to change the
provisions and the limits on such changes,
the Constitution has ensured that it will
survive as a document respected by people.
This arrangement also ensures that no
section or group can, on its own, subvert
the Constitution.
Why does the cartoonist describe
Therefore in determining whether a
the new Iraqi Constitution as the
constitution has authority you can ask
castle of cards? Would this
yourself three questions:
description apply to the Indian
± Were the people who enacted the
Constitution?
constitution credible? This question
will be answered in the remaining part
of this chapter.
± Secondly, did the constitution ensure
that power was intelligently organised so that it was not easy for
any group to subvert the constitution? And, most importantly,
does the constitution give everyone some reason to go along with
it? Most of this book is about this question.
± Also, is the constitution the locus of people’s hopes and
aspiration? The ability of the constitution to command voluntary
allegiance of the people depends to a certain extent upon whether
the constitution is just. What are the principles of justice
underlying the Indian Constitution? The last chapter of this book
will answer this question.

READ A CARTOON

14

How was the Indian Constitution made?
Let us find out how the Indian Constitution was made. Formally, the
Constitution was made by the Constituent Assembly which had been
elected for undivided India. It held its first sitting on

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?

9 December1946 and reassembled as Constituent Assembly for divided
India on 14 August 1947. Its members were chosen by indirect election
by the members of the Provincial Legislative Assemblies that had been
established under the Government of India Act, 1935. The Constituent
Assembly was composed roughly along the lines suggested by the
plan proposed by the committee of the British cabinet, known as the
Cabinet Mission. According to this plan:
± Each Province and each Princely State or group of States were
allotted seats proportional to their respective population roughly
in the ratio of 1:10,00,000. As a result the Provinces (that were
under direct British rule) were to elect 292 members while the
Princely States were allotted a minimum of 93 seats.
± The seats in each Province were distributed among the three main
communities, Muslims, Sikhs and general, in proportion to their
respective populations.
± Members of each community in the Provincial Legislative
Assembly elected their own representatives by the method of
proportional representation with single transferable vote.
± The method of selection in the case of representatives of Princely
States was to be determined by consultation.
For more details, visit http://164.100.47.194/loksabha/constituent/facts.html

“We must make our political democracy a social democracy as well.
Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it
social democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a
way of life, which recognises liberty, equality and fraternity as the
principles of life. These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity
are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a
union of trinity in the sense that to divorce one from the other is to
defeat the very purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced
from equality, equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can
liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. Without equality,
liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many.
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative. Without
fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course
of things…”
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, CAD, Vol. XI, p.979, 25 November 1949
Are the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity being practised in
your classroom? How can they coexist? Discuss this with your friends.

Rationalised 2023-24

15

Indian Constitution at Work

The previous section discusses the three factors that
make a constitution effective and respectable. How far
does the Indian Constitution pass this test?

What would have happened if
the Constituent Assembly was
elected by all the people of
India? Could it be very
different from what it was?

16

Composition of the Constituent Assembly
As a consequence of the Partition under the plan of
3 June 1947 those members who were elected from
territories which fell under Pakistan ceased to be
members of the Constituent Assembly. The number of
members in the Assembly was reduced to 299. The
Constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949. 284
members were actually present on 24 January 1950 and
appended their signature to the Constitution as finally
passed. The Constitution came into force on 26 January
1950. The Constitution was thus framed against the
backdrop of the horrendous violence that the Partition
unleashed on the subcontinent. But it is a tribute to the
fortitude of the framers that they were not only able to
draft a constitution under immense pressure, but also
learnt the right lessons from the unimaginable violence
that accompanied the Partition. The Constitution was
committed to a new conception of citizenship, where not
only would minorities be secure, but religious identity
would have no bearing on citizenship rights.
But this account of the composition of the Constituent
Assembly that drafted the Constitution touches upon only
the surface of how our Constitution was made. Although,
the members of the Assembly were not elected by
universal suffrage, there was a serious attempt to make
the Assembly a representative body. Members of all
religions were given representation under the scheme
described above; in addition, the Assembly had twentyeight members from the Scheduled Castes. In terms of
political parties, the Congress dominated the Assembly
occupying as many as eighty-two per cent of the seats in
the Assembly after the Partition. The Congress itself was
such a diverse party that it managed to accommodate
almost all shades of opinion within it.

Rationalised 2023-24

