Indian Constitution at Work

Check your progress
The proportion of Muslims in the population of India
is about 14.2 per cent. But the number of Muslim
MPs in the Lok Sabha has usually been less than 6
per cent, less than half of their share in population. A
similar situation prevails in most State Assemblies.
Three students drew different conclusions from this
fact. Write down whether and why you agree or
disagree with each of them.
Hilal: This demonstrates the unfairness of the
FPTP system. We should have opted for PR system.
Arif: This shows the wisdom of granting
reservations to SC and ST. What is needed is a
reservation of seats for Muslims on the same lines as
for SC and ST.
Saba: There is no point in talking about Muslims
as a whole. Muslim women are not going to get any
share in any of these systems. We need a separate
quota for Muslim women.

Am I or am I not an adult? I
am mature enough to choose
my future career, old enough
to get a driving license, but not
old enough to vote! If laws
can apply to me, why can’t I
decide on who makes those
laws?

66

Universal franchise and right to contest
Apart from laying down a method of elections, the
Constitution answers two basic questions about elections:
Who are the voters? Who can contest elections? In both
these respects our Constitution follows the well established
democratic practices.
You already know that democratic elections require
that all adult citizens of the country must be eligible to
vote in the elections. This is known as universal adult
franchise. In many countries, citizens had to fight long
battles with the rulers to get this right. In many countries,
women could get this right very late and only after
struggle. One of the important decisions of the framers of
the Indian Constitution was to guarantee every adult
citizen in India, the right to vote.
Till 1989, an adult Indian meant an Indian citizen
above the age of 21. An amendment to the Constitution
in 1989, reduced the eligibility age to 18. Adult franchise
ensures that all citizens are able to participate in the

Rationalised 2023-24

process of selecting their representative. This is consistent with the
principle of equality and non-discrimination that we studied in the
67
chapter on rights. Many people thought and many think so today
that giving the right to vote to
everyone
irrespective
of
educational qualification was not
READ A CARTOON
right. But our Constitution
makers had a firm belief in the
ability and worth of all adult
citizens as equals in the matter
of deciding what is good for the
society, the country and for their
own constituencies.
What is true of the right to
vote is also true of right to contest
election. All citizens have the right
to stand for election and become
the representative of the people.
However, there are different
minimum age requirements for
contesting elections. For example,
in order to stand for Lok Sabha
or Assembly election, a candidate
must be at least 25 years old.
There are some other restrictions
also. For instance, there is a legal
provision that a person who has
undergone imprisonment for two
or more years for some offence is
disqualified from contesting
21 October 1951
elections. But there are no
Why is universal adult franchise compared
restrictions of income, education
to an elephant? Is it unmanageable? Or is it
or class or gender on the right to
like the story in which everyone describes the
contest elections. In this sense,
elephant only by its parts?
our system of election is open to
all citizens.
Independent Election Commission
Several efforts have been made in India to ensure the free and fair
election system and process. The most important among these is the

Rationalised 2023-24

Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.

Chapter 3: Election and Representation

Indian Constitution at Work

creation of an independent Election Commission to ‘supervise and
conduct’ elections. Do you know that in many countries, there is an
absence of an independent mechanism for conducting elections?
Article 324: (1)
The superintendence, direction and control of
the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and
the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and
to the Legislature of every State and of
elections to the offices of President and VicePresident held under this Constitution shall
be vested in a Commission (referred to in this
Constitution as the Election Commission).

68

Article 324 of the Indian Constitution provides for an independent
Election Commission for the ‘superintendence, direction and control
of the electoral roll and the conduct of elections’ in India. These words
in the Constitution are very important, for they give the Election
Commission a decisive role in virtually everything to do with elections.
The Supreme Court has agreed with this interpretation of the
Constitution.
To assist the Election Commission of India there is a Chief Electoral
Officer in every state. The Election Commission is not responsible for
the conduct of local body elections. As we shall study in the chapter
on Local Government, the State Election Commissioners work
independently of the Election Commission of India and each has its
own sphere of operation.
The Election Commission of India can either be a single member
or a multi-member body. Till 1989, the Election Commission was
single member. Just before the 1989 general elections, two Election
Commissioners were appointed, making the body multi-member.
Soon after the elections, the Commission reverted to its single member
status. In 1993, two Election Commissioners were once again
appointed and the Commission became multi-member and has
remained multi-member since then. Initially there were many
apprehensions about a multi-member Commission. There was a
sharp difference of opinion between the then Chief Election

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 3: Election and Representation

Commissioner and the other Commissioners about who
had how much power. The matter had to be settled by the
Supreme Court. Now there is a general consensus that a
multi-member Election Commission is more appropriate
as power is shared and there is greater accountability.
The Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) presides over
the Election Commission, but does not have more powers
than the other Election Commissioners. The CEC and the
two Election Commissioners have equal powers to take
all decisions relating to elections as a collective body. They
are appointed by the President of India on the advice of
the Council of Ministers. It is therefore possible for a ruling
party to appoint a partisan person to the Commission
who might favour them in the elections. This fear has led
many to suggest that this procedure should be changed.
Many persons have suggested that a different method
should be followed that makes consultation with the leader
of opposition and the Chief Justice of India necessary for
the appointment of CEC and Election Commissioners.
The Constitution ensures the security of the tenure of
the CEC and Election Commissioners. They are appointed
for a six year term or continue till the age of 65, whichever
is earlier. The CEC can be removed before the expiry of

69

Has this now been settled? Or
can the government go back to
a single member Election
Commission? Does the
Constitution allow this game?

Special majority
Special majority means:
± Two-thirds majority of those present and voting, and
± Simple majority of the total membership of the House.
Let us say that you have to pass a resolution in your class
with a special majority. Imagine further that your class has a total
student strength of 57. But on the day of voting, only 51 students
are present and 50 students participated in voting. When would
you say that the resolution has been passed with ‘special majority’
in this situation?
In this book you will find mention of ‘special majority’ in at
least three other chapters. One is in the next chapter on Executive,
where we discuss the impeachment of the President of India. Find
out the other two places where special majority is discussed.

Rationalised 2023-24

Indian Constitution at Work

70

the term, by the President if both Houses of Parliament make such a
recommendation with a special majority. This is done to ensure that
a ruling party cannot remove a CEC who refuses to favour it in
elections. The Election Commissioners can be removed by the
President of India.
The Election Commission of India has a wide range of functions.
± It supervises the preparation of up-to-date voters’ list. It makes
every effort to ensure that the voters’ list is free of errors like nonexistence of names of registered voters or existence of names of
those non-eligible or non-existent.
± It also determines the timing of elections and prepares the election
schedule. The election schedule includes the notification of
elections, date from which nominations can be filed, last date for
filing nominations, last date of scrutiny, last date of withdrawal,
date of polling and date of counting and declaration of results.
± During this entire process, the Election Commission has the power
to take decisions to ensure a free and fair poll. It can postpone or
cancel the election in the entire country or a specific State or
constituency on the grounds that the atmosphere is vitiated and
therefore, a free and fair election may not be possible. The
Commission also implements a model code of conduct for parties
and candidates. It can order a re-poll in a specific constituency.
It can also order a recount of votes when it feels that the counting
process has not been fully fair and just.
± The Election Commission accords recognition to political parties
and allots symbols to each of them.
The Election Commission has very limited staff of its own. It
conducts the elections with the help of the administrative machinery.
However, once the election process has begun, the commission has
control over the administration as far as election related work is
concerned. During the election process, the administrative officers of
the State and central governments are assigned election related duty
and in this respect, the Election Commission has full control over
them. The EC can transfer the officers, or stop their transfers; it can
take action against them for failing to act in a non-partisan manner.
Over the years, the Election Commission of India has emerged as
an independent authority which has asserted its powers to ensure
fairness in the election process. It has acted in an impartial and
unbiased manner in order to protect the sanctity of the electoral
process. The record of Election Commission also shows that every

Rationalised 2023-24

improvement in the functioning of institutions does not require legal
71
or constitutional change. It is widely agreed that the Election
Commission is more independent and assertive now than it was till
25 years ago. This is not because the powers and constitutional
protection of the Election Commission have increased. The Election
Commission has started using more effectively the powers it always
had in the Constitution.
Since 1951–52, seventeen
Lok Sabha elections have been
held. Many more State assembly
READ A CARTOON
elections and by-elections have
been conducted by the Election
Commission. The EC has faced
many difficult situations such as
holding elections in militancy
affected areas like Assam,
Punjab or Jammu and Kashmir.
It has also faced the difficult
situation of having to postpone
the election process mid-way in
1991 when the ex-Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated
during campaigning. In 2002,
the Election Commission faced
another critical situation when
the Gujarat Assembly was
dissolved and elections had to be
conducted. But the Election
Commission
found
that
unprecedented violence in
that State had made it
impossible to hold free and fair
elections immediately. The
Election Commission decided
to postpone elections to the
The Netaji is afraid of EC. Why do leaders
State Assembly by a few
fear the Election Commission? Is this good
months. The Supreme Court
for democracy?
upheld this decision of the
Election Commission.

Rationalised 2023-24

R K Laxman in The Times of India.

Chapter 3: Election and Representation

Indian Constitution at Work

Check your progress
Why do you think does the Election Commission
have the following powers and privileges? What
could have happened if these did not exist?
The Commission can issue orders to
government employees engaged in any election
related duty.
The government cannot remove the Chief
Election Commissioner.
The Commission can cancel an election if it
thinks that it was not fair.

E LECTORAL REFORMS

Can we reduce the influence of
money and muscle power by
changing the law? Does
anything change in reality by
changing the law?

72

No system of election can ever be perfect. And in actual
election process, there are bound to be many flaws and
limitations. Any democratic society has to keep searching
for mechanisms to make elections free and fair to the
maximum. With the acceptance of adult suffrage, freedom
to contest elections, and the establishment of an
independent Election Commission, India has tried to make
its election process free and fair. However, the experience
of the past 66 years has given rise to many suggestions
for reforming our election system. The Election
Commission, political parties, various independent
groups, and many scholars have come up with proposals
for electoral reform. Some of these suggestions are about
changing the constitutional provisions discussed in this
Chapter:
± Our system of elections should be changed from the
FPTP to some variant of the PR system. This would

Rationalised 2023-24

ensure that parties get seats, as far as possible, in proportion to
the votes they get.
73
± There should be a special provision to ensure that at least onethird women are elected to the parliament and assemblies.
± There should be stricter provisions to control the role of money
in electoral politics. The
elections expenses should
be paid by the government
READ A CARTOON
out of a special fund.
± Candidates with any
criminal case should be
barred from contesting
elections, even if their
appeal is pending before a
court.
± There should be complete
ban on the use of caste and
religious appeals in the
campaign.
± There should be a law to
regulate the functioning of
political parties and to
ensure that they function in
a
transparent
and
democratic manner.
These are but a few
suggestions. There is no
consensus about these
suggestions. Even if there was
a consensus, there are limits to
what the laws and formal
provisions can do. Free and fair
elections can be held only if the
Should a person accused of a serious crime
candidates, the parties and
be barred from contesting elections?
those involved in the election
process agree to abide by the
spirit of democratic competition.
Apart from legal reforms, there are two other ways of ensuring
that elections reflect the expectations and democratic aspirations of
the people. One is, of course, that people themselves have to be more

Rationalised 2023-24

R K Laxman in The T imes of India.

Chapter 3: Election and Representation

Indian Constitution at Work

vigilant, more actively involved in political activities. But there are
limits to the extent to which ordinary people can engage in politics
on a regular basis. Therefore, it is necessary that various political
institutions and voluntary organisations are developed and are active
in functioning as watchdog for ensuring free and fair elections.

74

Conclusion
In countries where representative democracy is practiced,
elections and the representative character of those elections
are crucial factors in making democracy effective and
trustworthy. The success of India’s election system can be
gauged from a number of factors.
± Our election system has allowed the voters not only to freely
choose representatives, but also to change governments
peacefully both at the State and national level.
± Secondly, voters have consistently taken a keen interest in
the election process and participated in it. The number of
candidates and parties that contest elections is on the rise.
± Thirdly, the system of election has proved to be
accommodative and inclusive. The social composition of our
representatives has changed gradually. Now our representatives
come from many different social sections, though the number
of women legislators has not increased satisfactorily.
± Fourthly, the election outcome in most parts of the country
does not reflect electoral malpractices and rigging. Of course,
many attempts at rigging do take place. You must have read
about violence, about complaints that voters’ names disappear
from the voters’ list, about intimidation, and so on. Yet, such
instances rarely directly affect the outcome of the election.
± Finally and most importantly, elections have become a part
and parcel of our democratic life. No one can imagine a situation
where a government would disrespect the verdict of an election.
Similarly, no one can imagine that a government would be
formed without holding elections. In fact, regularity and
periodicity of elections has earned fame for India as a great
democratic experiment.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 3: Election and Representation

All these factors have earned for our election system a
respect within and outside the country. The voter in India has
gained confidence. The legitimacy of the Election Commission
has increased in the eyes of the people. This vindicates the
basic decisions taken by our Constitution makers. If the election
process becomes more flawless, we as voters and citizens would
be able to share more effectively in this carnival of democracy
and make it more meaningful.

Exercises
1. Which of the following resembles most a direct democracy?
a. Discussions in a family meeting
b. Election of the class monitor
c. Choice of a candidate by a political party
d. Decisions taken by the Gram Sabha
e. Opinion polls conducted by the media
2. Which of the following tasks are not performed by the Election
Commission?
a. Preparing the Electoral Rolls
b. Nominating the candidates
c. Setting up polling booths
d. Implementing the model code of conduct
e. Supervising the Panchayat elections
3. Which of the following is common to the method of election of the
members of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha?
a. Every citizen above the age of 18 is an eligible voter
b. Voter can give preference order for different candidates
c. Every vote has equal value
d. The winner must get more than half the votes
4. In the First Past the Post system, that candidate is declared winner
who
a. Secures the largest number of postal ballots

Rationalised 2023-24

75

Indian Constitution at Work

b. Belongs to the party that has highest number of votes in the
country
c. Has more votes than any other candidate in the constituency
d. Attains first position by securing more than 50% votes
5. What is the difference between the system of reservation of
constituencies and the system of separate electorate? Why did the
Constitution makers reject the latter?
6. Which of the following statements are incorrect? Identify and correct
them by substituting, adding or rearranging only one word or phrase.
a. FPTP system is followed for all the elections in India.
b. Election Commission does not supervise Panchayat and
Municipal elections.
c. President of India cannot remove an Election Commissioner.
d. Appointment of more than one Election Commissioner in the
Election Commission is mandatory.
7. Indian electoral system aims at ensuring representation of socially
disadvantaged sections. However we have only 12 per cent women
members in our legislatures. What measures would you suggest to
improve the situation?
8. Here are some wishes expressed in a conference to discuss a
constitution for a new country. Write against each of these whether
FPTP or Proportional Representation system is more suited to meet
each of these wishes.
a. People should clearly know who is their representative so that
they can hold him or her personally accountable.
b. We have small linguistic minorities who are spread all over the
country; we should ensure fair representation to them.
c. There should be no discrepancy between votes and seats for
different parties.
d. People should be able to elect a good candidate even if they do
not like his or her political party.

76

9. A former Chief Election Commissioner joined a political party and
contested elections. There are various views on this issue. One
view is that a former Election Commissioner is an independent
citizen and has a right to join any political party and to contest
election. According to the other view, leaving this possibility open

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 3: Election and Representation

can affect the impartiality of the Election Commission. So, former
Election Commissioners must not be allowed to contest any
elections. Which position do you agree with and why?
10. “Indian democracy is now ready to shift from a crude First Past the
Post system to a system of Proportional Representation”. Do you
agree with this statement? Give your reasons for or against this
statement.

National Voters’ Day (NVD) Pledge
We, the citizens of India, having abiding faith in democracy, hereby
pledge to uphold the democratic traditions of our country and the
dignity of free, fair and peaceful elections, and to vote in every election
fearlessly and without being influenced by considerations of religion,
race, caste, community, language or any inducement.
For details about Systematic Voters’ Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP)
programme of the Election Commission of India and Electoral Literacy Club (ELC),
visit http://ecisveep.nic.in

Rationalised 2023-24

77

Indian Constitution at Work

Chapter Four

EXECUTIVE

INTRODUCTION

78

Legislature, executive and judiciary are the three organs of government. Together,
they perform the functions of the government, maintain law and order and look
after the welfare of the people. The Constitution ensures that they work in
coordination with each other and maintain a balance among themselves. In a
parliamentary system, executive and the legislature are interdependent: the
legislature controls the executive, and, in turn, is controlled by the executive.
In this chapter we shall discuss the composition, structure and function of the
executive organ of the government. This chapter will also tell you about the
changes that have occurred in recent times due to political practice. After reading
this chapter, you will be able to
± make a distinction between the parliamentary and the presidential executive;
± understand the constitutional position of the President of India;
± know the composition and functioning of the Council of Ministers and the
importance of the Prime Minister; and
± understand the importance and functioning of the administrative machinery.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

WHAT IS AN EXECUTIVE?
Who is in charge of the administration of your school?
Who takes important decisions in a school or a university?
In any organisation, some office holder has to take
decisions and implement those decisions. We call this
activity administration or management. But
administration requires a body at the top that will take
policy decisions or the big decisions and supervise and
coordinate the routine administrative functioning. You
may have heard about the executives of big companies,
banks or industrial units. Every formal group has a body
of those who function as the chief administrators or the
executives of that organisation. Some office holders decide
the policies and rules and regulations and then some office
holders implement those decisions in actual day-to-day
functioning of the organisation. The word executive means
a body of persons that looks after the implementation of
rules and regulations in actual practice.
In the case of government also, one body may take
policy decisions and decide about rules and regulations,
while the other one would be in charge of implementing
those rules. The organ of government that primarily looks
after the function of implementation and administration
is called the executive.
What are the principal functions of the executive?
Executive is the branch of government responsible for the
implementation of laws and policies adopted by the
legislature. The executive is often involved in framing of
policy. The official designations of the executive vary from
country to country. Some countries have presidents, while
others have chancellors. The executive branch is not just
about presidents, prime ministers and ministers. It also
extends to the administrative machinery (civil servants).
While the heads of government and their ministers, saddled
with the overall responsibility of government policy, are
together known as the political executive, those
responsible for day to day administration are called the
permanent executive.

Rationalised 2023-24

79

I remember somebody saying
that the executive in a democracy
is accountable to people. Is that
also true of executives in big
companies? Aren’t they called
CEOs? Who are they
accountable to?

Indian Constitution at Work

WHAT ARE THE DIFFERENT TYPES OF EXECUTIVE?
Every country may not have the same type of executive. You may
have heard about the President of the USA and the Queen of England.
But the powers and functions of the President of the USA are very
different from the powers of the President of India. Similarly, the
powers of the Queen of England are different from the powers of the
King of Bhutan. Both India and France have prime ministers, but
their roles are different from each other. Why is this so?
Activity
Procure a photograph of the SAARC summit
meeting or the meeting of G-7 countries and list
those who attended the meeting. Can you imagine
why those people and not some others are attending
the meeting?

80

To answer this question we will briefly outline the nature of
executive existing in some of these countries. The USA has a
presidential system and executive powers are in the hands of the
president. Canada has a parliamentary democracy with a
constitutional monarchy where Queen Elizabeth II is the formal chief
of state and the prime minister is the head of government. In France,
both the president and the prime minister are a part of the semipresidential system. The president appoints the prime minister as
well as the ministers but cannot dismiss them as they are responsible
to the parliament. Japan has a parliamentary system with the
Emperor as the head of the state and the prime minister as the head
of government. Italy has a parliamentary system with the president
as the formal head of state and the prime minister as the head of
government. Russia has a semi-presidential system where president
is the head of state and prime minister, who is appointed by the
president, is the head of government. Germany has a parliamentary
system in which president is the ceremonial head of state and the
chancellor is the head of government.
In a presidential system, the president is the Head of state as well
as head of government. In this system the office of president is very
powerful, both in theory and practice. Countries with such a system
include the United States, Brazil and most nations in Latin America.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

81

Rationalised 2023-24

Indian Constitution at Work

Semi-Presidential Executive in Sri Lanka
In 1978 the constitution of Sri Lanka was amended and the system of
Executive Presidency was introduced. Under the system of Executive
Presidency, people directly elect the President. It may happen that both
the President and the Prime Minister belong to the same political party
or to different political parties.
The President has vast powers under the constitution. The President
chooses the Prime Minister from the party that has a majority in the
Parliament. Though ministers must be members of the Parliament, the
President has the power to remove the Prime Minister, or ministers.
Apart from being the elected Head of State and the Commander-inChief of the Armed Forces, the President is also the Head of the
Government.
Elected for a term of six years, the President cannot be removed
except by a resolution in the parliament passed by at least two-thirds
of the total number of Members of Parliament. If it is passed by not less
than one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament and the
Speaker is satisfied that such allegations merit inquiry then the Speaker
can report the matter to the Supreme Court.
How is the position of the President and Prime Minister in Sri Lanka
different from India? Compare the role of Supreme Court in the
impeachment of the President in India and Sri Lanka.

82

In a parliamentary system, the prime minister is the head of
government. Most parliamentary systems have a president or a
monarch who is the nominal Head of state. In such a system, the
role of president or monarch is primarily ceremonial and prime
minister along with the cabinet wields effective power. Countries with
such system include Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom as well
as Portugal. A semi-presidential system has both a president and a
prime minister but unlike the parliamentary system the president
may possess significant day-to-day powers. In this system, it is
possible that sometimes the president and the prime minister may
belong to the same party and at times they may belong to two different
parties and thus, would be opposed to each other. Countries with
such a system include France, Russia, Sri Lanka, etc.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

Check your progress
Neha: It is really very simple. A country having
a president has a presidential executive and
one with a prime minister has parliamentary
executive.

83

How would you explain to Neha that this is not
always the case?

PARLIAMENTARY EXECUTIVE IN INDIA
When the Constitution of India was written, India already
had some experience of running the parliamentary system
under the Acts of 1919 and 1935. This experience had
shown that in the parliamentary system, the executive
can be effectively controlled by the representatives of the
people. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted to
ensure that the government would be sensitive to public
expectations and would be responsible and accountable.
The other alternative to the parliamentary executive was
the presidential form of government. But the presidential
executive puts much emphasis on the president as the
chief executive and as source of all executive power. There
is always the danger of personality cult in presidential
executive. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted
a government that would have a strong executive branch,
but at the same time, enough safeguards should be there
to check against the personality cult. In the parliamentary
form there are many mechanisms that ensure that the
executive will be answerable to and controlled by the
legislature or people’s representatives. So the Constitution
adopted the parliamentary system of executive for the
governments both at the national and State levels.
According to this system, there is a President who is
the formal Head of the state of India and the Prime Minister

Rationalised 2023-24

Haven’t we had very strong
Prime Ministers? Does it mean
that even the parliamentary
system is not fool proof against
personality cult? That means
people and the legislatures have
to be constantly vigilant!

Indian Constitution at Work

and the Council of Ministers, which run the government at the
national level. At the State level, the executive comprises the Governor
and the Chief Minister and Council of Ministers.
The Constitution of India vests the executive power of the Union
formally in the President. In reality, the President exercises these powers
through the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The
President is elected for a period of five years. But there is no direct
election by the people for the office of President. The President is elected
indirectly. This means that the president is elected not by the ordinary
citizens but by the elected MLAs and MPs. This election takes place in
accordance with the principle of proportional representation with single
transferable vote.
The President can be removed from office only by Parliament by
following the procedure for impeachment. This procedure requires a
special majority as explained in the last chapter. The only ground
for impeachment is violation of the Constitution.
Power and position of President
Article 74 (1): There shall be a Council of
Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head
to aid and advise the President who shall
in the exercise of his functions, act in
accordance with such advice.
Provided that the President may require
the Council of Ministers to reconsider such
advice….., and the President shall act in
accordance with the advice tendered after
such reconsideration.

84

Do you know what the word shall means here? It indicates that the
advice is binding on the President. In view of the controversy about the
scope of the President’s powers, a specific mention was made in the
Constitution by an amendment that the advice of the Council of
Ministers will be binding on the President. By another amendment
made later, it was decided that the President can ask the Council of
Ministers to reconsider its advice but, has to accept the reconsidered
advice of the Council of Ministers.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

We have already seen that President is the formal head
of the government. In this formal sense, the President has
wide ranging executive, legislative, judicial and emergency
powers. In a parliamentary system, these powers are in
reality used by the President only on the advice of the
Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister and the Council
of Ministers have support of the majority in the Lok Sabha
and they are the real executive. In most of the cases, the
President has to follow the advice of the Council of
Ministers.

85

“We did not give him any real
power but we have made his
position one of authority and
dignity. The constitution wants
to create neither a real
executive
nor
a
mere
figurehead, but a head that
neither reigns nor governs; it
wants to create a great
figurehead...”

Jawaharlal Nehru
CAD, Vol. VI, p. 734

Discretionary Powers of the President
On the basis of the above discussion can we infer that the
President has no discretionary power under any
circumstances? This will be an incorrect assessment.
Constitutionally, the President has a right to be informed
of all important matters and deliberations of the Council
of Ministers. The Prime Minister is obliged to furnish all
the information that the President may call for. The
President often writes to the Prime Minister and expresses
his views on matters confronting the country.

Rationalised 2023-24

Am I just a figurehead or am I
asking real questions? Did the
textbook writers give me power
to ask questions I wish to ask
or am I asking questions they
have in their mind?

Indian Constitution at Work

It is very well to talk of the
President as He or She, but
has a woman ever become the
President?

86

Besides this, there are at least three situations where
the President can exercise the powers using his or her
own discretion. In the first place, we have already noted
that the President can send back the advice given by the
Council of Ministers and ask the Council to reconsider
the decision. In doing this, the President acts on his (or
her) own discretion. When the President thinks that the
advice has certain flaws or legal lacunae, or that it is not
in the best interests of the country, the President can ask
the Council to reconsider the decision. Although, the
Council can still send back the same advice and the
President would then be bound by that advice, such a
request by the President to reconsider the decision, would
naturally carry a lot of weight. So, this is one way in which
the president can act in his own discretion.
Secondly, the President also has veto power by which
he can withhold or refuse to give assent to Bills (other
than Money Bill) passed by the Parliament. Every bill
passed by the Parliament goes to the President for his
assent before it becomes a law. The President can send
the bill back to the Parliament asking it to reconsider the

We saw that there is no time limit on the President for
giving his assent to a bill. Do you know that such a thing
has already happened? In 1986, the Parliament passed a
bill known as Indian Post office (amendment) bill. This bill
was widely criticised by many for it sought to curtail the
freedom of the press. The then President, Gyani Zail Singh,
did not take any decision on this bill. After his term was
over, the next President, Venkataraman sent the bill finally
back to the Parliament for reconsideration. By that time,
the government that brought the bill before the Parliament
had changed and a new government was elected in 1989.
This government belonged to a different coalition and did
not bring the bill back before the Parliament. Thus, Zail
Singh’s decision to postpone giving assent to the bill
effectively meant that the bill could never become a law!

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

bill. This ‘veto’ power is limited because, if the Parliament passes the
same bill again and sends it back to the President, then, the President
has to give assent to that bill. However, there is no mention in the
Constitution about the time limit within which the President must
send the bill back for reconsideration. This means that the President
can just keep the bill pending with him without any time limit. This
gives the President an informal power to use the veto in a very effective
manner. This is sometimes referred to as ‘pocket veto’.
Then, the third kind of discretion arises more out of political
circumstances. Formally, the President appoints the Prime Minister.
Normally, in the parliamentary system, a leader who has the support
of the majority in the Lok Sabha would be appointed as Prime
Minister and the question of discretion would not arise. But imagine
a situation when after an election, no leader has a clear majority in
the Lok Sabha. Imagine further that after attempts to forge alliances,
two or three leaders are claiming that they have the support of the
majority in the house. Now, the President has to decide whom to
appoint as the Prime Minister. In such a situation, the President has
to use his own discretion in judging who really may have the support
of the majority or who can actually form and run the government.
Since 1989 major political changes have considerably increased
the importance of the presidential office. In the four parliamentary
elections held from 1989 to 1998, no single party or coalition attained

President’s role in choosing the Prime Minister
After 1977, party politics in India became more competitive
and there have been many instances when no party had
clear majority in the Lok Sabha. What does the President do
in such situations? No political party or coalition secured
majority in the elections held in March 1998. The BJP and
its allies secured 251 seats, 21 short of a majority. President
Narayanan adopted an elaborate procedure. He asked the
leader of the alliance, Atal Behari Vajpayee, “to furnish
documents in support of his claim from concerned political
parties.” Not stopping at this the President also advised
Vajpayee to secure a vote of confidence within ten days of
being sworn in.

Rationalised 2023-24

87

Indian Constitution at Work

a majority in the Lok Sabha. These situations demanded presidential
intervention either in order to constitute governments or to grant a
request for dissolution of Lok Sabha by a Prime Minister who could
not prove majority in the House. It may thus be said that presidential
discretion is related to political conditions. There is greater scope for
presidential assertiveness when governments are not stable and
coalitions occupy power.
For the most part, the President is a formal power holder and a
ceremonial head of the nation. You may wonder why then do we
need a President? In a parliamentary system, the Council of Ministers
is dependent on the support of the majority in the legislature. This
also means that the Council of Ministers may be removed at any
time and a new Council of Ministers will have to be put in place.
Such a situation requires a Head of the state who has a fixed term,
who may be empowered to appoint the Prime Minister and who may
symbolically represent the entire country. This is exactly the role of
the President in ordinary circumstances. Besides, when no party
has a clear majority, the President has the additional responsibility
of making a choice and appointing the Prime Minister to run the
government of the country.

88

The Vice President of India
The Vice President is elected for five years. His election
method is similar to that of the President, the only
difference is that members of State legislatures are
not part of the electoral college. The Vice President
may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
Rajya Sabha passed by a majority and agreed to by
the Lok Sabha. The Vice President acts as the exofficio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and takes over
the office of the President when there is a vacancy by
reasons of death, resignation, removal by
impeachment or otherwise. The Vice President acts
as the President only until a new President is elected.
B. D. Jatti acted as President on the death of
Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed until a new President was
elected.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

Check your progress
Imagine that the Prime Minister wants to impose
‘President’s rule’ in one State because the State
government has failed to effectively curb atrocities
against the Dalits in that State. The President has a
different position. He is saying that the provision
regarding President’s rule should be used only
sparingly. In this situation which of the following courses
are open to the President?
a. Tell the Prime Minister that he will not sign on
the order promulgating President’s rule.
b. Dismiss the Prime Minister.
c. Ask the Prime Minister to send CRPF to that State.
d. Make a press statement about how the Prime
Minister is wrong.
e. Discuss the matter with the Prime Minister and
try to dissuade him from taking this action, but
if he insists, agreeing to sign the said order.

Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.

PRIME MINISTER AND COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
READ A CARTOON

22 August 1954
There is no Council of Ministers without the Prime Minister. This
cartoon shows how, literally, the Prime Minister ‘leads’ the Council
of Ministers!

Rationalised 2023-24

89

R K Laxman in The T imes of India.

Indian Constitution at Work

No discussion of government or politics in India, would normally
take place without mentioning one office: the Prime Minister of India.
Can you imagine why this is so?
We have already seen earlier in this
chapter that the President exercises his
READ A CARTOON
powers only on the advice of the Council of
Ministers. The Council of Ministers is headed
by the Prime Minister. Therefore, as head of
the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister
becomes the most important functionary of
the government in our country.
In the parliamentary form of executive,
it is essential that the Prime Minister has the
support of the majority in the Lok Sabha.
This support by the majority also makes the
Prime Minister very powerful. The moment
this support of the majority is lost, the Prime
Minister loses the office. For many years after
independence, the Congress party had the
majority in the Lok Sabha and its leader
would become the Prime Minister. Since
1989, there have been many occasions when
no party had majority in the Lok Sabha.
Why do people want to be
Various political parties have come together
ministers? This cartoon seems to
and formed a coalition that has majority in
suggest that it is only for perks
the House. In such situations, a leader who
and status! Then why is there
is acceptable to most partners of the
competition for some portfolios?
coalition becomes the Prime Minister.
Formally, a leader who has the support of
the majority is appointed by the President as Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister then decides who will be the ministers in the
Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister allocates ranks and
portfolios to the ministers. Depending upon the seniority and political
importance, the ministers are given the ranks of cabinet minister,
minister of State or deputy minister. In the same manner, Chief
90
Ministers of the States choose ministers from their own party or
coalition. The Prime Minister and all the ministers have to be members
of the Parliament. If someone becomes a minister or Prime Minister

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

without being an MP, such a person has to get elected to the
Parliament within six months.
There were some members in the Constituent Assembly
who felt that ministers should be elected by the legislature
and not selected by the Prime Minister or Chief Minister:
“Swiss system under which the legislature elects the
executive for a certain period …is to my mind the best
form of government for the provinces… The system of the
single transferable vote is ...the best system that can be
adopted for the appointment of the executive because in
that all interests will be represented and no party in the
legislature will have any occasion to feel that it is not
represented.”
Begum Aizaz Rasul, CAD, Vol. IV, p. 631, 17 July 1947

Size of the Council of Ministers
Before the 91st Amendment Act (2003), the size of the Council
of Ministers was determined according to exigencies of time and
requirements of the situation. But this led to very large size of
the Council of Ministers. Besides, when no party had a clear
majority, there was a temptation to win over the support of the
members of the Parliament by giving them ministerial positions
as there was no restriction on the number of the members of
the Council of Ministers. This was happening in many States
also. Therefore, an amendment was made that the Council of
Ministers shall not exceed 15 percent of total number of members
of the House of the People (or Assembly, in the case of the States).

In the chapter on the legislature, you will study in detail the
various mechanisms through which the Parliament controls the
executive. But remember that the most important feature of
parliamentary executive is that the executive is routinely under the
control and supervision of the legislature.
The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok
Sabha. This provision means that a Ministry which loses confidence

Rationalised 2023-24

91

Indian Constitution at Work

Is it that a person becomes Prime
Minister because he/she is
powerful or is it that you
become powerful once you have
become the Prime Minister?

92

of the Lok Sabha is obliged to resign. The principle
indicates that the ministry is an executive committee of
the Parliament and it collectively governs on behalf of the
Parliament. Collective responsibility is based on the
principle of the solidarity of the cabinet. It implies that a
vote of no confidence even against a single minister leads
to the resignation of the entire Council of Ministers. It also
indicates that if a minister does not agree with a policy or
decision of the cabinet, he or she must either accept the
decision or resign. It is binding on all ministers to pursue
or agree to a policy for which there is collective
responsibility.
In India, the Prime Minister enjoys a pre-eminent place
in the government. The Council of Ministers cannot exist
without the Prime Minister. The Council comes into
existence only after the Prime Minister has taken the oath
of office. The death or resignation of the Prime Minister
automatically brings about the dissolution of the Council
of Ministers but the demise, dismissal or resignation of a
minister only creates a ministerial vacancy. The Prime
Minister acts as a link between the Council of Ministers
on the one hand and the President as well as the Parliament
on the other. It is this role of the Prime Minister which led
Pt. Nehru to describe him as ‘the linchpin of Government’.
It is also the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister
to communicate to the President all decisions of the
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the
affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation. The Prime
Minister is involved in all crucial decisions of the
government and decides on the policies of the government.
Thus, the power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from
various sources: control over the Council of Ministers,
leadership of the Lok Sabha, command over the
bureaucratic machine, access to media, projection of
personalities during elections, projection as national
leader during international summitry as well as foreign
visits.

Rationalised 2023-24

However, the power which the Prime Minister wields and actually
93
puts into use depends upon the prevailing political conditions. The
position of the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers has been
unassailable whenever a single political party has secured majority
in the Lok Sabha. However, this has not
been the case when governments have been
READ A CARTOON
led by coalitions of political parties. Since
1989, we have witnessed many coalition
governments in India. Many of these
governments could not remain in power for
the full term of the Lok Sabha. They were
either removed or they resigned due to loss
of support of the majority. These
developments have affected the working of
the parliamentary executive.
In the first place, these developments
have resulted in a growing discretionary role
of the President in the selection of Prime
Ministers. Secondly, the coalitional nature
of Indian politics in this period has
necessitated much more consultation
between political partners, leading to
erosion of prime ministerial authority.
Thirdly, it has also brought restrictions on
This Chief Minster is not happy
various prerogatives of the Prime Minister
even after winning the
like choosing the ministers and deciding
confidence motion! Can you
their ranks and portfolios. Fourthly, even
imagine why this is so?
the policies and programmes of the
government cannot be decided by the Prime
Minister alone. Political parties of different ideologies come together
both as pre-poll and post-poll allies to form a government. Policies
are framed after a lot of negotiations and compromises among the
allies. In this entire process, the Prime Minister has to act more as a
negotiator than as leader of the government.
At the State level, a similar parliamentary executive exists, though
with some variations. The most important variation is that there is a
Governor of the State appointed by the President (on the advice of

Rationalised 2023-24

R K Laxman in The T imes of India.

Chapter 4: Executive

Indian Constitution at Work

the central government). Though the Chief Minister, like the Prime
Minister is the leader of the majority party in the Assembly, the
Governor has more discretionary powers. However, the main
principles of parliamentary system operate at the State level too.

Check your progress
Suppose the Prime Minister is to select the Council of
Ministers. What will he/she do?
a. Select those who are experts in the various
subjects.
b. Select only those who are from his/her party.
c. Select those who are personally loyal and
dependable.
d. Select those who are supporters of the
government.
e. Take into account the political weight of the
various aspirants and choose from among them.

PERMANENT EXECUTIVE: BUREAUCRACY

94

Who implements the decisions of the ministers?
The Executive organ of the government includes the Prime
Minister, the ministers and a large organisation called the
bureaucracy or the administrative machinery. To underline the
difference between this machinery and the military service, it is
described as civil service. Trained and skilled officers who work as
permanent employees of the government are assigned the task of
assisting the ministers in formulating policies and implementing these
policies.
In a democracy, the elected representatives and the ministers are
in charge of government and the administration is under their control
and supervision. In the parliamentary system, the legislature also
exercises control over the administration. The administrative officers
cannot act in violation of the policies adopted by the legislature. It is
the responsibility of the ministers to retain political control over the
administration. India has established professional administrative

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

machinery. At the same time, this machinery is made
politically accountable. The bureaucracy is also expected
to be politically neutral. This means that the bureaucracy
will not take any political position on policy matters. In a
democracy, it is always possible that a party is defeated
in elections and the new government wants to opt for new
policies in the place of policies of the previous government.
In such a situation, it is the responsibility of the
administrative machinery to faithfully and efficiently
participate in drafting the policy and in its
implementation.
The Indian bureaucracy today is an enormously
complex system. It consists of the All-India services, State
services, employees of the local governments, and
technical and managerial staff running public sector
undertakings. Makers of our Constitution were aware of
the importance of the non-partisan and professional
bureaucracy. They also wanted the members of the civil
services or bureaucracy to be impartially selected on the
basis of merit. So, the Union Public Service Commission
has been entrusted with the task of conducting the process
of recruitment of the civil servants for the government of
India. Similar public service commissions are provided for
the States also. Members of the Public Service Commissions
are appointed for a fixed term. Their removal or suspension
is subject to a thorough enquiry made by a judge of the
Supreme Court.
While efficiency and merit are the norms for recruitment,
the Constitution also ensures that all sections of the society
including the weaker sections have an opportunity to be
part of the public bureaucracy. For this purpose, the
Constitution has provided for reservation of jobs for the
Dalits and Adivasis. Subsequently, reservations have also
been provided for women and other backward classes.
These provisions ensure that the bureaucracy would be
more representative and social inequalities will not come
in the way of recruitment to the civil service.

Rationalised 2023-24

95

Yes, I know that the officers
are there to serve the people.
But people are always afraid of
these officers. And officers also
behave as if they were the
masters!

Indian Constitution at Work

96

Persons selected by the UPSC for Indian Administrative Service
and Indian Police Service constitute the backbone of the higher level
bureaucracy in the States. You may know that the collector of a district
is the most important officer of the government at the district level.
Do you know that the collector is normally an IAS officer and that
the officer is governed by the service conditions laid down by the
central government? An IAS or IPS officer is assigned to a particular
State, where he or she works under the supervision of the State
government. However, the IAS or IPS officers are appointed by the
central government, they can go back into the service of the central
government and most importantly, only the central government can
take disciplinary action against them. This means that the key
administrative officers of the States are under the supervision and
control of the central government. Apart from the IAS and the IPS
officers appointed by the UPSC, the administration of the State is
looked after by officers appointed through the State Public Service
Commissions. As we shall study later in the chapter on federalism,
this feature of the bureaucracy strengthens the control of the central
government over the administration of the States.
The bureaucracy is an instrument through which welfare policies
of the government must reach the people. But most often, it is so
powerful that people are afraid of approaching a government officer.
It is a common experience of the people that bureaucracy is
insensitive to the demands and expectations of the ordinary citizen.
Only if the democratically elected government controls the
bureaucracy, some of these problems can be effectively handled. On
the other hand, too much political interference turns the bureaucracy
into an instrument in the hands of the politician. Though the
Constitution has created independent machinery for recruitment,
many people think that there is no provision for protecting the civil

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

servants from political interference in the performance of their duties.
It is also felt that enough provisions are not there to ensure the
accountability of the bureaucracy to the citizen. There is an
expectation that measures like the Right to Information may make
the bureaucracy a little more responsive and accountable.
Conclusion
The modern executive is a very powerful institution of
government. The executive enjoys greater powers compared to
other organs of the government. This generates a greater need
to have democratic control over the executive. The makers of
our Constitution thought with foresight that the executive must
be put firmly under regular supervision and control. Thus, a
parliamentary executive was chosen. Periodic elections,
constitutional limits over the exercise of powers and democratic
politics have ensured that executive organ cannot become
unresponsive.

Exercises
1. A parliamentary executive means:
a. Executive where there is a parliament
b. Executive elected by the parliament
c. Where the parliament functions as the Executive
d. Executive that is dependent on support of the majority in the
parliament
2. Read this dialogue. Which argument do you agree with? Why?
Amit: Looking at the constitutional provisions, it seems that the
President is only a rubber stamp.
Shama: The President appoints the Prime Minister. So, he must
have the powers to remove the Prime Minister as well.
Rajesh: We don’t need a President. After the election, the
Parliament can meet and elect a leader to be the Prime Minister.

Rationalised 2023-24

97

Indian Constitution at Work

3. Match the following
i. Works within the particular State in
which recruited

a. Indian Foreign
Service

ii. Works in any central government
office located either at the national
capital or elsewhere in the country

b. State Civil
Services

iii. Works in a particular State to which
allotted; can also be sent on
deputation to the centre

c. All India Services

iv. Works in Indian missions abroad

d. Central Services

4. Identify the ministry which may have released the following news
items. Would this be a ministry of the central government or the
State government? Why?
a. An official release said that in 2004-05 the Tamil Nadu
Textbooks Corporation would release new versions for
standards VII, X and XI.
b. A new railway loop line bypassing the crowded TiruvallurChennai section to help iron ore exporters. The new line, likely
to be about 80 km long, will branch off at Puttur and then
reach Athipattu near the port.
c. The three-member sub-divisional committee formed to verify
suicide by farmers in Ramayampet mandal has found that
the two farmers who committed suicide this month have had
economic problems due to failure of crops.

98

5. While appointing the Prime Minister, the President selects
a. Leader of the largest party in the Lok Sabha
b. Leader of the largest party in the alliance which secures a
majority in the Lok Sabha
c. The leader of the largest party in the Rajya Sabha
d. Leader of the alliance or party that has the support of the
majority in Lok Sabha

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 4: Executive

6. Read this discussion and say which of these statements applies
most to India.
Alok: Prime Minister is like a king, he decides everything in our
country.
Shekhar: Prime Minister is only ‘first among equals’, he does not
have any special powers. All ministers and the PM have similar
powers.
Bobby: Prime Minister has to consider the expectations of the
party members and other supporters of the government. But after
all, the Prime Minister has a greater say in policy making and in
choosing the ministers.
7. Why do you think is the advice of the Council of Ministers binding
on the President? Give your answer in not more than 100 words.
8. The parliamentary system of executive vests many powers in the
legislature for controlling the executive. Why, do you think, is it
so necessary to control the executive?
9. It is said that there is too much political interference in the working
of the administrative machinery. It is suggested that there should
be more and more autonomous agencies which do not have to
answer to the ministers.
a. Do you think this will make administration more peoplefriendly?
b. Do you think this will make administration more efficient?
c. Does democracy mean full control of elected representatives
over the administration?
10. Write an essay of two hundred words on the proposal to have an
elected administration instead of an appointed administration.

Rationalised 2023-24

99

Indian Constitution at Work

Chapter Five

LEGISLATURE

INTRODUCTION

100

You have already studied the importance of elections and the method of election
adopted in India. Legislatures are elected by the people and work on behalf of
the people. In this chapter you would study how elected legislatures function
and help in maintaining democratic government. You will also learn about the
composition and functioning of the parliament and State legislatures in India
and their importance in democratic government. After reading this chapter you
would know
±
the importance of the legislature;
±
the functions and powers of the Parliament of India;
±
the law making procedure;
±
how the Parliament controls the executive; and
±
how the Parliament regulates itself.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

WHY DO WE NEED A PARLIAMENT?
Legislature is not merely a law making body. Lawmaking is but one
of the functions of the legislature. It is the centre of all democratic
political process. It is packed with action; walkouts, protests,
demonstration, unanimity, concern and co-operation. All these serve
very vital purposes. Indeed, a genuine democracy is inconceivable
without a representative, efficient and effective legislature. The
legislature also helps people in holding the representatives
accountable. This is indeed, the very basis of representative
democracy.
Yet, in most democracies, legislatures are losing central place to
the executive. In India too, the Cabinet initiates policies, sets the
agenda for governance and carries them through. This has led some
critics to remark that the Parliament has declined. But even very
strong cabinets must retain majority in the legislature. A strong leader
has to face the Parliament and answer to the satisfaction of the
Parliament. Herein lies the democratic potential of the Parliament. It
is recognised as one of the most democratic and open forum of debate.
On account of its composition, it is the most representative of all
organs of government. It is above all, vested with the power to choose
and dismiss the government.

Activity
Consider these newspaper reports and then think:
what would happen if there were no legislatures?
After reading each news report, state how the
legislature succeeded or failed in maintaining
control over the executive.
l
28 th February 2002: The Union Finance
Minister, Jaswant Singh, announced in the
Union budget proposal an increase of Rs. 12
in the price of a 50 kg bag of urea and a smaller
increase in the price of two other fertilizers which
constituted about 5 per cent rise in prices. The
current urea price of Rs. 4,830 a tonne carries
a subsidy of as much as 80 per cent.

Rationalised 2023-24

101

Indian Constitution at Work
l

l

l

l

11 March 2002. The Finance Minister had to
roll back the increases in fertilizer prices
under intense opposition pressure (The Hindu,
12 March 2002)
On 4 June 1998, the Lok Sabha witnessed
acrimonious scenes over the hike in urea and
petroleum process. The entire opposition
staged a walkout. The issue rocked the house
for two days leading to walkout by opposition.
The finance minister in his budget proposal had
proposed a hike of 50 paisa per kilogram of
urea to reduce subsidy on it. This forced the
finance minister Mr. Yashwant Sinha to roll
back the hike in urea prices ( Hindustan Times,
4 and 5 June 1998)
22 February 1983: In a rare move, the Lok
Sabha today unanimously decided to suspend
official business and give precedence to debate
on Assam. Home Minister P.C.Sethi made a
statement “I seek the cooperation of all members
whatever their views and policies, in promoting
harmony among different communities and
groups living in Assam. What is needed now is
not acrimony but a healing touch.” (Hindustan
Times, 22 February 1983)
Congress Members voiced protest against
atrocities on Harijans in Andhra Pradesh (The
Hindu, 3 March 1985)

WHY DO WE NEED TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT?

102

The term ‘Parliament’ refers to the national legislature. The legislature
of the States is described as State legislature. The Parliament in India
has two houses. When there are two houses of the legislature, it is
called a bicameral legislature. The two Houses of the Indian
Parliament are the Council of States or the Rajya Sabha and the
House of the People or the Lok Sabha. The Constitution has given
the States the option of establishing either a unicameral or bicameral
legislature. At present only six States have a bicameral legislature.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

103

States having a bicameral legislature are given below:
(i) Andhra Pradesh
(ii) Bihar
(iii) Karnataka
(iv) Maharashtra
(v) Telangana
(vi) Uttar Pradesh

Rationalised 2023-24

Indian Constitution at Work

Countries with large size and much diversity usually prefer to
have two houses of the national legislature to give representation to
all sections in the society and to give representation to all geographical
regions or parts of the country. A bicameral legislature has one more
advantage. A bicameral legislature makes it possible to have every
decision reconsidered. Every decision taken by one house goes to
the other house for its decision. This means that every bill and policy
would be discussed twice. This ensures a double check on every
matter. Even if one house takes a decision in haste, that decision will
come for discussion in the other house and reconsideration will be
possible.

“...an Upper House could perform
the...useful function of being a
revising body, and ...its views may
count but not its votes... ...,those
who could not enter into the rough
and tumble of active politics
could...advise the Lower House.”
Purnima Banerji
CAD, Vol. IX, p. 33, 30 July 1949

104

Rajya Sabha
Each of the two Houses of Parliament has different bases of
representation. The Rajya Sabha represents the States of India. It is
an indirectly elected body. Residents of the State elect members to
State Legislative Assembly. The elected members of State Legislative
Assembly in turn elect the members of the Rajya Sabha.
We can imagine two different principles of representation in the
second chamber. One way is to give equal representation to all the
parts of the country irrespective of their size or population. We may
call this as symmetrical representation. On the other hand, parts of
the country may be given representation according to their

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

population. This second method means
that regions or parts having larger
population would have more
representatives in the second chamber
than regions having less population.
In the USA, every state has equal
representation in the Senate. This
ensures equality of all the states. But
this also means that a small state would
have the same representation as the
larger states. The system of
representation adopted for the Rajya
Sabha is different from that in the USA.
The number of members to be elected
from each State has been fixed by the
fourth schedule of the Constitution.
What would happen if we were to
follow the American system of equality
of representation in the Rajya Sabha?
Uttar Pradesh with a population of
1998.12 lakhs would get seats equal
to that of Sikkim whose population is
only 6.10 lakhs. The framers of the
Constitution wanted to prevent such
discrepancy. States with larger
population get more representatives
than States with smaller population get.
Thus, a more populous State like Uttar
Pradesh sends 31 members to the
Rajya Sabha, while a smaller and less
populous State like Sikkim has one seat
in the Rajya Sabha.
Members of the Rajya Sabha are
elected for a term of six years. They can
get re-elected. All members of the Rajya
Sabha do not complete their terms at
the same time. Every two years, one
third members of the Rajya Sabha

Bicameralism in Germany
Germany has a bicameral
legislature. The two Houses
are
known
as
Federal
Assembly (Bundestag) and
Federal Council (Bundesrat).
Assembly is elected by a
complex system combining
direct and proportional
representation for a period of
four years.
The 16 federal states of
Germany are represented in
the Federal Council. The 69
seats of the Bundesrat are
divided among states on the
basis of a range of populations.
These members are generally
the
ministers
in
the
governments at the state level
and are appointed, not elected,
by the governments of the
federal states. According to the
German law, all the members
from one state have to vote as
a bloc as per the instructions
of the state governments.
Sometimes due to coalition
government at the state level,
they fail to reach an agreement
and may have to abstain.
The Bundesrat does not
vote on all legislative initiatives
but all the policy areas on
which the federal states have
concurrent powers and are
responsible
for
federal
regulations must be passed by
it. It can also veto such
legislation.

Rationalised 2023-24

105

Indian Constitution at Work

complete their term and elections are held for those one
third seats only. Thus, the Rajya Sabha is never fully
dissolved. Therefore, it is called the permanent House of
the Parliament. The advantage of this arrangement is that
even when the Lok Sabha is dissolved and elections are
yet to take place, the meeting of the Rajya Sabha can be
called and urgent business can be conducted.
Apart from the elected members, Rajya Sabha also
has twelve nominated members. The President nominates
these members. These nominations are made from among
those persons who have made their mark in the fields of
literature, science, art and social service.

Activity
Find out the number of representatives elected from
different States. Prepare a chart showing number of
representatives and the population of the State
according to the 2011 census.

I don’t understand why there
is a provision for nominating
these sportspersons and artists
and scientists. Whom do they
represent? And, do they really
contribute much to the
proceedings of the Rajya Sabha?

106

Lok Sabha
The Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies are
directly elected by the people. For the purpose of election,
the entire country (State, in case of State Legislative
Assembly) is divided into territorial constituencies of
roughly equal population. One representative is elected
from each constituency through universal adult suffrage
where the value of vote of every individual would be equal
to another. At present there are 543 constituencies. This
number has not changed since 1971 census.
The Lok Sabha is elected for a period of five years.
This is the maximum. We have seen in the chapter on the
executive that before the completion of five years, the Lok
Sabha can be dissolved if no party or coalition can form
the government or if the Prime Minister advises the
President to dissolve the Lok Sabha and hold fresh
elections.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

Check your progress
± Do you think that composition of Rajya Sabha
has protected the position of States of India?
± Should indirect election of Rajya Sabha be
replaced by direct elections? What would be
its advantages and disadvantages?
± Since 1971 census the number of seats in the
Lok Sabha has not increased. Do you think that
it should be increased? What should be the
basis for this?

WHAT DOES THE PARLIAMENT DO?
What is the function of the legislature? Do both Houses of the
Parliament have similar functions? Is there a difference in the powers
of the two Houses?
Apart from law making, the Parliament is engaged in many other
functions. Let us list the functions of the Parliament:
± Legislative Function: The Parliament enacts legislations for the
country. Despite being the chief law making body, the Parliament
often merely approves legislations. The actual task of drafting
the bill is performed by the bureaucracy under the supervision
of the minister concerned. The substance and even the timing of
the bill are decided by the Cabinet. No major bill is introduced in
the Parliament without the approval of the Cabinet. Members
other than ministers can also introduce bills but these have no
chance of being passed without the support of the government.
± Control of Executive and ensuring its accountability: Perhaps
the most vital function of the Parliament is to ensure that the
executive does not overstep its authority and remains responsible
to the people who have elected them. We shall discuss this function
in greater detail later in this chapter.
± Financial Function: Government is about spending a lot of money
on various matters. Where does this money come from? Every

Rationalised 2023-24

107

Indian Constitution at Work

Shankar. Copyright: Children’s Book Trust.

government raises resources through taxation. However, in a
democracy, legislature controls taxation and the way in which
money is used by the government. If the Government of India
proposes to introduce any new tax, it has to get the approval of
the Lok Sabha. The financial powers of the Parliament involve
grant of resources to the government to implement its
programmes. The government has to give an account to the
legislature about the money it has spent and resources that it
wishes to raise. The legislature also ensures that the government
does not misspend or overspend. This is done through the budget
and annual financial statements.

READ A CARTOON

3 April 1955
The Parliament is the boss and the ministers are looking very
humble here. That is the effect of the Parliament’s power to
sanction money to different ministries.

Representation: Parliament represents the divergent views of
members from different regional, social, economic, religious
groups of different parts of the country.
± Debating Function: The Parliament is the highest forum of debate
in the country. There is no limitation on its power of discussion.
Members are free to speak on any matter without fear. This makes
it possible for the Parliament to analyse any or every issue that
faces the nation. These discussions constitute the heart of
democratic decision making.
±

108

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

Constituent Function: The Parliament has the power of discussing
and enacting changes to the Constitution. The constituent powers
of both the houses are similar. All constitutional amendments
have to be approved by a special majority of both Houses.
± Electoral functions: The Parliament also performs some electoral
functions. It elects the President and Vice President of India.
± Judicial functions: The judicial functions of the Parliament
include considering the proposals for removal of President,
Vice-President and Judges of High Courts and Supreme Court.
±

Powers of Rajya Sabha
We discussed above, the functions that are performed by the
Parliament in general. However, in a bicameral legislature, there is
some difference between the powers of the two Houses. Look at the
charts showing the powers of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
Powers of the Lok Sabha

Powers of Rajya Sabha

±

±

Considers and approves
non money bills and
suggests amendments to
money bills.

±

Approves constitutional
amendments.

±

Exercises control over
executive by asking
questions, introducing
motions and resolutions.

±

Participates in the election
and removal of the
President, Vice President,
Judges of Supreme Court
and High Court.It can
alone initiate the
procedure for removal of
Vice President.

±

Can give the Union
parliament power to make
laws on matters included
in the State list.

±

±

±
±
±

±

Makes Laws on matters
included in Union List and
Concurrent List. Can
introduce and enact money
and non money bills.
Approves proposals for
taxation, budgets and
annual financial statements.
Controls the executive by
asking questions,
supplementary questions,
resolutions and motions and
through no confidence motion.
Amends the Constitution.
Approves the Proclamation of
emergency.
Elects the President and Vice
President and removes
Judges of Supreme Court and
High Court.
Establishes committees and
commissions and considers
their reports.

Rationalised 2023-24

109

Indian Constitution at Work

So, the Lok Sabha controls the
purse! Then it must be the more
powerful House.

110

Special Powers of Rajya Sabha
As you know, the Rajya Sabha is an institutional
mechanism to provide representation to the States. Its
purpose is to protect the powers of the States. Therefore,
any matter that affects the States must be referred to it for
its consent and approval. Thus, if the Union Parliament
wishes to remove a matter from the State list (over which
only the State Legislature can make law) to either the Union
List or Concurrent List in the interest of the nation, the
approval of the Rajya Sabha is necessary. This provision
adds to the strength of the Rajya Sabha. However,
experience shows that the members of the Rajya Sabha
represent their parties more than they represent their
States.
Powers exercised only by the Lok Sabha: Then, there
are powers that only the Lok Sabha exercises. The Rajya
Sabha cannot initiate, reject or amend money bills. The
Council of Ministers is responsible to the Lok Sabha and
not Rajya Sabha. Therefore, Rajya Sabha can criticise the
government but cannot remove it.
Can you explain why? The Rajya Sabha is elected by
the MLAs and not directly by the people. Therefore, the
Constitution stopped short of giving certain powers to the
Rajya Sabha. In a democratic form as adopted by our
Constitution, the people are the final authority. By this
logic, the representatives, directly elected by the people,
should have the crucial powers of removing a government
and controlling the finances.
In all other spheres, including passing of non-money
bills, constitutional amendments, and impeaching the
President and removing the Vice President the powers of
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha are co-equal.

HOW DOES THE PARLIAMENT MAKE LAWS?
The basic function of any legislature is to make laws for
its people. A definite procedure is followed in the process
of making law. Some of the procedures of law making are

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

mentioned in the Constitution, while some have evolved from
conventions. Follow a bill through the legislative process and
you will clearly see that the law making process is technical and
even tedious.

Peoples' inputs

Bill Sent to
Committee or
discussed in
the House itself.

Committee
gives
report

House may
or may not
accept the
report

Bill

Introduction
in either
House in
case of
non-money
bill

Bill
becomes
Law

Detailed
discussion
of bill in
House
Bill is accepted
or rejected
Sent to the
Other House

President
approves or
sends
back for
reconsideration

Other House
approves or gives
recommendations
Joint Session of
Parliament
(if required)

Rationalised 2023-24

111

Indian Constitution at Work

A bill is a draft of the proposed law. There can be different types of
bills. When a non-minister proposes a bill, it is called private member’s
Bill. A bill proposed by a minister is described as Government Bill. Let
us now see the different stages in the life of a bill.

Types of Bills

Government Bill

Private Member’s
Bill

Non-Money
Bill

Money Bill

Ordinary Bill

112

Constitution
Amendment Bill

Even before a bill is introduced in the Parliament there may be a
lot of debate on the need for introducing such a bill. A political party
may pressurise the government to initiate a bill in order to fulfil its
election promises or to improve its chances of winning forthcoming
elections. Interest groups, media and citizens’ forums may also
persuade the government for a particular legislation. Law making is
thus not merely a legal procedure but also a political course of action.
The preparation of a bill itself involves many considerations such as
resources required to implement the law, the support or opposition
that the bill is likely to produce, the impact that the law may have on

Rationalised 2023-24

the electoral prospect of the ruling party etc. In the era of coalition
113
politics especially, a bill proposed by the government has to be
acceptable to all the partners of the coalition. Such practical
considerations can hardly be ignored. The Cabinet considers all these
before arriving at a decision to enact a law.
Once the Cabinet approves the policy behind the legislation, the
task of drafting the legislation begins. The draft of any bill is prepared
by the concerned ministry. For instance a bill raising the marriageable
age of girls from 18 to 21 will be prepared by the law ministry. The
ministry of women and child welfare may also be involved in it.
Within the Parliament, a bill may be introduced in the Lok Sabha or
Rajya Sabha by a member of the House (but often a minister
responsible for the subject introduces the bill). A money bill can be
introduced only in Lok Sabha. Once passed there, it is sent to the
Rajya Sabha.
A large part of the discussion on the bills takes place in the
committees. The recommendation of the committee is then sent to the
House. That is why committees are referred to as
miniature legislatures. This is the second stage in
the law making process. In the third and final stage,
READ A CARTOON
the bill is voted upon. If a non-money bill is passed
by one House, it is sent to the other House where it
goes through exactly the same procedure.
As you know, a bill has to be passed by both
Houses for enactment. If there is disagreement
between the two Houses on the proposed bill,
attempt is made to resolve it through Joint Session
of Parliament. In the few instances when joint
sessions of the parliament were called to resolve a
deadlock, the decision has always gone in favour of
the Lok Sabha.
If it is a money bill, the Rajya Sabha can either
approve the bill or suggest changes but cannot reject
it. If it takes no action within 14 days the bill is
deemed to have been passed. Amendments to the
Is this how they follow
bill, suggested by Rajya Sabha, may or may not be
the ‘rules of the game’?
accepted by the Lok Sabha.

Rationalised 2023-24

R K Laxman in The T imes of India.

Chapter 5: Legislature

Indian Constitution at Work

Article 109
Special procedure in respect of
Money Bills.—(1)
A Money Bill shall not be
introduced in the Council of
States

When a bill is passed by both Houses, it is sent to the President for
his assent. The assent of the President results in the enactment of a
bill into a law.
Check your progress
± From the discussion of the law making
process, do you think that Parliament can
devote enough time for thorough
discussion of the bills? If not, then what
remedies would you suggest to overcome
this difficulty?

HOW DOES THE PARLIAMENT CONTROL THE EXECUTIVE?

114

In a parliamentary democracy, the executive is drawn from the party
or a coalition of parties that has a majority in Lok Sabha. It is not
difficult for the executive to exercise unlimited and arbitrary powers
with the support of the majority party. In such a situation,
parliamentary democracy may slip into Cabinet dictatorship, where
the Cabinet leads and the House merely follows. Only if the Parliament
is active and vigilant, can it keep regular and effective check on the
executive. There are many ways in which the Parliament can control
the executive. But basic to them all is the power and freedom of the
legislators as people’s representatives to work effectively and
fearlessly. For instance, no action can be taken against a member for

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

whatever the member may have said in the legislature.
This is known as parliamentary privilege. The presiding
officer of the legislature has the final powers in deciding
matters of breach of privilege.
The main purpose of such privileges is to enable the
members of the legislature to represent the people and
exercise effective control over the executive. How does the
Parliament exercise such control? What are the means
available at its disposal? Is parliamentary control
successful in curbing executive excesses?
Instruments of Parliamentary Control
The legislature in parliamentary system ensures executive
accountability at various stages: policy making,
implementation of law or policy and during and postimplementation stage. The legislature does this through
the use of a variety of devices:
± Deliberation and discussion
± Approval or Refusal of laws
± Financial control
± No confidence motion
Deliberation and discussion: During the law making
process, members of the legislature get an opportunity to
deliberate on the policy direction of the executive and the
ways in which policies are implemented. Apart from
deliberating on bills, control may also be exercised during
the general discussions in the House. The Question Hour,
which is held every day during the sessions of Parliament,
where Ministers have to respond to searching questions
raised by the members; Zero Hour where members are
free to raise any matter that they think is important
(though the ministers are not bound to reply),
half -an -hour discussion on matters of public importance,
adjournment motion, etc., are some instruments of
exercising control.
Perhaps the question hour is the most effective method
of keeping vigil on the executive and the administrative
agencies of the government. Members of Parliament have

Rationalised 2023-24

115

With so many sting operations
are MPs still free to speak
anything anywhere?

Indian Constitution at Work

It must be difficult to be a
minister. This is like giving an
examination almost every day!

116

shown great interest in question hour and maximum
attendance is recorded during this time. Most of the
questions aim at eliciting information from the government
on issues of public interest such as, price rise, availability
of food grains, atrocities on weaker sections of the society,
riots, black-marketing, etc. This gives the members an
opportunity to criticise the government, and represent the
problems of their constituencies. The discussions during
the question hour are so heated that it is not uncommon
to see members raise their voice, walk to the well of the
house or walk out in protest to make their point. This
results in considerable loss of legislative time. At the same
time, we must remember that many of these actions are
political techniques to gain concessions from government
and in the process force executive accountability.
Approval and ratification of laws: Parliamentary
control is also exercised through its power of ratification.
A bill can become a law only with the approval of the
Parliament. A government that has the support of a
disciplined majority may not find it difficult to get the
approval of the Legislature. Such approvals however,
cannot be taken for granted. They are the products of
intense bargaining and negotiations amongst the
members of ruling party or coalition of parties and even
government and opposition. If the government has
majority in Lok Sabha but not in the Rajya Sabha, as has
happened during the Janata Party rule in 1977 and
N.D.A. rule in 2000, the government will be forced to make
substantial concessions to gain the approval of both the
Houses. Many bills, such as the Lok Pal Bill have failed
enactment, Prevention of Terrorism bill (2002) was rejected
by the Rajya Sabha.
Financial control: As mentioned earlier, financial
resources to implement the programmes of the
government are granted through the budget. Preparation
and presentation of budget for the approval of the
legislature is constitutional obligation of the government.
This obligation allows the legislature to exercise control

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

over the purse strings of the government. The legislature may refuse
to grant resources to the government. This seldom happens because
the government ordinarily enjoys support of the majority in the
parliamentary system. Nevertheless, before granting money the Lok
Sabha can discuss the reasons for which the government requires
money. It can enquire into cases of misuse of funds on the basis of
the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General and Public
Accounts committees. But the legislative control is not only aimed at
financial propriety. The legislature is concerned about the policies of
the government that are reflected in the budget. Through financial
control, the legislature controls the policy of the government.
No Confidence Motion: The most powerful weapon that enables
the Parliament to ensure executive accountability is the no-confidence
motion. As long as the government has the support of its party or
coalition of parties that have a majority in the Lok Sabha, the power
of the House to dismiss the government is fictional rather than real.
However, after 1989, several governments have been forced to resign
due to lack of confidence of the house. Each of these governments
lost the confidence of the Lok Sabha because they failed to retain the
support of their coalition partners.
Thus, the Parliament can effectively control the executive and
ensure a more responsive government. It is however important for
this purpose, that there is adequate time at the disposal of the House,
the members are interested in discussion and participate effectively
and there is willingness to compromise amongst the government and
the opposition. In the last two decades, there has been a gradual
decline in sessions of the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies
and time spent on debates. Moreover, the Houses of the Parliament
have been plagued by absence of quorum, boycott of sessions by
members of opposition which deprive the house the power to control
the executive through discussion.

Activity
Watch the Dooradarshan telecast of Parliament
sessions for three continuous days. Or collect the
newspaper reports for three continuous days and
make a wallpaper. Take care to observe the issues

Rationalised 2023-24

117

Indian Constitution at Work

Irfan

being discussed, the role of the speaker, questions
being asked, the political parties of the
representatives, representatives from your region,
nature of the issues of discussion – whether they
were all of national or regional in character.

READ A CARTOON

W H AT D O T H E C O M M I T T E E S
PARLIAMENT DO?

OF

A significant feature of the legislative process
is the appointment of committees for various
legislative purposes. These committees play a
vital role not merely in law making, but also in
the day-to-day business of the House. Since
the Parliament meets only during sessions, it
has very limited time at its disposal. The
making of law for instance requires in-depth
study of the issue under consideration. This
in turn demands more attention and time.
Similarly, there are other important functions
also, like studying the demands for grants
made by various ministries, looking into
expenditure incurred by various departments,
investigating cases of corruption etc.
Parliamentary committees perform such
Walkout is a fr equently
functions. Since 1983, India has developed a
adopted measure by the
opposition to register their
system of parliamentary standing committees.
protest
against
the
There are over twenty such departmentally
government. Has there been
related committees. Standing Committees
an overuse of that weapon?
supervise the work of various departments,
their budget, their expenditure and bills
that come up in the house relating to
the department.
Apart from standing committees, the Joint Parliamentary
118
Committees have occupied a position of eminence in our country.
Joint Parliamentary Committees (JPCs) can be set up for the purpose
of discussing a particular bill, like the joint committee to discuss

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

bill, or for the purpose of investigating financial
irregularities. Members of these committees are selected
from both Houses.
The committee system has reduced the burden on the
Parliament. Many important bills have been referred to
committees. The Parliament has merely approved the work
done in the committees with few occasional alterations.
Of course legally speaking, no bill can become law, and
no budget will be sanctioned unless approved by the
Parliament. But the Parliament rarely rejects the
suggestions made by the committees.

119

“The nature of the
legislature is such that
there are restrictions
only so far as procedure
is concerned. But in
substance there is no
restriction, no limitation
on the sovereignty of the
legislature or
Parliament…”
N.V. Gadgil, CAD, Vol. XI, p.659, 18 November 1949

HOW DOES THE PARLIAMENT REGULATE ITSELF?
Parliament as mentioned earlier is a debating forum. It is
through debates that the parliament performs all its vital
functions. Such discussions must be meaningful and
orderly so that the functions of the Parliament are carried
out smoothly and its dignity is intact. The Constitution
itself has made certain provisions to ensure smooth
conduct of business. The presiding officer of the legislature
is the final authority in matters of regulating the business
of the legislature.

Rationalised 2023-24

So, the lawmakers too, are
subject to some laws!

Irfan

Indian Constitution at Work

READ A CARTOON

“We are not walking out, we have been ordered out,” said the MPs.
Why do you think such situations occur?

I don’t understand why they
change parties. Do they even
come back to the party they once
left?

120

There is one more way in which the presiding officers
control the behaviour of the members. You may have
heard about the anti-defection law. Most of the members
of the legislatures are elected on the ticket of some political
party. What would happen if they decide to leave the party
after getting elected? For many years after independence,
this issue was unresolved. Finally there was an agreement
among the parties that a legislator who is elected on one
party’s ticket must be restricted from ‘defecting’ to another
party. An amendment to the Constitution was made (52nd
amendment act) in 1985. This is known as anti-defection
amendment. It has also been subsequently modified by
the 91st amendment. The presiding officer of the House is
the authority who takes final decisions on all such cases.
If it is proved that a member has ‘defected’, then such

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

member loses the membership of the House. Besides, such a
person is also disqualified from holding any political office like
ministership, etc.
What is defection? If a member remains absent in the House when
asked by the party leadership to remain present or votes against the
instructions of the party or voluntarily leaves the membership of the
party, it is deemed as defection.
Experience of the past twenty years shows that the anti-defection
amendment has not been able to curb defections, but it has given
additional powers to the party leadership and the presiding officers
of the legislatures over the members.

Conclusion
Have you watched the live telecast of the proceeding of the
Parliament? You will find that our Parliament is truly a rainbow
of colourful dresses symbolising different regions of the country.
Members speak different languages in the course of the
proceedings. They come from various castes, religions and sects.
They often fight bitterly. Many times an impression is created
that they are wasting the time and money of the nation. But we
have seen in this chapter that these same parliamentarians
can effectively control the executive. They can express the
interests of various sections of our society. On account of its
composition, Legislature is the most representative of all organs
of government. The sheer presence of members of diverse social
backgrounds makes the legislatures more representative and
potentially more responsive to people’s expectations. In a
parliamentary democracy, legislature, as a body representing
the wishes of the people occupies a high position of power and
responsibility. Herein lies the democratic potential of the
Parliament.

Rationalised 2023-24

121

Indian Constitution at Work

Exercises
1. Alok thinks that a country needs an efficient government that looks
after the welfare of the people. So, if we simply elected our Prime
Minister and Ministers and left to them the task of government, we
will not need a legislature. Do you agree? Give reasons for your
answer.
2. A class was debating the merits of a bicameral system. The following
points were made during the discussion. Read the arguments and
say if you agree or disagree with each of them, giving reasons.

√
√

Neha said that bicameral legislature does not serve any purpose.

√

Tridib said that if a country is not a federation, then there is no
need to have a second chamber.

Shama argued that experts should be nominated in the second
chamber.

3. Why can the Lok Sabha control the executive more effectively than
the Rajya Sabha can?
4. Rather than effective control of the executive, the Lok Sabha is a
platform for the expression of popular sentiments and people’s
expectations. Do you agree? Give reasons.
5. The following are some proposals for making the Parliament more
effective. State if you agree or disagree with each of them and give
your reasons. Explain what would be the effect if these suggestions
were accepted.

122

√
√

Parliament should work for longer period.

√

Speakers should be empowered to penalise members for
interrupting the proceedings of the House.

Attendance should be made compulsory for members of
Parliament.

6. Arif wanted to know that if ministers propose most of the important
bills and if the majority party often gets the government bills passed,
what is the role of the Parliament in the law making process? What
answer would you give him?

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 5: Legislature

7. Which of the following statements you agree with the most? Give
your reasons.

√
√

Legislators must be free to join any party they want.

√

Defection is always for selfish purposes and therefore, a
legislator who wants to join another party must be disqualified
from being a minister for the next two years.

Anti-defection law has contributed to the domination of the party
leaders over the legislators.

8. Dolly and Sudha are debating about the efficiency and effectiveness
of the Parliament in recent times. Dolly believed that the decline of
Indian Parliament is evident in the less time spent on debate and
discussion and increase in the disturbances of the functioning of
the House and walkouts etc. Sudha contends that the fall of different
governments on the floor of Lok Sabha is a proof of its vibrancy.
What other arguments can you provide to support or oppose the
positions of Dolly and Sudha?
9. Arrange the different stages of passing of a bill into a law in their
correct sequence:.

√
√

A resolution is passed to admit the bill for discussion

√
√
√
√

The bill is referred to other House and is passed

√
√

The concerned minister proposes the need for a bill

The bill is referred to the President of India – write what happens
next if s/he does not sign it
The bill is passed in the house in which it was proposed
The bill is read clause by clause and each is voted upon
The bill is referred to the subcommittee – the committee makes
some changes and sends it back to the house for discussion
Legislative department in ministry of law, drafts a bill

10. How has the system of parliamentary committee affected the
overseeing and appraisal of legislation by the Parliament?

Rationalised 2023-24

123

Indian Constitution at Work

Chapter Six

JUDICIARY

INTRODUCTION

124

Many times, courts are seen only as arbitrators in disputes between individuals
or private parties. But judiciary performs some political functions also. Judiciary
is an important organ of the government. The Supreme Court of India is in fact,
one of the very powerful courts in the world. Right from 1950 the judiciary has
played an important role in interpreting and in protecting the Constitution. In
this chapter you will study the role and importance of the judiciary. In the
chapter on fundamental rights you have already read that the judiciary is very
important for protecting our rights. After studying this chapter, you would be
able to understand
± the meaning of independence of judiciary;
± the role of Indian Judiciary in protecting our rights;
± the role of the Judiciary in interpreting the Constitution; and
± the relationship between the Judiciary and the Parliament of India.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 6: Judiciary

In any society, disputes are bound to arise between individuals,
between groups and between individuals or groups and government.
All such disputes must be settled by an independent body in
accordance with the principle of rule of law. This idea of rule of law
implies that all individuals — rich and poor, men or women, forward
or backward castes — are subjected to the same law. The principal
role of the judiciary is to protect rule of law and ensure supremacy
of law. It safeguards rights of the individual, settles disputes in
accordance with the law and ensures that democracy does not give
way to individual or group
dictatorship. In order to be able to do
all this, it is necessary that the
READ A CARTOON
judiciary is independent of any
political pressures.
What is meant by an independent
judiciary? How is this independence
ensured?
Independence of Judiciary
Simply stated independence of
judiciary means that
± the other organs of the government
like the executive and legislature
must not restrain the functioning
of the judiciary in such a way that
it is unable to do justice.
± the other organs of the government
should not interfere with the
decision of the judiciary.
± judges must be able to perform
their functions without fear or
favour.
Independence of the judiciary does
not imply arbitrariness or absence of
accountability. Judiciary is a part of
the democratic political structure of the

125

No fisticuffs please, this is rule of law!

Rationalised 2023-24

R K Laxman in The T imes of India.

WHY DO WE NEED AN INDEPENDENT JUDICIARY?

Indian Constitution at Work

I remember the case of Machal
mentioned in chapter two.
Don’t they say, ‘justice delayed
is justice denied’? Somebody
should do something about
this.

126

country. It is therefore accountable to the Constitution,
to the democratic traditions and to the people of the
country.
How can the independence of judiciary be provided
and protected?
The Indian Constitution has ensured the
independence of the judiciary through a number of
measures. The legislature is not involved in the process of
appointment of judges. Thus, it was believed that party
politics would not play a role in the process of
appointments. In order to be appointed as a judge, a
person must have experience as a lawyer and/or must be
well versed in law. Political opinions of the person or his/
her political loyalty should not be the criteria for
appointments to judiciary.
The judges have a fixed tenure. They hold office till
reaching the age of retirement. Only in exceptional cases,
judges may be removed. But otherwise, they have security
of tenure. Security of tenure ensures that judges could
function without fear or favour. The Constitution
prescribes a very difficult procedure for removal of judges.
The Constitution makers believed that a difficult
procedure of removal would provide security of office to
the members of judiciary.
The judiciary is not financially dependent on either
the executive or legislature. The Constitution provides that
the salaries and allowances of the judges are not subjected
to the approval of the legislature. The actions and
decisions of the judges are immune from personal
criticisms. The judiciary has the power to penalise those
who are found guilty of contempt of court. This authority
of the court is seen as an effective protection to the judges
from unfair criticism. Parliament cannot discuss the
conduct of the judges except when the proceeding to
remove a judge is being carried out. This gives the
judiciary independence to adjudicate without fear of being
criticised.

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 6: Judiciary

Activity
Hold a debate in class on the following
topic.
Which of the following factors do you think,
work as constraints over the judges in
giving their rulings? Do you think these are
justified?
± Constitution
± Precedents
± Opinion of other courts
± Public opinion
± Media
± Traditions of law
± Laws
± Time and staff constraints
± Fear of public criticism
± Fear of action by executive
Appointment of Judges
The appointment of judges has never been free from
political controversy. It is part of the political process. It
makes a difference who serves in the Supreme Court and
High Court— a difference in how the Constitution is
interpreted. The political philosophy of the judges, their
views about active and assertive judiciary or controlled
and committed judiciary have an impact on the fate of the
legislations enacted. Council of Ministers, Governors and
Chief Ministers and Chief Justice of India — all influence
the process of judicial appointment.
As far as the appointment of the Chief Justice of India
(CJI) is concerned, over the years, a convention had
developed whereby the senior-most judge of the Supreme
Court was appointed as the Chief Justice of India. This
convention was however broken twice. In 1973 A. N. Ray
was appointed as CJI superseding three senior Judges.
Again, Justice M.H. Beg was appointed superseding
Justice H.R. Khanna (1975).

Rationalised 2023-24

127

I am afraid, I am getting
confused. In a democracy, you
can criticise the Prime Minister
or even the President, but not
the judges! And what is this
contempt of court? But am I
being guilty of contempt if I
asked about these matters?

Indian Constitution at Work

But I think, finally the Council
of Ministers would have greater
say in appointing judges. Or is
it that the judiciary is a selfappointing body?

128

The other Judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Court are appointed by the President after ‘consulting’
the CJI. This, in effect, meant that the final decisions in
matters of appointment rested with the Council of
Ministers. What then, was the status of the consultation
with the Chief Justice?
This matter came up before the Supreme Court again
and again between 1982 and 1998. Initially, the court
felt that role of the Chief Justice was purely consultative.
Then it took the view that the opinion of the Chief Justice
must be followed by the President. Finally, the Supreme
Court has come up with a novel procedure: it has
suggested that the Chief Justice should recommend
names of persons to be appointed in consultation with
four senior-most judges of the Court. Thus, the Supreme
Court has established the principle of collegiality in
making recommendations for appointments. At the
moment therefore, in matters of appointment the decision
of the group of senior judges of the Supreme Court carries
greater weight. Thus, in matters of appointment to the
judiciary, the Supreme Court and the Council of Ministers
play an important role.
Removal of Judges
The removal of judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts is also extremely difficult. A judge of the Supreme
Court or High Court can be removed only on the ground
of proven misbehaviour or incapacity. A motion
containing the charges against the judge must be
approved by special majority in both Houses of the
Parliament. Do you remember what special majority
means? We have studied this in the chapter on Elections.
It is clear from this procedure that removal of a judge is a
very difficult procedure and unless there is a general
consensus among Members of the Parliament, a judge
cannot be removed. It should also be noted that while in
making appointments, the executive plays a crucial role;
the legislature has the powers of removal. This has ensured

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 6: Judiciary

both balance of power and independence of the judiciary. So far,
only one case of removal of a judge of the Supreme Court came up
for consideration before Parliament. In that case, though the motion
got two-thirds majority, it did not have the support of the majority of
the total strength of the House and therefore, the judge was not
removed.
Unsuccessful Attempt to Remove a Judge
In 1991 the first-ever motion to remove a Supreme Court
Justice was signed by 108 members of Parliament. Justice
V. Ramaswami, during his tenure as the Chief Justice of
the Punjab and Haryana High Court was accused of
misappropriating funds. In 1992, a year after Parliament
had started the removal proceedings, a high-profile inquiry
commission consisting of Judges of the Supreme Court
found Justice V. Ramaswami “guilty of wilful and gross
misuses of office . . . and moral turpitude by using public
funds for private purposes and reckless disregard of
statutory rules” while serving as the Chief Justice of the
Punjab and Haryana High Court. Despite this strong
indictment, Ramaswami survived the parliamentary
motion
recommending
removal.
The
motion
recommending his removal got the required two-thirds
majority among the members who were present and voting,
but the Congress party abstained from voting in the
House. Therefore, the motion could not get the support of
one-half of the total strength of the House.

Check your progress
± Why is independence of the judiciary
important?
± Do you think that executive should have
the power to appoint judges?
± If you were asked to make suggestions
for changing the procedure of appointing
judges, what changes would you
suggest?

Rationalised 2023-24

129

Indian Constitution at Work

STRUCTURE OF THE JUDICIARY
The Constitution of India provides for a single integrated judicial
system. This means that unlike some other federal countries of the
world, India does not have separate State courts. The structure of
the judiciary in India is pyramidal with the Supreme Court at the
top, High Courts below them and district and subordinate courts at
the lowest level (see the diagram below). The lower courts function
under the direct superintendence of the higher courts.
Supreme Court of India
± Its decisions are binding on all courts.
± Can transfer Judges of High Courts.
± Can move cases from any court to itself.
± Can transfer cases from one High Court to
another.
High Court
± Can hear appeals from lower courts.
± Can issue writs for restoring Fundamental
Rights.
± Can deal with cases within the
jurisdiction of the State.
± Exercises superintendence and control
over courts below it.
District Court
± Deals with cases arising in the
District.
± Considers appeals on decisions
given by lower courts.
± Decides cases involving serious
criminal offences.

130

Subordinate Courts
± Consider cases of
civil and criminal
nature

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 6: Judiciary

Jurisdiction of Supreme Court
The Supreme Court of India is one of the very powerful courts
anywhere in the world. However, it functions within the limitations
imposed by the Constitution. The functions and responsibilities of
the Supreme Court are defined by the Constitution. The Supreme
Court has specific jurisdiction or scope of powers.

Jurisdiction
of Supreme
Court
of India

Original
Settles
disputes
between
Union and
States and
amongst
States.

Appellate
Tries appeals
from lower
courts in Civil,
Criminal and
Constitutional
cases

Advisory
Advises the
President on
matters of
public
importance
and law

Writ:
Can issue writs of
Habeas Corpus,
Mandamus, Prohibition,
Certiorari and Quo
warranto to protect the
Fundamental Rights of the
individual.

Special Powers
Can grant special leave to an appeal from any judgement or
matter passed by any court in the territory of India.

Rationalised 2023-24

131

Indian Constitution at Work

Original Jurisdiction
Original jurisdiction means cases that can be directly considered by
the Supreme Court without going to the lower courts before that.
From the diagram above, you will notice that cases involving federal
relations go directly to the Supreme Court. The Original Jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court establishes it as an umpire in all disputes
regarding federal matters. In any federal country, legal disputes are
bound to arise between the Union and the States; and among the
States themselves. The power to resolve such cases is entrusted to
the Supreme Court of India. It is called original jurisdiction because
the Supreme Court alone has the power to deal with such cases.
Neither the High Courts nor the lower courts can deal with such
cases. In this capacity, the Supreme Court not just settles disputes
but also interprets the powers of Union and State government as
laid down in the Constitution.
Writ Jurisdiction
As you have already studied in the chapter on fundamental rights,
any individual, whose fundamental right has been violated, can
directly move the Supreme Court for remedy. The Supreme Court
can give special orders in the form of writs. The High Courts can also
issue writs, but the persons whose rights are violated have the choice
of either approaching the High Court or approaching the Supreme
Court directly. Through such writs, the Court can give orders to the
executive to act or not to act in a particular way.

132

Appellate Jurisdiction
The Supreme Court is the highest court of appeal. A person can
appeal to the Supreme Court against the decisions of the High Court.
However, High Court must certify that the case is fit for appeal, that
is to say that it involves a serious matter of interpretation of law or
Constitution. In addition, in criminal cases, if the lower court has
sentenced a person to death then an appeal can be made to the High
Court or Supreme Court. Of course, the Supreme Court holds the
powers to decide whether to admit appeals even when appeal is not
allowed by the High Court. Appellate jurisdiction means that the
Supreme Court will reconsider the case and the legal issues involved

Rationalised 2023-24

Chapter 6: Judiciary

in it. If the Court thinks that the law or the Constitution
has a different meaning from what the lower courts
understood, then the Supreme Court will change the
ruling and along with that also give new interpretation of
the provision involved.
The High Courts too, have appellate jurisdiction over
the decisions given by courts below them.

133

Advisory Jurisdiction
In addition to original and appellate jurisdiction, the
Supreme Court of India possesses advisory jurisdiction
also. This means that the President of India can refer any
matter that is of public importance or that which involves
interpretation of Constitution to Supreme Court for advice.
However, the Supreme Court is not bound to give advice
on such matters and the President is not bound to accept
such an advice.
What then is the utility of the advisory powers of the
Supreme Court? The utility is two-fold. In the first place,
it allows the government to seek legal opinion on a matter
of importance before taking action on it. This may prevent
unnecessary litigations later. Secondly, in the light of the
advice of the Supreme Court, the government can make
suitable changes in its action or legislations.
Article 137
…….. the Supreme Court shall
have power to review any
judgment pronounced or order
made by it.

Article 144
…… All authorities, civil and
judicial, in the territory of India
shall act in aid of the Supreme
Court.

Rationalised 2023-24

Isn’t it funny that giving advice
is optional and accepting that
advice is also optional? I
thought that the Courts gave
decisions that were binding!

Indian Constitution at Work

Why is the Supreme Court
allowed to change its own
ruling? Is it because courts can
also make mistakes? Is it
possible that the same judge is
part of the ‘Bench’ that revises
the ruling and was also on the
Bench that gave the ruling in
the first place?

Read the articles quoted above. These articles help us
to understand the unified nature of our judiciary and the
powers of the Supreme Court. Decisions made by the
Supreme Court are binding on all other courts within the
territory of India. Orders passed by it are enforceable
throughout the length and breadth of the country. The
Supreme Court itself is not bound by its decision and
can at any time review it. Besides, if there is a case of
contempt of the Supreme Court, then the Supreme Court
itself decides such a case.

Check your progress
Match the following
Dispute between
State of Bihar and
Union of India will be
heard by

High Court

Appeal from District
court of Haryana
will go to

Judicial review

Advisory Jurisdiction

Original Jurisdiction
Single Integrated
Judiciary

Supreme Court

Declaring a law
unconstitutional

Single Constitution

JUDICIAL ACTIVISM
134

Have you heard of the term judicial activism? Or, Public
Interest Litigation?
Both these terms are often used in the discussions
about judiciary in recent times. Many people think that
these two things have revolutionised the functioning of
judiciary and made it more people-friendly.

Rationalised 2023-24

READ A CARTOON

Do you know that in recent times the judiciary has ruled that
bandhs and hartals are illegal?

The chief instrument through which judicial activism has
flourished in India is Public Interest Litigation (PIL) or Social Action
Litigation (SAL). What is PIL or SAL? How and when did it emerge?
In normal course of law, an individual can approach the courts only
if he/she has been personally aggrieved. That is to say, a person
whose rights have been violated, or who is involved in a dispute,
could move the court of law. This concept underwent a change
around 1979. In 1979, the Court set the trend when it decided to
hear a case where the case was filed not by the aggrieved persons
but by others on their behalf. As this case involved a consideration
of an issue of public interest, it and such other cases came to be
known as public interest litigations. Around the same time, the
Supreme Court also took up the case about rights of prisoners. This
opened the gates for large number of cases where public spirited
citizens and voluntary organisations sought judicial intervention for
protection of existing rights, betterment of life conditions of the poor,

Rationalised 2023-24

Irfan

Chapter 6: Judiciary

135

Indian Constitution at Work

protection of the environment, and many other issues in
the interest of the public. PIL has become the most
important vehicle of judicial activism.
Judiciary, which is an institution that traditionally
confined to responding to cases brought before it, began
considering many cases merely on the basis of newspaper
reports and postal complaints received by the court.
Therefore, the term judicial activism became the more
popular description of the role of the judiciary.
I have heard someone say that
PIL means ‘private interest
litigation’. Why would that
be so?

136

Some Early PILs
± In 1979, newspapers published reports about
‘under trials’. There were many prisoners in
Bihar who had spent long years in jail, longer
than what they would have spent if they had
been punished for the offences for which they
were arrested. This report prompted an
advocate to file a petition. The Supreme Court
heard this case. It became famous as one of
the early Public Interest Litigations (PILs). This
was the Hussainara Khatoon vs. Bihar case.
± In 1980, a prison inmate of the Tihar jail
managed to send a scribbled piece of paper to
Justice Krishna Iyer of the Supreme Court
narrating physical torture of the prisoners.
The judge got it converted into a petition.
Though later on, the Court abandoned the
practice of considering letters, this case,
known as Sunil Batra vs. Delhi Administration
(1980) also became one of the pioneers of
public interest litigation.

Through the PIL, the court has expanded the idea of
rights. Clean air, unpolluted water, decent living, etc., are
rights for the entire society. Therefore, it was felt by the
courts that individuals as parts of the society must have
the right to seek justice wherever such rights were violated.
Secondly, through PIL and judicial activism of the
post-1980 period, the judiciary has also shown readiness
to take into consideration rights of those sections who

Rationalised 2023-24

