--- PAGE 1 ---
Indian Constitution
at Work
Textbook in Political Science for Class XI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 2 ---
11102 – I C W
NDIAN ONSTITUTION AT ORK
ISBN 81-7450-550-4
Textbook for Class 11
First Edition
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
March 2006 Chaitra 1928
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
Reprinted transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
February 2007 Magha 1928
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent,
December 2007 Pausa 1929
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any
December 2008 Pausa 1930 form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
January 2010 Magha 1931 q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price
November 2010 Kartika 1932 indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and
November 2013 Kartika 1935 should be unacceptable.
December 2014 Pausa 1936
December 2015 Agrahayana 1937 OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
January 2017 Pausa 1938
January 2018 Magha 1939 NCERT Campus
February 2019 Magha 1940 Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
January 2020 Magha 1941
108, 100 Feet Road
August 2021 Shravana 1943
Hosdakere Halli Extension
November 2021 Agrahayana 1943 Banashankari III Stage
October 2022 Kartika 1944 Bangaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
PD 50T RPS P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
© National Council of Educational Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Research and Training, 2006 Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
` 145.00
Publication Team
Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput
The cartoons on the cover have Division
been taken from the works of –
Chief Production : Arun Chitkara
Officer
Shankar
Chief Business : Vipin Dewan
R.K. Laxman Manager
Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar
(In charge)
Printed on 80 GSM paper with Assistant Editor : Shashi Chadha
NCERT watermark
Assistant Production : Deepak Jaiswal
Published at the Publication Division Officer
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training, Cover and Layout
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi Shweta Rao
110 016 and printed Taj Printers, Sketches
69/6A Najafgarh Road Industrial Rajeev Kumar
Area, Near Kirti Nagar Metro Station,
Cartoons
New Delhi - 110 015
Irfaan
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 3 ---
FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005, recommends that
children’s life at school must be linked to their life outside the school.
This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning
which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the
school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea.
They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance
of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these
measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-
centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals
and teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own
learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must
recognise that given space, time and freedom, children generate new
knowledge by engaging with the information passed on to them by
adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites
of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as
receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and
mode of functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary
as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the required
number of teaching days is actually devoted to teaching. The methods
used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective
this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy
experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus
designers have tried to address the problem of curricular burden by
restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for
teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving
higher priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and
wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring
hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training
(NCERT) appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development
committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 4 ---
iv
Chairperson of the advisory group in Social Sciences, Professor Hari
Vasudevan and the Chief Advisors for this book, Professor Suhas
Palshikar and Professor Yogendra Yadav for guiding the work of this
committee. Several teachers contributed to the development of this
textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making this possible.
We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development
under the Chairmanship of Professor Mrinal Miri and
Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous
improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes
comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 5 ---
A LETTER TO YOU
Dear Students,
Looking at the title of this book, you may wonder: “why am I studying
Indian Constitution again? Didn’t I study it in the previous classes?”
Yes, you have studied the broad structure of the Indian government
and some bits of the Constitution. But this book takes you to
something different from what you have already studied.
You have now chosen Political Science and will study this subject
for the next two years. What better way can there be to get introduced
to Political Science than through politics of our own country? That
is what this book does. The study of the working of the Indian
Constitution here is a gateway to studying politics in India. The study
of Indian politics is a window to understanding politics in other
societies. We hope that through the study of institutions and the
politics of power surrounding them, you would come to know about
the principles and theories of politics. Thus this book will tell you
about the way our Constitution has been working and the way it
shapes politics in our country. This book is not about legal provisions
and technical details in the Constitution. It is about how institutions
are shaped through interaction with actual politics.
We were inspired to write this different kind of a textbook by the
National Curriculum Framework 2005. It says that instead of just
memorisation and repetition, emphasis should be laid on ‘developing
concepts and the ability to analyse socio-political realities’. The
Foreword to this book by the Director of NCERT explains the vision
of this new curriculum. The new syllabi for Political Science recognise
the need to deepen the student’s understanding of the provisions
and the working of the Constitution of India.
That is why you would find more focus on the rationale and the
real life consequences of the Constitution than just more and more
information on the Constitution. This textbook will introduce you to
the idea of constitution and the story of the making and working of
the Indian Constitution. We certainly talk about the various key
provisions of the Constitution. But we have added three new features.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 6 ---
vi
In the first place, this textbook responds to your curiosity about
why a particular arrangement in the Constitution was adopted and
why not some other. Secondly, it allows you to see how institutions
grow in the company of actual politics. That is why chapters in this
book do not stop at 1950. They in fact start off at 1950 and take you
to some instances drawn from the political history of the last fifty
years or more. We hope that this book will create an appetite for
more information about Indian politics; it will prepare you for the
course on Indian politics that you will study next year. Thirdly, this
book allows you to compare India and its Constitution to other
countries in the world having many similar concerns and different
answers. So, wherever possible this textbook tells you about what
has happened elsewhere in the world. We hope you will develop a
habit of comparing any one institution to other institutions
and other social situations.
We have also introduced a number of aides for you to get
more interested in the subject that you are studying. In
Articles each chapter, there will be some example of an article from
the Constitution itself. This will give you a feel of the exact
wording, the vocabulary of our Constitution. You will also
find some quotations in each chapter. Most of these are
from the debates in
the Constituent Assembly.
The purpose is to introduce Quotations from
you to this extraordinary Constituent Assembly
heritage of political Debates (CAD)
intelligence and foresight that Source: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in/
we have inherited and also ls/debates/debates.htm
the drama that was unfolding
in the making of the Constitution.
Many chapters have cartoons too. But they are not there simply
as comic relief. They tell you about the criticisms, about the weak
spots, about near-failures. We hope that apart from enjoying these
cartoons, you would learn from them, both about politics and about
how to think about politics. Finally, there are these two characters
that keep popping up on the sides of your textbook pages from time
to time. Irfaan, the cartoonist, has especially penned them so that
you would relate to them. They are just like you: inquisitive, curious,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 7 ---
vii
often cynical! Some times they are bold—more than what the
authors of this book have been!—enough to ask inconvenient
questions and make comments that make one sit up and think.
We call them Unni and Munni. While writing this book, we
have grown quite fond of them and we hope that they will endear
themselves to you as well. Perhaps, taking inspiration from
them, you would ask more questions to your teachers and
pass on some of these to us.
At the end of each chapter, you would find some interesting
puzzles in the form of exercises. Encouraged and inspired by Munni
the NCF and the hope of the Director of NCERT that textbooks
must help improve the system of assessment, and with the help of
some young friends, we have tried to mix the exercises with some
innovative puzzles. They will make you ‘use your grey cells’! We hope
that in solving these puzzles, you would not feel that you are
answering exam questions.
We have prepared this book with the help of a large team that
kept working for over six months. This included many school and
college teachers, educationists, political scientists and artists. You
would read about this group under the title Textbook Development
Team listed on page ix. Professor Krishna Kumar, Director of NCERT,
supported us through out this effort and kept on guiding us. We
also received support and valuable inputs from Professor Hari
Vasudevan, Professor Gopal Guru, Professor Mrinal Miri, Professor
G.P. Deshpande and members of the National Monitoring Committee.
A large number of people have contributed generously to the
making of this book.We were fortunate to have
the benefit of the expertise of Professors Rajeev
Bhargava, Pratap Mehta, Sandeep Shastri,
Dr. Sanjeeb Mukherji, Dr. Sanjay Lodha,
Dr. Pushkar Raj, Ms. M. Manisha,
Unni
Dr. Shailendra Deolankar and Ms. Chaitra
Redkar in writing these chapters. Pankaj
Pushkar, Manish Jain, Alex George and
M. Manisha formed the backbone of the team.
They did research for this book, spent sleepless
nights in preparing the drafts, the boxes and
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 8 ---
viii
other material that you see in this book. Their concern for quality
and their insights into the pedagogy of social science lifted the book
a few notches above what it would otherwise have been. Manish Jain
relentlessly pursued the agenda of improving the quality and
innovativeness of the exercises. Pankaj Pushkar has practically
steered this book through the last six months. Dr. SriRanjani and
Dr. Sanjeer Alam, both at the Lokniti Programme of the CSDS kindly
extended their help in times of urgent need. Amit Ahuja, a doctoral
student at the university of Michigan, extended help in preparing
the boxes with comparative examples.
We are sure that you will appreciate this pleasant design that
Shweta Rao has prepared and the cartoons and Unni-Munni
characters born from the pencil of Irfaan Khan. The Children’s Book
Trust kindly allowed us the use of Shankar’s cartoons. Mr. R. K.
Laxman also gave permission for using cartoons drawn by him. In
short, this is a collective effort to make study of Political Science more
lively, relevant and student-friendly. We must also mention the
generosity of the Lokniti Programme of the CSDS, and Professor Peter
R. De Souza, Director, Lokniti, for literally housing the entire work of
the book at their premises and for providing infrastructure.
You have recently passed a big exam. Now it is our turn to be
examined. Whether this textbook fails or passes in what it tried to do
is for you to evaluate. We would be eagerly waiting for our exam
result with your comments, criticisms and suggestions to make a
better attempt next time.
Suhas Palshikar
Yogendra Yadav
Chief Advisors
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 9 ---
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT
COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS AT THE SECONDARY
LEVEL
Hari Vasudevan, Professor, Department of History, University of
Calcutta, Kolkata
CHIEF ADVISORS
Suhas Palshikar, Professor, Department of Politics and Public
Administration, University of Pune, Pune, Maharashtra
Yogendra Yadav, Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing
Societies, Delhi
MEMBERS
A.K. Verma, Reader, Department of Political Science, Christ Church
College, Kanpur, U.P.
Alex M. George, Independent Researcher, Eruvatty, District Kannur
Kerala
Anju Malhotra, Principal, Kalka Public School, New Delhi
Chaitra Redkar, Sr. Lecturer, SNDT College, Mumbai, Maharashtra
G. Pathak, PGT, Doni-Polo Public School, Itanagar, Arunachal Pradesh
M. Manisha, Sr. Lecturer, Department of Political Science, Loreto
College, Kolkata
Manish Jain, former PGT and a Doctoral student with the Department
of Education, University of Delhi, Delhi
Manisha Priyam, Sr. Lecturer, Gargi College, New Delhi
Pankaj Pushkar, Senior Lecturer, Directorate of Higher Education,
Haldwani, Uttaranchal
Pratap Bhanu Mehta, President, Centre for Policy Research,
New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 10 ---
x
Pushkar Raj, Sr. Lecturer, Department of Politcal Science, Zakir
Hussain College, New Delhi
Rajeev Bhargava, Senior Fellow, Centre for the Study of Developing
Societies, Delhi
Rakesh Shukla, Advocate, Supreme Court, New Delhi
Sandeep Shastri, Director, International Academy for Creative
Teaching, Bangalore, Karnataka
Sanjay Lodha, Associate Professor, Department of Political Science,
Mohan Lal Sukhadia University, Udaipur, Rajasthan
Sanjeeb Mukherjee, Sr. Lecturer, Department of Political Science,
Calcutta University, Kolkata
Sayed Sabkulla, PGT, Maharanis Government Pre-University College,
Mysore, Karnataka
Shailendra Deolankar, Lecturer, Department of Political Science, Govt.
College, Aurangabad, Maharashtra
Shefali Jha, Associate Professor, Centre for Political Studies, School
of Social Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
Srilekha Mukherjee, PGT, St. Paul School, New Delhi
Versha Manku, Vice Principal and PGT, Kulachi Hansraj Model
School, New Delhi
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Sanjay Dubey, Reader, DESSH, NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 11 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Efforts of many persons and organisations have gone into the making
of this book. We appreciate the help extended by the following
institutions and persons:
l Cagle Cartoons (for the use of cartoons of Chappatte, John
Trever and Ares);
l The Children’s Book Trust (for the use of Shankar’s
cartoons);
l Nehru Memorial Museum and Library and Down to Earth
(for the photographs);
l Sarai, an initiative of the Centre for the Study of Developing
Societies (CSDS), and Nirantar — Centre for Gender and
Education;
l Lokniti, CSDS (for housing the project of making of this book);
l R.K. Laxman (for allowing the use of his cartoons);
l Arvind Sharma and Vikram Rawat (for helping in the
preparation of a foolproof copy);
l Amit Ahuja, Sriranjani and Sanjeer Alam (for providing
research inputs);
l Irfaan Khan (for the cartoons and the Unni-Munni
characters);
l Shweta Rao (for design and layout of the book);
l Peter Ronald De Souza (for allowing the use of Lokniti
resources);
l Pankaj Pushkar (for untiring support in the making of this
textbook)
We are thankful to all these institutions and persons.
Suhas Palshikar and Yogendra Yadav, Chief Advisors
The contribution of M.V.S.V. Prasad, Assistant Professor, Department
of Curriculum Studies, NCERT, in reviewing and updating the current
edition is appreciated.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 13 ---
CONTENTS
Foreword iii
A letter to you v
1. CONSTITUTION:
WHY AND HOW? 1
2. RIGHTS IN THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION 26
3. ELECTION AND
REPRESENTATION 51
4. EXECUTIVE 78
5. LEGISLATURE 100
6. JUDICIARY 124
7. FEDERALISM 150
8. LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS 176
9. CONSTITUTION AS A
LIVING DOCUMENT 196
10. THE PHILOSOPHY OF
THE CONSTITUTION 220
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 14 ---
Constitution of India
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 15 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
1
Chapter One
CONSTITUTION:
WHY AND HOW?
I
NTRODUCTION
This book is about the working of the Indian Constitution. In the chapters that
follow, you will read information about various aspects of the working of our
Constitution. You will learn about the various institutions of the government in
our country and their relationship with each other.
But before you begin to read about elections, governments, and presidents
and prime ministers, it is necessary to understand that the entire structure of the
government and the various principles that bind the institutions of government
have their origin in the Constitution of India.
After studying this chapter, you will learn:
± what a constitution means;
± what a constitution does to the society;
± how constitutions govern the allocation of power in society; and
± what was the way in which the Constitution of India was made.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 16 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
W D W N C ?
HY O E EED A ONSTITUTION
What is a constitution? What are its functions? What role does it
perform for a society? How does a constitution relate to our daily
existence? Answering these questions is not as difficult as you might
think.
Constitution allows coordination and
assurance
Imagine yourself to be a member of a
reasonably large group. Further imagine that
this group has the following characteristics.
The members of this group are diverse in
various ways. They have different religious
allegiances: some are Hindus, some are
Muslims, some Christians and some perhaps
profess no religion at all. They are also varied
in many different respects: they
pursue different professions, have
different abilities, have different
hobbies, different tastes in
everything from films to books. This group is very much like the
Some are rich and some are poor. people of my village.
Some are old, some young.
Imagine further that members of this group are likely to
have disputes over various aspects of life: How much
property should one be allowed to own? Should it be
compulsory that every child be sent to school or should
the parents be allowed to decide? How much should this
Yes, this could be my colony as
group spend on its safety and security? Or should it build
well! Does this apply to your
more parks instead? Should the group be allowed to
village or town or colony too?
discriminate against some of its members? Every question
will elicit a variety of answers from different people. But,
for all their diversity, this group has to live together. They are
dependent upon each other in various ways. They require the
2
cooperation of each other. What will enable the group to live together
peacefully?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 17 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
One may say that perhaps members of this group can live together
if they can agree on some basic rules. Why will the group need certain 3
basic rules? Think of what would happen in the absence of some
basic rules. Every individual would be insecure simply because they
would not know what members of this group could do to each other,
who could claim rights over what. Any group will need some basic
rules that are publicly promulgated and known to all members of
that group to achieve a minimal degree of coordination. But these
rules must not only be known, they must also be enforceable. If
citizens have no assurance that others will follow these rules, they
will themselves have no reason to follow these rules. Saying that the
rules are legally enforceable gives an assurance to everybody that
others will follow these, for if they do not do so, they will be punished.
The first function of a constitution is to provide a set of
basic rules that allow for minimal coordination amongst
members of a society.
Activity
Enact the thought experiment of this section in the
classroom. The entire class should discuss and arrive
at some decisions that would apply to everyone for
this entire session. The decision could be about:
± How would the class representatives be chosen?
± Which decisions will the representative be able to
take on behalf of the entire class?
± Are there some decisions that the class
representative cannot take without consulting the
entire class?
± You can add any other items to this list (collection
of common kitty for the class, organisation of picnic
and trips, sharing of common resources, …) as long
as everyone agrees to it. Make sure that you
include those subjects that have led to any
differences in the past.
± How to revise these decisions in case you
need to?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 18 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
± Write down all these decisions on a paper and put
it up on the notice board. Which problems did you
encounter in this decision? Were there differences
among different students? How did you resolve
these differences? Did the entire class gain
something from this exercise?
Specification of decision making powers
A constitution is a body of fundamental principles according to which
a state is constituted or governed. But what should these
fundamental rules be? And what makes them fundamental? Well,
the first question you will have to decide is who gets to decide what
the laws governing the society should be? You may want rule X, but
others may want rule Y. How do we decide whose rules or preferences
should govern us? You may think the rules you want everyone to
live by are the best; but others think that their rules are the best.
How do we resolve this dispute? So even before you decide what
rules should govern this group you have to decide: Who gets to
decide?
The constitution has to provide an answer to this question. It
specifies the basic allocation of power in a society. It decides who
gets to decide what the laws will be. In principle, this question, who
gets to decide, can be answered in many ways: in a monarchical
constitution, a monarch decides; in some constitutions like the old
Soviet Union, one single party was given the power to decide. But in
democratic constitutions, broadly speaking, the people get to decide.
But this matter is not so simple. Because even if you answer that the
people should decide, it will not answer the question: how should
the people decide? For something to be law, should everyone agree
to it? Should the people directly vote on each matter as the ancient
Greeks did? Or should the people express their preferences by electing
representatives? But if the people act through their representatives,
how should these representatives be elected? How many should there
be?
4 In the Indian Constitution for example, it is specified that in most
instances, Parliament gets to decide laws and policies, and that
Parliament itself be organised in a particular manner. Before
identifying what the law in any given society is, you have to identify
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 19 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
who has the authority to enact it. If Parliament has the authority to
enact laws, there must be a law that bestows this authority on 5
Parliament in the first
place. This is the function
of the constitution. It is an
authority that constitutes
government in the first
place.
The second function
of a constitution is to
specify who has the
power to make
decisions in a society.
It decides how the
government will be
constituted.
Limitations on the
powers of government
But this is clearly not
enough. Suppose you
decided who had the
authority to make
decisions. But then this
authority passed laws that
you thought were patently
unfair. It prohibited you
from practising your
religion for instance. Or it
enjoined that clothes of a
certain colour were
prohibited, or that you
were not free to sing certain songs or that people who belonged to a
particular group (caste or religion) would always have to serve others
and would not be allowed to retain any property. Or that government
could arbitrarily arrest someone, or that only people of a certain skin
colour would be allowed to draw water from wells. You would obviously
think these laws were unjust and unfair. And even though they were
passed by a government that had come into existence based
.snootraC
elgaC
thgirypoC
40PES12
,enubirT
dlareH
lanoitanretnI
,etappahC
kcirtaP
yb
”noitutitsnoC
naeporuE“
R C
EAD A ARTOON
Countries of the European Union tried to create a
European constitution. The attempt failed. Here is a
cartoonist’s impression of this attempt. Does this
always happen in any constitution making?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 20 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
on certain procedures there would be something
obviously unjust about that government enacting these
laws.
So the third function of a constitution is to set
some limits on what a government can impose on
its citizens. These limits are fundamental in the
sense that government may never trespass them.
Constitutions limit the power of government in many
ways. The most common way of limiting the power of
government is to specify certain fundamental rights that
all of us possess as citizens and which no government
can ever be allowed to violate. The exact content and
interpretation of these rights varies from constitution to
Ah! So you first create a monster constitution. But most constitutions will protect a basic
and then start worrying about cluster of rights. Citizens will be protected from being
saving yourself from it! I would arrested arbitrarily and for no reason. This is one basic
say, why create this monster called limitation upon the power of government. Citizens will
government in the first place? normally have the right to some basic liberties: to freedom
of speech, freedom of conscience, freedom of association,
freedom to conduct a trade or business etc. In practice,
these rights can be limited during times of national
emergency and the constitution specifies the
circumstances under which these rights may be
withdrawn.
Aspirations and goals of a society
Most of the older constitutions limited themselves largely
to allocating decision-making power and setting some
limits to government power. But many twentieth century
constitutions, of which the Indian Constitution is the
finest example, also provide an enabling framework for
the government to do certain positive things, to express
the aspirations and goals of society. The Indian
Constitution was particularly innovative in this respect.
Societies with deep entrenched inequalities of various
6 kinds, will not only have to set limits on the power of
government, they will also have to enable and empower
the government to take positive measures to overcome
forms of inequality or deprivation.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 21 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
For example, India aspires to be a society that is free of caste
discrimination. If this is our society’s aspiration, the government will 7
have to be enabled or empowered to take all the necessary steps to
achieve this goal. In a country like South Africa, which had a deep
history of racial discrimination, its new constitution had to enable
the government to end racial discrimination. More positively, a
constitution may enshrine the aspirations of a society. The framers
of the Indian Constitution, for example, thought that each
individual in society should have all that is necessary for them to
lead a life of minimal dignity and social self-respect — minimum
material well-being, education etc. The Indian Constitution
enables the government to take positive welfare measures
some of which are legally enforceable. As we go on studying
the Indian Constitution, we shall find that such enabling
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
R C
EAD A ARTOON
4 December 1949
The constitution makers have to address themselves to very
different aspirations. Here is Nehru trying to balance between
different visions and ideologies. Can you identify what these
different groups stand for? Who do you think prevailed in this
balancing act?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 22 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
provisions have the support of the Preamble to our
Constitution, and these provisions are found in the section
on Fundamental Rights. The Directive Principles of State
of Policy also enjoin government to fulfil certain
aspirations of the people.
The fourth function of a constitution is to enable
the government to fulfil the aspirations of a society
and create conditions for a just society.
Enabling provisions of the Constitution
What does it take to write nice Constitutions are not only rules and regulations
things in the constitution? controlling the powers of the government. They
What is the point in writing also give powers to the government for pursuing
down lofty aspirations and collective good of the society.
goals if they cannot change the ± Constitution of South Africa assigns many
life of the people? responsibilities to the government: it wants
the government to take measures to promote
conservation of nature, make efforts to protect
persons or groups subjected to unfair
discrimination, and provides that the
government must progressively ensure
adequate housing to all, health care, etc.
± In the case of Indonesia also, the government
is enjoined to establish and conduct national
education system. The Indonesian Constitution
ensures that the poor and destitute children
will be looked after by the government.
Fundamental identity of a people
Finally, and perhaps even most importantly, a
constitution expresses the fundamental identity of a
people.
This means the people as a collective entity come
into being only through the basic constitution. It is
8 by agreeing to a basic set of norms about how one
should be governed, and who should be governed that
one forms a collective identity. One has many sets
of identities that exist prior to a constitution. But by
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 23 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
agreeing to certain basic norms and principles one constitutes one’s
9
basic political identity. Second, constitutional norms are the overarching
framework within which one pursues individual aspirations, goals and
freedoms. The constitution sets authoritative constraints upon what one
may or may not do. It defines the fundamental values that we may not
trespass. So the constitution also gives one a moral identity. Third and
finally, it may be the case that many basic political and moral values are
now shared across different constitutional traditions.
If one looks at constitutions around the world, they differ in many
respects — in the form of government they enjoin in many procedural
details. But they also share a
good deal. Most modern
R C
constitutions create a form of EAD A ARTOON
government that is democratic
in some respects, most claim
to protect certain basic rights.
But constitutions are different
in the way they embody
conceptions of national
identity. Most nations are an
amalgamation of a complex
set of historical traditions;
they weave together the
diverse groups that reside
within the nation in different
ways. For example, German
identity was constituted by
being ethnically German.
The constitution gave
The writing of the new Iraqi constitution after
expression to this identity.
the collapse of Saddam Hussain’s regime saw
The Indian Constitution, on
a lot of conflict between different ethnic
the other hand, does not groups in the country. What do these
make ethnic identity a different people stand for? Compare the
criterion for citizenship. conflict depicted here with that depicted in
Different nations embody earlier cartoons for the European Union and
India.
different conceptions of
what the relationship
.snootraC
elgaC
.thgirypoC
.50GUA81
,lanruoJ
euqreuqublA
,reverT
nhoJ
,”noitutitsnoC
iqarI“
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 24 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
between the different regions of a nation and the central government
should be. This relationship constitutes the national identity of a
country.
Check your progress
Here are some provisions of the Indian and other constitutions.
For each of these write the function that this provision
performs.
The government cannot Limitations on the
order any citizen to follow power of the
or not to follow any religion government
The government must try
to reduce inequalities
in income and wealth
The President has the
power to appoint
the Prime Minister
The Constitution is the
supreme law that everyone
has to obey
Indian citizenship is not
limited to people of
any race, caste or religion
T A C
HE UTHORITY OF A ONSTITUTION
10
We have outlined some of the functions a constitution performs. These
functions explain why most societies have a constitution. But there
are three further questions we can ask about constitutions:
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 25 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
a) What is a constitution?
b) How effective is a constitution? 11
c) Is a constitution just?
In most countries, ‘Constitution’ is a compact
document that comprises a number of articles about the
state, specifying how the state is to be constituted and
what norms it should follow. When we ask for the
constitution of a country we are usually referring to this
document. But some countries, the United Kingdom for
instance, do not have one single document that can be
called the Constitution. Rather they have a series of
documents and decisions that, taken collectively, are
referred to as the constitution. So, we can say that
constitution is the document or set of documents that
seeks to perform the functions that we mentioned above.
But many constitutions around the world exist only
on paper; they are mere words existing on a parchment.
The crucial question is: how effective is a constitution?
What makes it effective? What ensures that it has a real
impact on the lives of people? Making a constitution
effective depends upon many factors.
Mode of promulgation
This refers to how a constitution comes into being. Who
crafted the constitution and how much authority did they
have? In many countries constitutions remain defunct
because they are crafted by military leaders or leaders
who are not popular and do not have the ability to carry
the people with them. The most successful constitutions,
like India, South Africa and the United States, are
constitutions which were created in the aftermath of
popular national movements. Although India’s
Constitution was formally created by a Constituent
Assembly between December 1946 and November What do people do if they find
1949, it drew upon a long history of the nationalist out that their constitution is
movement that had a remarkable ability to take along not just? What happens to
different sections of Indian society together. The people when a constitution
Constitution drew enormous legitimacy from the exists only on paper?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 26 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Debate over Constitution
fact that it was drawn up by people
making in Nepal:
who enjoyed immense public
Making a constitution is not always
credibility, who had the capacity
an easy and smooth affair. Nepal
to negotiate and command the is an example of the complicated
respect of a wide cross-section of nature of constitution making.
society, and who were able to Since 1948, Nepal has had five
constitutions, in 1948, 1951, 1959,
convince the people that the
1962 and 1990. But all these
constitution was not an instrument
constitutions were ‘granted’ by the
for the aggrandisement of their King of Nepal. The 1990
personal power. The final constitution introduced a multi-
document reflected the broad party competition, though the King
continued to hold final powers in
national consensus at the time.
many respects. For many years
Some countries have subjected
Nepal was faced with militant
their constitution to a full-fledged
political agitations for restructuring
referendum, where all the people the government. The main issue
vote on the desirability of a was the role of the monarchy in the
constitution. The Indian constitution of Nepal. Some groups
in Nepal wanted to abolish the
Constitution was never subjected
institution of monarchy and
to such a referendum, but
establish republican form of
nevertheless carried enormous government. Others believed that
public authority, because it had it may be useful to shift to limited
the consensus and backing of monarchy with a reduced role for
the King. The King himself was not
leaders who were themselves
ready to give up powers. He took
popular. Although the
over all powers in October 2002.
Constitution itself was not
Many political parties and
subjected to a referendum, the organisations demanded the
people adopted it as their own by formation of a new constituent
assembly. The Communist Party of
abiding by its provisions.
Nepal (Maoist) was in the forefront
Therefore, the authority of people
of the struggle for a popularly
who enact the constitution helps
elected constituent assembly.
determine in part its prospects for Finally, under pressure of popular
success. agitation, the King had to install a
government acceptable to the
agitating parties. This government
The substantive provisions of a
has stripped the King of almost all
constitution
powers. In 2008, Nepal emerged as
12 It is the hallmark of a successful a democratic republic after
constitution that it gives everyone abolishing the monarchy. Finally,
in society some reason to go along Nepal adopted a new constitution
in 2015.
with its provisions. A constitution
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 27 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
that, for instance, allowed permanent majorities to oppress minority
groups within society would give minorities no reason to go along 13
with the provision of the constitution. Or a constitution that
systematically privileged some members at the expense of others, or
that systematically entrenched the power of small groups in society,
would cease to command allegiance. If any group feels their identity
is being stifled, they will have no reason to abide by the constitution.
No constitution by itself achieves perfect justice. But it has to convince
people that it provides the framework for pursuing basic justice.
Do this thought experiment. Ask yourself this question: What
would be the content of some basic rules in society, such that they
gave everyone a reason to go along with them?
The more a constitution preserves the freedom and equality of
all its members, the more likely it is to succeed. Does the Indian
Constitution, broadly speaking, give everyone a reason to go along
with its broad outlines? After studying this book, one should be
able to answer this question in the affirmative.
Balanced institutional design
Constitutions are often subverted, not by the people, but by small
groups, who wish to enhance their own power. Well crafted
constitutions fragment power in society intelligently so that no single
group can subvert the constitution. One way of such intelligent
designing of a constitution is to ensure that no single institution
acquires monopoly of power. This is often done by fragmenting power
across different institutions. The Indian Constitution, for example,
horizontally fragments power across different institutions like the
Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary and even independent
statutory bodies like the Election Commission. This ensures that
even if one institution wants to subvert the Constitution, others can
check its transgressions. An intelligent system of checks and
balances has facilitated the success of the Indian Constitution.
Another important aspect of intelligent institutional design is:
that a constitution must strike the right balance between certain
values, norms and procedures as authoritative, and at the same
time allow enough flexibility in its operations to adapt to changing
needs and circumstances. Too rigid a constitution is likely to break
under the weight of change; a constitution that is, on the other
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 28 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
hand, too flexible, will give no security,
R C
EAD A ARTOON predictability or identity to a people.
Successful constitutions strike the right
balance between preserving core values and
adapting them to new circumstances. You
will notice the wisdom of makers of the
Indian Constitution in the chapter on the
Constitution as a living document (Chapter
9). The Indian Constitution is described as
‘a living’ document. By striking a balance
between the possibility to change the
provisions and the limits on such changes,
the Constitution has ensured that it will
survive as a document respected by people.
This arrangement also ensures that no
section or group can, on its own, subvert
the Constitution.
Why does the cartoonist describe Therefore in determining whether a
the new Iraqi Constitution as the constitution has authority you can ask
castle of cards? Would this yourself three questions:
description apply to the Indian ± Were the people who enacted the
Constitution?
constitution credible? This question
will be answered in the remaining part
of this chapter.
± Secondly, did the constitution ensure
that power was intelligently organised so that it was not easy for
any group to subvert the constitution? And, most importantly,
does the constitution give everyone some reason to go along with
it? Most of this book is about this question.
± Also, is the constitution the locus of people’s hopes and
aspiration? The ability of the constitution to command voluntary
allegiance of the people depends to a certain extent upon whether
the constitution is just. What are the principles of justice
underlying the Indian Constitution? The last chapter of this book
will answer this question.
14 How was the Indian Constitution made?
Let us find out how the Indian Constitution was made. Formally, the
Constitution was made by the Constituent Assembly which had been
elected for undivided India. It held its first sitting on
50PES
,snootraC
elgaC
thgirypoc
,serA
,
”sdraC
fo
eltsaC“
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 29 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
9 December1946 and reassembled as Constituent Assembly for divided
15
India on 14 August 1947. Its members were chosen by indirect election
by the members of the Provincial Legislative Assemblies that had been
established under the Government of India Act, 1935. The Constituent
Assembly was composed roughly along the lines suggested by the
plan proposed by the committee of the British cabinet, known as the
Cabinet Mission. According to this plan:
± Each Province and each Princely State or group of States were
allotted seats proportional to their respective population roughly
in the ratio of 1:10,00,000. As a result the Provinces (that were
under direct British rule) were to elect 292 members while the
Princely States were allotted a minimum of 93 seats.
± The seats in each Province were distributed among the three main
communities, Muslims, Sikhs and general, in proportion to their
respective populations.
± Members of each community in the Provincial Legislative
Assembly elected their own representatives by the method of
proportional representation with single transferable vote.
± The method of selection in the case of representatives of Princely
States was to be determined by consultation.
For more details, visit http://164.100.47.194/loksabha/constituent/facts.html
“We must make our political democracy a social democracy as well.
Political democracy cannot last unless there lies at the base of it
social democracy. What does social democracy mean? It means a
way of life, which recognises liberty, equality and fraternity as the
principles of life. These principles of liberty, equality and fraternity
are not to be treated as separate items in a trinity. They form a
union of trinity in the sense that to divorce one from the other is to
defeat the very purpose of democracy. Liberty cannot be divorced
from equality, equality cannot be divorced from liberty. Nor can
liberty and equality be divorced from fraternity. Without equality,
liberty would produce the supremacy of the few over the many.
Equality without liberty would kill individual initiative. Without
fraternity, liberty and equality could not become a natural course
of things…”
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, CAD, Vol. XI, p.979, 25 November 1949
Are the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity being practised in
your classroom? How can they coexist? Discuss this with your friends.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 30 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
The previous section discusses the three factors that
make a constitution effective and respectable. How far
does the Indian Constitution pass this test?
Composition of the Constituent Assembly
As a consequence of the Partition under the plan of
3 June 1947 those members who were elected from
territories which fell under Pakistan ceased to be
members of the Constituent Assembly. The number of
members in the Assembly was reduced to 299. The
Constitution was adopted on 26 November 1949. 284
members were actually present on 24 January 1950 and
appended their signature to the Constitution as finally
passed. The Constitution came into force on 26 January
1950. The Constitution was thus framed against the
backdrop of the horrendous violence that the Partition
unleashed on the subcontinent. But it is a tribute to the
fortitude of the framers that they were not only able to
draft a constitution under immense pressure, but also
learnt the right lessons from the unimaginable violence
that accompanied the Partition. The Constitution was
committed to a new conception of citizenship, where not
only would minorities be secure, but religious identity
would have no bearing on citizenship rights.
But this account of the composition of the Constituent
Assembly that drafted the Constitution touches upon only
the surface of how our Constitution was made. Although,
the members of the Assembly were not elected by
What would have happened if
universal suffrage, there was a serious attempt to make
the Constituent Assembly was
the Assembly a representative body. Members of all
elected by all the people of
religions were given representation under the scheme
India? Could it be very
described above; in addition, the Assembly had twenty-
different from what it was?
eight members from the Scheduled Castes. In terms of
political parties, the Congress dominated the Assembly
occupying as many as eighty-two per cent of the seats in
16
the Assembly after the Partition. The Congress itself was
such a diverse party that it managed to accommodate
almost all shades of opinion within it.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 31 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
The Principle of Deliberation
17
The authority of the Constituent Assembly does not come only from
the fact that it was broadly, though not perfectly, representative. It
comes from the procedures it adopted to frame the Constitution and
the values its members brought to their deliberations. While in any
assembly that claims to be representative, it is desirable that diverse
sections of society participate, it is equally important that they
participate not only as representatives of their own identity or
community. Each member deliberated upon the Constitution with
the interests of the whole nation in mind. There were often
disagreements amongst members, but few of these disagreements
could be traced to members protecting their own interests.
There were legitimate differences of principle. And the differences
were many: should India adopt a centralised or decentralised system
of government? What should be the relations between the States and
the centre? What should be the powers of the judiciary? Should the
Constitution protect property rights? Almost every issue that lies at
the foundation of a modern state was discussed with great
sophistication. Only one provision of the Constitution was passed
without virtually any debate: the introduction of universal suffrage
(meaning that all citizens reaching a certain age, would be entitled to
be voters irrespective of religion, caste, education, gender or income).
So, while the members felt no need at all to discuss the issue of who
should have the right to vote, every other matter was seriously
discussed and debated. Nothing can be a better testament to the
democratic commitment of this Assembly.
The Constitution drew its authority from the fact that members
of the Constituent Assembly engaged in what one might call public
reason. The members of the Assembly placed a great emphasis on
discussion and reasoned argument. They did not simply advance
their own interests, but gave principled reasons to other members
for their positions. The very act of giving reasons to others makes
you move away from simply a narrow consideration of your own
interest because you have to give reasons to others to make them go
along with your view point. The voluminous debates in the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 32 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Constituent Assembly, where each clause of the Constitution was
subjected to scrutiny and debate, is a tribute to public reason at its
best. These debates deserved to be memorialised as one of the most
significant chapters in the history of constitution making, equal in
importance to the French and American revolutions.
Procedures
The importance of public reason
was emphasised in the mundane
procedures of the Assembly as
well. The Constituent Assembly
had eight major Committees on
different subjects. Usually,
Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajendra
Prasad, Sardar Patel or B.R.
Ambedkar chaired these
The President of the Constituent Assembly,
Committees. These were not men
Dr. Rajendra Prasad and the Chairman of
the Drafting Committee, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar who agreed with each other on many
greeting each other things. Ambedkar had been a bitter
“... I have realised as nobody else could have, critic of the Congress and Gandhi,
with what zeal and devotion the members accusing them of not doing enough
of the Drafting Committee and especially its
for the upliftment of Scheduled
Chairman, Dr. Ambedkar in spite of his
Castes. Patel and Nehru disagreed
indifferent health, have worked. We could
never make a decision which was or could on many issues. Nevertheless, they
be ever so right as when we put him on the all worked together. Each
Drafting Committee and made him its
Committee usually drafted
Chairman. He has not only justified his
selection but has added lustre to the work particular provisions of the
which he has done. In this connection, it Constitution which were then
would be invidious to make any distinction subjected to debate by the entire
as among the other members of the
Assembly. Usually an attempt was
Committee. I know they have all worked
with the same zeal and devotion as its made to reach a consensus with the
Chairman, and they deserve the thanks of belief that provisions agreed to by
the country.”
all, would not be detrimental to any
Dr. Rajendra Prasad
particular interests. Some
CAD, Vol. XI, p.994, 26 November 1949
provisions were subject to the vote.
18 But in each instance every single
argument, query or concern was
responded to with great care and
18
R C
EAD A ARTOON
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 33 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
in writing. The Assembly met for one hundred and sixty
six days, spread over two years and eleven months. Its 19
sessions were open to the press and the public alike.
Inheritance of the nationalist movement
But no constitution is simply a product of the Assembly
that produces it. An Assembly as diverse as the
Constituent Assembly of India could not have functioned
if there was no background consensus on the main
principles the Constitution should enshrine. These
principles were forged during the long struggle for
freedom. In a way, the Constituent Assembly was giving
concrete shape and form to the principles it had inherited
from the nationalist movement. For decades preceding
the promulgation of the Constitution, the nationalist
movement had debated many questions that were
relevant to the making of the constitution — the shape
and form of government India should have, the values it
should uphold, the inequalities it should overcome.
Answers forged in those debates were given their final
form in the Constitution.
Perhaps the best summary of the principles that the
nationalist movement brought to the Constituent
Assembly is the Objectives Resolution (the resolution that
defined the aims of the Assembly) moved by Nehru in
1946. This resolution encapsulated the aspirations and
values behind the Constitution. What the previous section
terms as substantive provisions of the constitution is
inspired by and summed up by the values incorporated
in the Objectives Resolution. Based on this resolution,
our Constitution gave institutional expression to these
fundamental commitments: equality, liberty, democracy,
What would have happened if
sovereignty and a cosmopolitan identity. Thus, our
we got independence in 1937?
Constitution is not merely a maze of rules and procedures,
Or if we had to wait till 1957?
but a moral commitment to establish a government that
Would our Constitution be
will fulfil the many promises that the nationalist movement very different from what it is
held before the people. today?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 34 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Main points of the Objectives Resolution
√
India is an independent, sovereign, republic;
√
India shall be a Union of erstwhile British Indian
territories, Indian States, and other parts outside
British India and Indian States as are willing to be a
part of the Union;
√
Territories forming the Union shall be autonomous
units and exercise all powers and functions of the
Government and administration, except those assigned
to or vested in the Union;
√
All powers and authority of sovereign and independent
India and its constitution shall flow from the people;
√
All people of India shall be guaranteed and secured
social, economic and political justice; equality of status
and opportunities and equality before law; and
fundamental freedoms - of speech, expression, belief,
faith, worship, vocation, association and action -
subject to law and public morality;
√
The minorities, backward and tribal areas, depressed
and other backward classes shall be provided adequate
safeguards;
√
The territorial integrity of the Republic and its sovereign
rights on land, sea and air shall be maintained
according to justice and law of civilized nations;
√
The land would make full and willing contribution to
the promotion of world peace and welfare of mankind.
Institutional arrangements
The third factor ensuring effectiveness of a constitution is a balanced
arrangement of the institutions of government. The basic principle is
that government must be democratic and committed to the welfare
of the people. The Constituent Assembly spent a lot of time on
evolving the right balance among the various institutions like the
20
executive, the legislature and the judiciary. This led to the
adoption of the parliamentary form and the federal arrangement,
which would distribute governmental powers between the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 35 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
legislature and the executive on the one hand and
between the States and the central government on the 21
other hand.
While evolving the most balanced governmental
arrangements, the makers of our Constitution did not
hesitate to learn from experiments and experiences of
other countries. Thus, the framers of the Constitution
were not averse to borrowing from other constitutional
traditions. Indeed, it is a testament to their wide learning
that they could lay their hands upon any intellectual
argument, or historical example that was necessary for
fulfilling the task at hand. So they borrowed a number of
provisions from different countries.
But borrowing these ideas was not slavish imitation.
Was it a borrowed constitution
Far from it. Each provision of the Constitution had to be
then? Why could we not have
defended on grounds that it was suited to Indian
a constitution that does not
problems and aspirations. India was extremely lucky to
borrow anything from
have an Assembly that instead of being parochial in its
anywhere else?
outlook could take the best available everywhere in the
world and make it their own.
“One likes to ask whether there
can be anything new in a
Constitution framed at this hour
in the history of the world… The
only new things, if there can be
any, in a Constitution framed so
late in the day are the variations
made to remove the faults and to
accommodate it to the needs of
the country.”
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar
CAD, Vol. VII, p.37, 4 November 1948
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar presiding over a discussion in the
Constituent Assembly
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 36 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Provisions adapted from
constitutions of different
countries
British Constitution
Irish
Constitution
First Past the Post
Directive
Parliamentary Form of
Principles of
Government
State Policy
The idea of the rule of law
French
Institution of the Speaker
Constitution
and her/his role
Principles of
Law-making procedure
Liberty, Equality
and Fraternity
United States
Constitution Canadian
Constitution
Charter of
Fundamental A quasi-federal form
Rights of government (a
federal system with a
Power of Judicial strong central
Review and government)
independence of
the judiciary The idea of Residual
Powers
22
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 37 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
Conclusion 23
It is a tribute to the wisdom and foresight of the makers of the
Constitution that they presented to the nation a document that
enshrined fundamental values and highest aspirations shared
by the people. This is one of the reasons why this most intricately
crafted document has not only survived but become a living
reality, when so many other constitutions have perished with
the paper they were first written on.
India’s Constitution is a unique document which in turn
became an exemplar for many other constitutions, most notably
South Africa. The main purpose behind the long search that
went on for almost three years was to strike the right balance
so that institutions created by the Constitution would not be
haphazard or tentative arrangements but would be able to
accommodate the aspirations of the people of India for a long
time to come. You will know more about these arrangements
through the study of the remaining chapters in this book.
Exercises
1. Which of these is not a function of the constitution?
a. It gives a guarantee of the rights of the citizen.
b. It marks out different spheres of power for different branches of
government.
c. It ensures that good people come to power.
d. It gives expression to some shared values.
2. Which of the following is a good reason to conclude that the
authority of the constitution is higher than that of the parliament?
a. The constitution was framed before the parliament came into
being.
b. The constitution makers were more eminent leaders than the
members of the parliament.
c. The constitution specifies how parliament is to be formed and
what are its powers.
d. The constitution cannot be amended by the parliament.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 38 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
3. State whether the following statements about a constitution are True
or False.
a. Constitutions are written documents about formation and power
of the government.
b. Constitutions exist and are required only in democratic
countries.
c. Constitution is a legal document that does not deal with ideals
and values.
d. A constitution gives its citizens a new identity.
4. State whether the following inferences about the making of the Indian
Constitution are Correct or Incorrect. Give reasons to support your
answer.
a. The Constituent Assembly did not represent the Indian people
since it was not elected by all citizens.
b. Constitution making did not involve any major decision since
there was a general consensus among the leaders at that time
about its basic framework.
c. There was little originality in the Constitution, for much of it
was borrowed from other countries.
5. Give two examples each to support the following conclusions about
the Indian Constitution:
a. The Constitution was made by credible leaders who commanded
peoples’ respect.
b. The Constitution has distributed power in such a way as to
make it difficult to subvert it.
c. The Constitution is the locus of people’s hopes and aspirations.
6. Why is it necessary for a country to have a clear demarcation of
powers and responsibilities in the constitution? What would happen
in the absence of such a demarcation?
7. Why is it necessary for a constitution to place limitations on the
rulers? Can there be a constitution that gives no power at all to the
citizens?
8. The Japanese Constitution was made when the US occupation army
24
was still in control of Japan after its defeat in the Second World
War. The Japanese constitution could not have had any provision
that the US government did not like. Do you see any problem in
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 39 ---
Chapter 1: Constitution: Why and How?
this way of making the constitution? In which way was the Indian
experience different from this? 25
9. Rajat asked his teacher this question: “ The constitution is a fifty
year old and therefore outdated book. No one took my consent for
implementing it. It is written in such tough language that I cannot
understand it. Tell me why should I obey this document?” If you
were the teacher, how would you answer Rajat?
10. In a discussion on the experience of the working of our Constitution,
three speakers took three different positions:
a. Harbans: The Indian Constitution has succeeded in giving us a
framework of democratic government.
b. Neha: The Constitution made solemn promises of ensuring
liberty, equality and fraternity. Since this has not happened,
the Constitution has failed.
c. Nazima: The Constitution has not failed us. We have failed the
Constitution.
Do you agree with any of these positions? If yes, why? If not,
what is your own position?
You may watch and discuss the Rajya Sabha TV Series, Samvidhaan: The
Making of the Constitution of India, and films such as Gandhi, Sardar, and
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. These audio-visual materials will deepen your
understanding of the context in which the Constitution was made. They
will also help you to learn about the life and times of our national leaders.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 40 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Two
RIGHTS IN THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION
I
NTRODUCTION
A constitution is not only about the composition of the various organs of
government and the relations among them. As we studied in the last chapter,
the constitution is a document that sets limits on the powers of the government
and ensures a democratic system in which all persons enjoy certain rights. In this
chapter, we shall study the Fundamental Rights contained in the Indian
Constitution. Part three of the Constitution of India lists the Fundamental
Rights and also mentions the limits on these rights. In the past six decades, the
scope of rights has changed and in some respects, expanded. After studying this
chapter, you would know
± what are the various Fundamental Rights listed in the Constitution of India;
± how these rights are protected;
± what role the judiciary has played in protecting and interpreting these rights;
26 and
± what is the difference between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive
Principles of State Policy.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 41 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
T R
HE IMPORTANCE OF IGHTS
27
In 1982 during the construction work for Asian Games the
government engaged a few contractors. These contractors employed
a large number of very poor construction workers from different
parts of the country to build the flyovers and stadiums. These workers
were kept in poor working conditions and were paid less than the
minimum wages decided by the government.
A team of social scientists studied their poor condition and
petitioned the Supreme Court. They argued that employing a person
to work for less than the minimum prescribed wage amounts to
begar or forced labour, which is a violation of the Fundamental Right
against exploitation. The court accepted this plea and directed the
government to ensure that thousands of workers get the prescribed
wages for their work.
Machal Lalung was 23 when he was arrested. A resident of
Chuburi village of Morigaon district of Assam, Machal was charged
of causing grievous injuries. He was found mentally too unstable to
stand trial and was sent as under trial to Lok Priya Gopinath Bordoloi
Mental Hospital in Tejpur for treatment.
Machal was treated successfully and doctors wrote twice to jail
authorities in 1967 and 1996 that he was fit to stand trial. But no
one paid any attention. Machal Lalung remained in “judicial custody.’’
Machal Lalung was released in July 2005. He was 77 then. He
spent 54 years under custody during which his case never came up
for hearing. He was freed when a team appointed by the National
Human Rights Commission intervened after an inspection of
undertrials in the State.
Machal’s entire life was wasted because a proper trial
What if Machal was a rich and
against him never took place. Our Constitution gives every
powerful man? What if those
citizen the right to ‘life and liberty’: this means that every
working with the construction
citizen must also have the right to fair and speedy trial.
contractor were engineers?
Machal’s case shows what happens when rights granted
Would their rights have been
by the Constitution are not available in practice. violated?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 42 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
In the case of the first instance also there was violation
of rights provided in the Constitution. But it was
challenged in the court. As a result, workers could get
what was due to them in the form of their rightful wages.
The constitutional guarantee of the right against
exploitation ensured justice to these workers.
Bill of Rights
Both these examples show the importance of having rights
and of the actual implementation of these rights. A
democracy must ensure that individuals have certain
rights and that the government will always recognise these
rights. Therefore it is often a practice in most democratic
countries to list the rights of the citizens in the constitution
itself. Such a list of rights mentioned and protected by
the constitution is called the ‘bill of rights’. A bill of rights
prohibits government from thus acting against the rights
of the individuals and ensures a remedy in case there is
violation of these rights.
From whom does a constitution protect the rights of
the individual? The rights of a person may be threatened
by another person or private organisation. In such a
situation, the individual would need the protection of the
government. So, it is necessary that the government is
bound to protect the rights of the individual. On the other
hand, the organs of the government (the legislature,
executive, bureaucracy or even the judiciary), in the course
of their functioning, may violate the rights of the person.
I get it! The bill of rights is like
F R I
UNDAMENTAL IGHTS IN THE NDIAN
a warrantee card that we get
C
ONSTITUTION
when we purchase a TV or a
During our freedom struggle, the leaders of the freedom
fan. Isn’t it?
movement had realised the importance of rights and
demanded that the British rulers should respect rights of
the people. The Motilal Nehru committee had demanded
28
a bill of rights as far back as in 1928. It was therefore,
natural that when India became independent and the
Constitution was being prepared, there were no
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 43 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
two opinions on the inclusion Bill of rights in the South African
and protection of rights in the Constitution 29
Constitution. The Constitution
The South African Constitution was
listed the rights that would be inaugurated in December 1996. Its
specially protected and called creation and promulgation took
them ‘fundamental rights’. place at a time when South Africa
The word fundamental still faced the threat of a civil war
after the dissolution of the Apartheid
suggests that these rights are so
government. The South African
important that the Constitution
Constitution says that its “Bill of
has separately listed them and
Rights is a cornerstone of democracy
made special provisions for their
in South Africa”. It forbids
protection. The Fundamental discrimination on the grounds of
Rights are so important that the “race, gender, pregnancy, marital
Constitution itself ensures that status, ethnic or social origin,
they are not violated by the colour, age, disability, religion,
government. conscience, belief, culture, language
and birth”. It grants perhaps the
Fundamental Rights are
most extensive range of rights to the
different from other rights
citizens. A special constitutional
available to us. While ordinary
court enforces the rights enshrined
legal rights are protected and
in the constitution.
enforced by ordinary law, Some of the Rights included in
Fundamental Rights are the constitution of South Africa
protected and guaranteed by include:
the constitution of the country. ± Right to Dignity
Ordinary rights may be changed ± Right to Privacy
by the legislature by ordinary ± Right to fair labour practices
process of law making, but a ± Right to healthy environment
and right to protection of
fundamental right may only be
environment
changed by amending the
± Right to adequate housing
Constitution itself. Besides this,
± Right to health care, food, water
no organ of the government can
and social security
act in a manner that violates ± Children’s rights
them. As we shall study below ± Right to basic and higher
in this chapter, judiciary has the education
powers and responsibility to ± Right of cultural, religious and
linguistic communities
protect the fundamental rights
± Right to information
from violations by actions of the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 44 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
government. Executive as well as legislative actions can be declared
illegal by the judiciary if these violate the fundamental rights or
restrict them in an unreasonable manner. However, fundamental
rights are not absolute or unlimited rights. Government can put
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of our fundamental rights.
Check your progress
Compare the Fundamental Rights in the Indian Constitution
with the Bill of Rights in the South African Constitution. Make
a list of rights that are:
± Common to both the constitutions
± Available in South Africa but not in India
± Clearly granted in South Africa but implicit in the
Indian Constitution
R
IGHT TO EQUALITY
Consider the following two situations. These are imaginary situations.
But similar things do happen and can happen. Do you think they
involve violation of fundamental rights?
± Swadesh Kumar is visiting his village. He is accompanied by one of his
friends. They decided to have a cup of tea at the village roadside hotel. The
shopkeeper knew Swadesh Kumar but asked the name of his friend to know
his caste. After this the shopkeeper served tea to Swadesh Kumar in a nice
mug while his friend was given tea in an earthen cup because he was dalit.
± An order is served to four newsreaders of a television channel that they
would no longer read the news on screen. They are all women. The reason
30
given is that they are above the age of forty-five. Two male newsreaders
above the same age are not barred from presenting the news.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 45 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
31
Right to Equality Right against Exploitation
√ Equality before law √ Prohibition of traffic in human beings
– equal protection of laws and forced labour
√ Prohibition of discrimination on √ Prohibition of employment of children
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or in hazardous jobs
place of birth
– equal access to shops, hotels, wells,
Right to Freedom of Religion
tanks, bathing ghats, roads etc.
√ Equality of opportunity in public √ Freedom of conscience and free
profession, practice and propagation of
employment
√ Abolition of Untouchability religion
√ Freedom to manage religious affairs
√ Abolition of titles √ Freedom to pay taxes for promotion of
any particular religion
Right to Freedom
√ Freedom to attend religious instruction
√ Protection of Right to or worship in certain educational
– freedom of speech and expression;
institutions
– assemble peacefully;
– form associations/unions;
Cultural and Educational Rights
– move freely throughout the territory
of India; √ Protection of language, culture of
– reside and settle in any part of India; minorities
– practise any profession, or to carry √ Right of minorities to establish
on any occupation, trade or business.
educational institutions
√ Protection in respect of conviction for
offences
√ Right to life and personal liberty Right to Constitutional Remedies
√ Right to education √ Right to move the courts to issue
√ Protection against arrest and detention directions/orders/writs for enforcement
in certain cases of rights
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 46 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
These are examples of clear discrimination. In one
instance the discrimination is based on caste and in
another it is based on gender. Do you think that such
discrimination is justified?
Right to equality tries to do away with such and other
discriminations. It provides for equal access to public
places like shops, hotels, places of entertainment, wells,
bathing ghats and places of worship. There cannot be
any discrimination in this access on the grounds only of
religion, race, caste, sex, or place of birth. It also prohibits
any discrimination in public employment on any of the
above mentioned basis. This right is very important
Do such things really happen in
because our society did not practice equal access in the
our country? Or are these purely
past.
imaginary?
The practice of untouchability is one of the crudest
manifestations of inequality. This has been abolished
under the right to equality. The same right also provides
that the state shall confer no title on a person except those
who excel themselves in military or academic field. Thus
right to equality strives to make India a true democracy
by ensuring a sense of equality of dignity and status
among all its citizens.
Have you read the Preamble to our Constitution?
How does it describe equality? You will find that the
Preamble mentions two things about equality: equality
Article 16 (4): Nothing in this article shall
prevent the State from making any
provision for the reservation of
appointments or posts in favour of any
backward class of citizens which, in the
opinion of the State, is not adequately
represented in the services under the
State.
32
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 47 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
of status and equality of opportunity. Equality of opportunity means
that all sections of the society enjoy equal opportunities. But in a 33
society where there are various kinds of social inequalities, what does
equal opportunity mean? The Constitution clarifies that the
government can implement special schemes and measures for
improving the conditions of certain sections of society: children,
women, and the socially and educationally backward classes. You
may have heard about ‘reservations’ in jobs, and in admissions. You
would have wondered why there are reservations if we follow the
principle of equality. In fact Article 16(4) of the constitution explicitly
clarifies that a policy like reservation will not be seen as a violation of
right to equality. If you see the spirit of the Constitution, this is
required for the fulfilment of the right to equality of opportunity.
Y J
OU ARE THE UDGE
You have received a postcard from
Hadibandhu, who identifies himself as a
“member of the dalit community” in Puri
district in Odisha. Men from this community
refused to follow a custom that required
them to wash the feet of the groom and
guests of the ‘upper caste’ during marriage
ceremonies. In revenge, four women from
this community were beaten up and
another was paraded naked. The postcard
writer says “Our children are educated and
they are not willing to do the customary job of washing the feet of
upper caste men, clear the left-overs after the marriage feast and
wash the utensils.”
Assuming that the facts given above are correct, you have to decide:
Does this case involve violation of Fundamental Rights?
What would you order the government to do in this case?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 48 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Article 21: Protection of life and personal
liberty—No person shall be deprived of his
life or personal liberty except according
to procedure established by law.
R F
IGHT TO REEDOM
Equality and freedom or liberty, are the two rights that
are most essential to a democracy. It is not possible to
think of the one without thinking of the other. Liberty
means freedom of thought, expression and action. However
it does not mean freedom to do anything that one desires
or likes. If that were to be permitted then a large number
of people will not be able to enjoy their freedom. Therefore,
freedoms are defined in such a manner that every person
will enjoy her freedom without threatening freedom of
others and without endangering the law and order
situation.
Right to life and personal liberty
The foremost right among rights to freedom is the right to
life and personal liberty. No citizen can be denied his or
her life except by procedure as laid down under the law.
Similarly no one can be denied his/her personal liberty.
That means no one can be arrested without being told
Does it mean that in some cases
the grounds for such an arrest. If arrested, the person
someone’s life can be taken away
by law? That sounds strange. has the right to defend himself by a lawyer of his choice.
Can you think of an example? Also, it is mandatory for the police to take that person to
the nearest magistrate within 24 hours. The magistrate,
who is not part of the police, will decide whether the arrest
is justified or not.
This right is not just confined to a guarantee against
34
taking away of an individual’s life but has wider
application. Various judgments of Supreme Court have
expanded the scope of this right. The Supreme Court
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 49 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
has ruled that this right also includes right to live with human dignity,
35
free from exploitation. The court has held that right to shelter and
livelihood is also included in the right to life because no person can
live without the means of living, that is, the means of livelihood.
Preventive detention
Ordinarily, a person would be arrested after he or she has reportedly
committed some offence. However there are exceptions to this.
Sometimes a person can be arrested simply out of an apprehension
that he or she is likely to engage in unlawful activity and imprisoned
for some time without following the above mentioned procedure. This
is known as preventive detention. It means that if the government
feels that a person can be a threat to law and order or to the peace
and security of the nation, it can detain or arrest that person. This
preventive detention can be extended only for three months. After
three months such a case is brought before an advisory board for
review.
On the face of it, preventive detention looks like an effective tool
in the hands of the government to deal with anti-social elements or
subversives. But this provision has often been misused by the
government. Many people think that there must be greater safeguards
in this law so that it may not be misused against people for reasons
other than that which are really justified. In fact, there is a clear
tension between right to life and personal liberty and the provision
for preventive detention.
Other freedoms
You can see that under the right to freedom there are some other
rights as well. These rights however are not absolute. Each of these
is subject to restrictions imposed by the government.
For example right to freedom of speech and expression is subject
to restrictions such as public order, peace and morality etc. Freedom
to assemble too is to be exercised peacefully and without arms. The
government may impose restrictions in certain areas declaring the
assembly of five or more persons as unlawful. Such powers can be
easily misused by the administration. The genuine protest against
an act or policy of government by the people may be denied
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 50 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
permission. However, if the people are aware and vigilant in regard
to their rights and choose to protest against such acts of
administration such misuse becomes rare. In the Constituent
Assembly itself, some members had expressed their dissatisfaction
about restrictions on rights.
“I feel that many of these fundamental
rights have been framed from the point of
view of a police constable… you will find that
very minimum rights have been conceded
and are almost invariably followed by a
proviso. Almost every article is followed by
a proviso which takes away the right almost
completely,...
…What should be our conception of
fundamental rights?...We want to
incorporate every one of those rights which
our people want to get.”
Somnath Lahiri
CAD, Vol. III, p. 404, 29 April 1947
Rights of accused
Our Constitution ensures that persons accused of various offences
would also get sufficient protection. We often tend to believe that
anyone who is charged with some offence is guilty. However, no one is
guilty unless the court has found that person guilty of an offence. It is
also necessary that a person accused of any crime should get adequate
opportunity to defend herself or himself. To ensure a fair trial in courts,
the Constitution has provided three rights:
± no person would be punished for the same offence more than
once,
36 ± no law shall declare any action as illegal from a backdate,
and
± no person shall be asked to give evidence against himself or
herself.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 51 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
Check your progress
Do you think that the following situations demand 37
restrictions on right to freedom? Give reasons to support
your answer.
a. People have assembled for a peace march after
communal riots in the city.
b. Dalits are denied entry in a temple. A march is being
organised to forcibly enter the temple.
c. Hundreds of Adivasis blocked the road demanding
that the land taken away from them for an industry
be returned.
d. A caste panchayat is meeting to decide the
punishment to a young couple for marrying outside
their caste.
R E
IGHT AGAINST XPLOITATION
In our country there are millions of
people who are underprivileged and
deprived. They may be subjected to
exploitation by their fellow human
beings. One such form of
exploitation in our country has been
begar or forced labour without
payment. Another closely related
form of exploitation is buying and
selling of human beings and using
them as slaves. Both of these are
prohibited under the Constitution.
Forced labour was imposed by
landlords, moneylenders and other
wealthy persons in the past. Some
form of bonded labour still
Name the fundamental rights whose
continues in the country, specially
violation is depicted in this
in brick kiln work. It has now
photograph.
been declared a crime and it is
punishable.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 52 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
The Constitution also forbids employment of children below the
age of 14 years in dangerous jobs like factories and mines. With
child labour being made illegal and right to education becoming a
fundamental right for children, this right against exploitation has
become more meaningful.
R F R
IGHT TO REEDOM OF ELIGION
According to our Constitution, everyone enjoys the right to follow
the religion of his or her choice. This freedom is considered as a
hallmark of democracy. Historically, there were rulers and emperors
in different parts of the world who did not allow residents of their
countries to enjoy the right to freedom of religion. Persons following
a religion different from that of the ruler were either persecuted or
forced to convert to the official religion of the rulers. Therefore,
democracy has always incorporated the freedom to follow the religion
of one’s choice as one of its basic principles.
Freedom of faith and worship
In India, everyone is free to choose a religion and practice that religion.
Freedom of religion also includes the freedom of conscience. This
means that a person may choose any religion or may choose not to
follow any religion. Freedom of religion includes the freedom to
profess, follow and propagate any religion. Freedom of religion is
subject to certain limitations. The government can impose restrictions
on the practice of freedom of religion in order to protect public order,
morality and health. This means that the freedom of religion is not
an unlimited right. The government can interfere in religious matters
for rooting out certain social evils. For example in the past, the
government has taken steps banning practices like sati, bigamy or
human sacrifice. Such restrictions cannot be opposed in the name
of interference in right to freedom of religion.
The limitations on the right to freedom of religion always produce
tensions between followers of various religions and the government.
When the government seeks to restrict some activities of any religious
group, people of that religion feel that this is interference in their
38 religion.
Freedom of religion becomes a matter of political controversy for
yet another reason. The Constitution has guaranteed the right
to propagate one’s religion. This includes persuading people to
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 53 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
convert from one religion to another. However, some people resent
conversions on the ground that these are based on intimidation or 39
inducement. The Constitution does not allow forcible conversions. It
only gives us the right to spread information about our religion and
thus attract others to it.
Equality of all religions
Being a country which is home to several religions, it is necessary
that the government must extend equal treatment to different
religions. Negatively, it means that government will not favour any
particular religion. India does not have any official religion. We don’t
have to belong to any particular religion in order to be a prime
minister or president or judge or any other public official. We have
also seen that under the right to equality, there is a guarantee that
government will not discriminate on the basis of religion in giving
employment. The institutions run by the state will not preach any
religion or give religious education nor will they favour persons of
any religion. The objective of these provisions is to sustain and
nurture the principle of secularism.
Activity
Make a list of public religious activities that take
place in your village or city.
Which of these involve an exercise of right to religious
freedom?
Discuss what could have happened if this right was
not available to people in your locality.
C E R
ULTURAL AND DUCATIONAL IGHTS
When we talk of the Indian society, the image of diversity comes before
our minds. India is not made up of a monolithic society. We are a
society that has vast diversity. In such a society that is full of diversity,
there would be social sections which are small in numbers compared
to some other groups. If a group is in minority, will it have to adopt
the culture of the majority?
Our Constitution believes that diversity is our strength. Therefore,
one of the fundamental rights is the right of the minorities to
maintain their culture. This minority status is not dependent only
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 54 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
“A heavy responsibility would be cast
on the majority to see that in fact the
minorities feel secure. …the only safety
for the minorities lies in a secular State.
It pays them to be nationalists ...The
majority community should not boast
of their national outlook. ...They should
try to place themselves in the position
of the minorities and try to appreciate
their fears. All demands for safeguards
...are the products of those fears that
the minorities have in their minds, ...as
regards their language, their script and
also about the services.”
Sardar Hukam Singh
CAD, VIII, p. 322, 26 May 1949
upon religion. Linguistic and cultural minorities are also included
in this provision. Minorities are groups that have common language
or religion and in a particular part of the country or in the country
as a whole, they are outnumbered by some other social section. Such
communities have a culture, language and a script of their own, and
have the right to conserve and develop these.
All minorities, religious or linguistic, can set up their own
educational institutions. By doing so, they can preserve and develop
their own culture. The government will not, while granting aid to
educational institutions, discriminate against any educational
institution on the basis that it is under the management of minority
community.
R C R
IGHT TO ONSTITUTIONAL EMEDIES
One would agree that our Constitution contains a very impressive
40 list of Fundamental Rights. But merely writing down a list of rights
is not enough. There has to be a way through which they could be
realised in practice and defended against any attack on these rights.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 55 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
Right to constitutional remedies is the means through
41
which this is to be achieved. Dr. Ambedkar considered
the right to constitutional remedies as ‘heart and soul of
the constitution’. It is so because this right gives a citizen
the right to approach a High Court or the Supreme Court
to get any of the fundamental rights restored in case of
their violation. The Supreme Court and the High Courts
can issue orders and give directives to the government for
the enforcement of rights.
The courts can issue various special orders known as
writs.
±±±±± Habeas corpus: A writ of habeas corpus means I am in minority in my locality
that the court orders that the arrested person but majority in the town,
should be presented before it. It can also order to minority if you look at my
set free an arrested person if the manner or language but majority if you go
grounds of arrest are not lawful or satisfactory. by my religion… Aren’t we all
±±±±± Mandamus: This writ is issued when the court minorities?
finds that a particular office holder is not doing
legal duty and thereby is infringing on the right of
an individual.
±±±±± Prohibition: This writ is issued by a higher court
(High Court or Supreme Court) when a lower court
has considered a case going beyond its jurisdiction.
±±±±± Quo Warranto: If the court finds that a person is
holding office but is not entitled to hold that office,
it issues the writ of quo warranto and restricts that
person from acting as an office holder.
±±±±± Certiorari: Under this writ, the court orders a
lower court or another authority to transfer a
matter pending before it to the higher authority or
court.
Apart from the judiciary, many other mechanisms
have been created in later years for the protection of
rights. You may have heard about the National
Commission on Minorities, the National Commission on
Women, the National Commission on Scheduled Castes,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 56 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
etc. These institutions protect the rights of women, minorities or
Dalits. Besides, the National Human Rights Commission has also
been established by law to protect the fundamental and other kinds
of rights.
National Human Rights Commission (NHRC)
The real test of the rights given by any constitution is in
their actual implementation. The poor, illiterate and the
deprived sections of the society must be able to exercise
their rights. Independent organisations like the People’s
Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) or People’s Union for
Democratic Rights (PUDR) have been working as
watchdogs against the violations of rights. In this
background, the government has established in 1993 an
institution, the National Human Rights Commission.
The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) is
composed of a former chief justice of the Supreme Court
of India, a former judge of the Supreme Court, a former
chief justice of a High Court and two other members who
have knowledge and practical experience in matters
relating to human rights.
The Commission’s functions include inquiry at its own
initiative or on a petition presented to it by a victim into
complaint of violation of human rights; visit to jails to
study the condition of the inmates; undertaking and
promoting research in the field of human rights, etc.
The Commission receives complaints in thousands
every year. These relate to custodial death, custodial rape,
disappearances, police excesses, failure in taking action,
indignity to women, etc. Its most significant intervention
has been on disappeared youth in Punjab and
investigation and trial of Gujarat riot cases where its
intervention proved effective.
The Commission does not have the power of
prosecution. It can merely make recommendations to the
42
government or recommend to the courts to initiate
proceedings based on the inquiry that it conducts.
For more details, visit http://www.nhrc.nic.in
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 57 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
D P S P
IRECTIVE RINCIPLES OF TATE OLICY
43
The makers of our Constitution knew that independent India was
going to face many challenges. Foremost among these was the
challenge to bring about equality and well-being of all citizens. They
also thought that certain policy direction was required for handling
these problems. At the same time, the Constitution did not want
future governments to be bound by certain policy decisions.
Therefore, some guidelines were incorporated in the Constitution
but they were not made legally enforceable: this means that if a
government did not implement a particular guideline, we cannot go
to the court asking the court to instruct the government to implement
that policy. Thus, these guidelines are ‘non-justiciable’ i.e., parts of
the Constitution that cannot be enforced by the judiciary. Those who
framed our Constitution thought that the moral force behind these
guidelines would ensure that the government would take them
seriously. Besides, they expected that the people would also hold
the governments responsible for implementing these directives. So,
a separate list of policy guidelines is included in the Constitution.
The list of these guidelines is called the Directive Principles of State
Policy.
What do the Directive Principles contain?
The chapter on Directive Principles lists mainly three things:
± the goals and objectives that we as a society should adopt;
± certain rights that individuals should enjoy apart from the
Fundamental Rights; and
± certain policies that the government should adopt.
You may get some idea of the vision of makers of our Constitution
by looking at some of the Directive Principles shown below.
The governments from time to time tried to give effect to some
Directive Principles of State Policy. They passed several zamindari
abolition bills, nationalised banks, enacted numerous factory laws,
fixed minimum wages, cottage and small industries were promoted
and provisions for reservation for the uplift of the scheduled castes
and scheduled tribes were made. Such efforts to give effect to the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 58 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Directive Principles include the right to education, formation of
panchayati raj institutions all over the country, partial right to work
under employment guarantee programme and the mid-day meal
scheme etc.
Fundamental Duties of citizens
± In 1976, the 42nd amendment to the Constitution was
passed. Among other things, this amendment inserted
a list of Fundamental Duties of Citizens. In all, ten duties
were enumerated. However, the Constitution does not
say anything about enforcing these duties.
± As citizens, we must abide by the Constitution, defend
our country, promote harmony among all citizens, protect
the environment.
± However, it must be noted that our Constitution does
not make the enjoyment of rights dependent or
conditional upon fulfilment of duties. In this sense, the
inclusion of fundamental duties has not changed the
status of our fundamental rights.
Check your progress
It is estimated that there are about three million urban homeless
in India. Night shelters are not available for more than five per
cent of this population. Hundreds of these old, sick homeless
people are killed by cold wave during winter. They cannot have
ration and voting cards in the absence of any ‘proof of residence’.
Without these documents they also cannot avail government
help as needy patients. A large number of these homeless people
are casual workers, who earn very low wages. They travel to
the city in search of work from different parts of the country.
Use these facts to write a petition to the Supreme Court of
India under the Right to Constitutional Remedies. Your petition
should mention:
a. What Fundamental Rights are being denied to the homeless
in their everyday life?
44
b. What kind of order would you request the Supreme Court
to issue?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 59 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
R F R
ELATIONSHIP BETWEEN UNDAMENTAL IGHTS AND
45
D P
IRECTIVE RINCIPLES
It is possible to see both Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles
as complementary to each other. Fundamental Rights restrain
the government from doing certain things while Directive
D P
IRECTIVE RINCIPLES
Goals
Welfare of the people; Social,
economic and political
justice;
Non-justiciable rights
Raising the standard of
living; equitable distribution
Adequate livelihood;
of resources;
Equal pay for equal work for
Promotion of international
men and women;
peace
Right against economic
exploitation;
Policies Right to work;
Uniform civil code; Early childhood care and
education to children below
Prohibition of consumption the age of six years
of alcoholic liquor;
Promotion of cottage
industries;
Prevention of slaughter of
useful cattle; Tell me what is the point of
saying nice things in the
Promotion of village Constitution if these cannot be
panchayats implemented by any court?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 60 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Principles exhort the government to do certain things. Fundamental
Rights mainly protect the rights of individuals while directive
principles ensure the well-being of the entire society.
However, at times, when government intends to implement
Directive Principles of State Policy, it can come in conflict with the
Fundamental Rights of the citizen.
This problem arose when the government sought to pass laws to
abolish zamindari system. These measures were opposed on the
ground that they violated right to property. However, keeping in mind
the societal needs that are greater than the individual interests, the
government amended the Constitution to give effect to the Directive
Principles of State Policy. This led to a long legal battle. The executive
and the judiciary took different positions. The government claimed
that rights can be abridged for giving effect to Directive Principles.
This argument assumed that rights were a hindrance to welfare of
the people. On the other hand, the court held the view that
Fundamental Rights were so important and sacred that they cannot
be limited even for purposes of implementing Directive Principles.
Right to Property
Behind the controversy about the relationship between rights
and directive principles, there was one important reason: in
the Constitution, originally, there was a fundamental right to
‘acquire, possess and maintain’ property. But the Constitution
made it clear that property could be taken away by the
government for public welfare. Since 1950, government made
many laws that limited this right to property. This right was at
the centre of the long debate over the relationship between rights
and directive principles. Finally, in 1973, the Supreme Court
gave a decision that the right to property was not part of the
basic structure of the Constitution and therefore, parliament
had power to abridge this right by an amendment. In 1978, the
44th amendment to the Constitution removed the right to property
from the list of Fundamental Rights and converted it into a simple
46
legal right under article 300 A.
What difference, do you think, this change of status makes
to the right to property?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 61 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
This generated another complicated debate. This related to the
amendment of the Constitution. The government was saying that 47
Parliament can amend any part of the Constitution. The court was
saying that Parliament cannot make an amendment that violated
Fundamental Rights. This controversy was settled by an important
decision of the Supreme Court in Kesavananda Bharati case. In this
case, the court said that there are certain basic features of the
Constitution and these cannot be changed by Parliament. We shall
discuss this in greater detail in Chapter 9 on ‘Constitution as a Living
Document’.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 62 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Check your progress
Read the main points of the Bill of Rights in the South
African Constitution and the Directive Principles in India.
Which are the common points in the two lists?
Why did the South African Constitution put these in the
Bill of Rights?
If you were writing the constitution for a new country,
what would you suggest?
Conclusion
In the writings of Jotirao Phuley (1827-1890), a radical social
reformer from Maharashtra, we find one of the earliest
expressions of the view that rights include both freedom and
equality. During the national movement, this idea of rights was
further sharpened and expanded to constitutional rights. Our
Constitution reflected this long tradition and listed the
fundamental rights. Since 1950, the judiciary has functioned
as an important protector of rights.
Judicial interpretations have expanded the scope of rights
in many respects. The government and administration of our
country function within this overall framework. Rights enforce
limitations on the functioning of the government and ensure
democratic governance of the country.
48
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 63 ---
Chapter 2: Rights in the Indian Constitution
Exercises
49
1. Write true or false against each of these statements:
a) A Bill of Rights lays down the rights enjoyed by the people of a
country.
b) A Bill of Rights protects the liberties of an individual.
c) Every country of the world has a Bill of Rights.
d) The Constitution guarantees remedy against violation of Rights.
2. Which of the following is the best description of Fundamental Rights?
a) All the rights an individual should have.
b) All the rights given to citizens by law.
c) The rights given and protected by the Constitution.
d) The rights given by the Constitution that cannot ever be
restricted.
3. Read the following situations. Which Fundamental Right is being
used or violated in each case and how?
a) Overweight male cabin crew are allowed to get promotion in the
national airlines but their women colleagues who gain weight
are penalised.
b) A director makes a documentary film that criticises the policies
of the government.
c) People displaced by a big dam take out a rally demanding
rehabilitation.
d) Andhra society runs Telugu medium schools outside Andhra
Pradesh.
4. Which of the following is a correct interpretation of the Cultural
and Educational Rights?
a) Only children belonging to the minority group that has opened
educational institution can study there.
b) Government schools must ensure that children of the minority
group will be introduced to their belief and culture.
c) Linguistic and religious minorities can open schools for their
children and keep it reserved for them.
d) Linguistic and religious minorities can demand that their
children must not study in any educational institution except
those managed by their own community.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 64 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
5. Which of the following is a violation of Fundamental Rights and
why?
a) Not paying minimum wages
b) Banning of a book
c) Banning of loudspeakers after 9 pm.
d) Making a speech
6. An activist working among the poor says that the poor don’t need
Fundamental Rights. What they need are Directive Principles to be
made legally binding. Do you agree with this? Give your reasons.
7. Several reports show that caste groups previously associated with
scavenging are forced to continue in this job. Those in positions of
authority refuse to give them any other job. Their children are
discouraged from pursuing education. Which of their Fundamental
Rights are being violated in this instance?
8. A petition by a human rights group drew attention of the court to
the condition of starvation and hunger in the country. Over five
crore tonnes of food grains was stored in the godowns of the Food
Corporation of India. Research shows that a large number of ration
cardholders do not know about the quantity of food grains they can
purchase from fair price shops. It requested the court to order the
government to improve its public distribution system.
a. Which different rights does this case involve? How are these
rights interlinked?
b. Should these rights form part of the right to life?
9. Read the statement by Somnath Lahiri in the Constitutent Assembly
quoted in this chapter. Do you agree with him? If yes, give instances
to prove it. If not, give arguments against his position.
10. Which of the Fundamental Rights is in your opinion the most
important right? Summarise its provisions and give arguments to
show why it is most important.
50
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 65 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Chapter Three 51
ELECTION AND
REPRESENTATION
I
NTRODUCTION
Have you ever played chess? What would happen if the black knight suddenly
started moving straight rather than two and a half squares? Or, what would
happen if in a game of cricket, there were no umpires? In any sport, we need to
follow certain rules. Change the rules and the outcome of the game would be
very different. Similarly a game needs an impartial umpire whose decision is
accepted by all the players. The rules and the umpire have to be agreed upon
before we begin to play a game. What is true of a game is also true of elections.
There are different rules or systems of conducting elections. The outcome of the
election depends on the rules we have adopted. We need some machinery to
conduct the elections in an impartial manner. Since these two decisions need to
be taken before the game of electoral politics can begin, these cannot be left to
any government. That is why these basic decisions about elections are written
down in the constitution of a democratic country.
In this chapter we shall study the constitutional provisions regarding elections
and representation. We shall focus on the importance of the method of election
chosen in our Constitution and the implications of the constitutional provisions
regarding impartial machinery for conducting elections. We shall also look at
some suggestions for amending the constitutional provisions in this respect. After
reading this chapter, you would understand:
± different methods of election;
± the characteristics of the system of election adopted in our country;
± the importance of the provisions for free and fair elections; and
± the debate on electoral reforms.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 66 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
E D
LECTIONS AND EMOCRACY
Let us begin by asking ourselves two simple questions about elections
and democracy.
± Can we have democracy without holding elections?
± Can we hold elections without having democracy?
Let us have a discussion in the classroom on both these questions
by using examples from whatever we have learnt so far in the previous
classes.
The first question reminds
us of the necessity of
R C
EAD A ARTOON
representation in a large
democracy. All citizens cannot
take direct part in making
every decision. Therefore,
representatives are elected by
the people. This is how elections
become important. Whenever
we think of India as a
democracy, our mind
invariably turns to the last
elections. Elections have today
become the most visible
symbol of the democratic
process. We often distinguish
between direct and indirect
democracy. A direct
democracy is one where the
citizens directly participate in
the day-to-day decision-
making and in the running of
They say elections are carnival of
the government. The ancient
democracy. But this cartoon depicts chaos
city-states in Greece were
instead. Is this true of elections always? Is
it good for democracy? considered examples of direct
democracy. Many would
52 consider local governments,
especially gram sabhas, to be
the closest examples of direct
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
17 February 1957
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 67 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
democracy. But this kind of direct democracy cannot be
practiced when a decision has to be taken by lakhs and 53
crores of people. That is why rule by the people usually
means rule by people’s representatives.
In such an arrangement citizens choose their
representatives who, in turn, are actively involved in
governing and administering the country. The method
followed to choose these representatives is referred to as
an election. Thus, the citizens have a limited role in taking
major decisions and in running the administration. They
are not very actively involved in making of the policies.
Citizens are involved only indirectly, through their elected
representatives. In this arrangement, where all major
decisions are taken by elected representatives, the method
by which people elect their representatives becomes very
important.
The second question reminds us of the fact that not
all elections are democratic. A large number of non-
democratic countries also hold elections. In fact non-
democratic rulers are very keen to present themselves as
democratic. They do so by holding election in such a way
that it does not threaten their rule. Can you think of some
examples of such non-democratic elections? What do you
think would distinguish a democratic from a non-
democratic election? What can be done to ensure that
elections in a country would be conducted in a
democratic way?
This is where constitution comes in. The constitution
of a democratic country lays down some basic rules about
elections. The details are usually left to be worked out by
laws passed by the legislatures. These basic rules are
usually about
± Who is eligible to vote?
± Who is eligible to contest?
± Who is to supervise elections? What is the need of writing
± How do the voters choose their representatives? these rules in the constitution?
± How are the votes to be counted and Why can’t these be decided by
representatives elected? the Parliament? Or by all the
parties before every election?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 68 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Like most democratic constitutions, the Constitution of India
answers all these questions. As you can see, the first three questions
are about ensuring that elections are free and fair and can thus be
called democratic. The last two questions are about ensuring a fair
representation. In this chapter you will consider both these aspects
of the Constitutional provisions about elections.
Activity
Collect newspaper clippings about elections in India
and any other country. Classify the clippings in the
following categories:
a. System of representation
b. Voter eligibility
c. Role of the Election Commission.
If you have access to internet, visit the
websites of the Election Commission of India,
https://eci.gov.in, and ACE project, The Electoral
Knowledge Network, http://aceproject.org and
collect the information mentioned above for at
least four countries.
E S I
LECTION YSTEM IN NDIA
You may have noted above a reference to different methods or the
systems of elections. You may have wondered what these were all
about. You may have seen or read about different methods of
electioneering or campaigning in the elections. But what are different
methods of elections? There is a system of conducting elections. There
are authorities and rules about do’s and don’ts. Is that what election
system is all about? You may have wondered why the constitution
needs to write down how the votes are to be counted and
representatives elected. Isn’t that very obvious? People go and vote.
The candidate who gets highest votes gets elected. That is what
elections are all over the world. Why do we need to think about it?
We need to, because this question is not as simple as it appears
54
to us. We have got so used to our system of elections that we think
that there cannot be any other way. In a democratic election, people
vote and their preference decides who will win the contest. But there
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 69 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Activity
55
Hold mock elections in your class to elect four class
representatives. Hold the election in three different ways:
± Each student can give one vote. The four highest vote getters
are elected.
± Each student has four votes and can give them all to one
candidate or split the votes among different candidates. The
four highest vote getters are elected.
± Each voter gives a preference ranking to candidates and the
counting follows the method of election of Rajya Sabha
members described below.
Did the same four persons win the election in each of these
methods? If not, what was the difference? Why?
can be very different ways in which people make their choices and
very different ways in which their preferences can be counted. These
different rules of the game can make a difference to who the winner
of the game will be. Some rules can favour bigger parties; some rules
can help the smaller players. Some rules can favour the majority
community, others can protect the minorities. Let us look at one
dramatic instance to see how this happens.
First Past the Post System
Look at the newspaper clipping.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 70 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
It talks of one historic moment in India’s democracy.
In the Lok Sabha elections of 1984, the Congress party
came to power winning 415 of the 543 Lok Sabha seats –
more than 80% of the seats. Such a victory was never
achieved by any party in the Lok Sabha. What did this
election show?
The Congress party won four-fifths of the seats. Does
it mean that four out of five Indian voters voted for the
Congress party? Actually not. Take a look at the enclosed
Less than 50 per cent votes and table. The Congress party got 48% of the votes. This means
more than 80 per cent seats! that only 48% of those who voted, voted in favour of the
Isn’t that unfair? How could
candidates put up by the Congress party, but the party
our Constitution makers accept
still managed to win more than 80% of the seats in the
such an unfair system?
Lok Sabha. Look at the performance of other parties. The
BJP got 7.4 per cent votes but less than one per cent seats.
How did that happen?
Votes and seats won by some major parties
in Lok Sabha Election of 1984
Party Votes (%) Seats
Congress 48.0 415
BJP 7.4 2
Janata 6.7 10
Lok Dal 5.7 3
CPI (M) 5.7 22
Telugu Desam 4.1 30
DMK 2.3 2
AIADMK 1.6 12
Akali Dal 1.0 7
AGP 1.0 7
This happened because in our country we follow a
special method of elections. Under this system:
± The entire country is divided into 543 constituencies;
56 ± Each constituency elects one representative; and
± The candidate who secures the highest number of
votes in that constituency is declared elected.
It is important to note that in this system whoever has
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 71 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
more votes than all other candidates, is declared elected.
The winning candidate need not secure a majority of the 57
votes. This method is called the First Past the Post (FPTP)
system. In the electoral race, the candidate who is ahead
of others, who crosses the winning post first of all, is the
winner. This method is also called the Plurality System.
This is the method of election prescribed by the
Constitution.
Let us now go back to our example. The Congress
party won greater share of seats than its share of votes
because in many of the constituencies in which its
candidates won, they secured less than 50% of the votes.
If there are several candidates, the winning candidate often
gets much less than 50% of the votes. The votes that go to
all the losing candidates go ‘waste’, for those candidates
or parties get no seat from those votes. Suppose a party
gets only 25 per cent of the votes in every constituency,
but everyone else gets even less votes. In that case, the
party could win all the seats with only 25 per cent votes
or even less.
Proportional Representation
Let us compare this to how elections take place in Israel
that follows a very different system of elections. In Israel
once the votes are counted, each party is allotted the share
of seats in the parliament in proportion to its share of
votes (see Box). Each party fills its quota of seats by picking
those many of its nominees from a preference list that has
been declared before the elections. This system of elections
is called the Proportional Representation (PR) system. In
this system a party gets the same proportion of seats as
its proportion of votes.
In the PR system there could be two variations. In
some countries, like Israel or Netherlands, the entire This is very confusing! How do
country is treated as one constituency and seats are I know who is my MP or my
allocated to each party according to its share of votes in MLA in this system? Who
would I go to if I have any
the national election. The other method is when the
work?
country is divided into several multi-member
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 72 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
constituencies as in Argentina and Portugal. Each party prepares a
list of candidates for each constituency, depending on how many
have to be elected from that constituency. In both these variations,
voters exercise their preference for a party and not a candidate. The
seats in a constituency are distributed on the basis of votes polled
58
by a party. Thus, representatives from a constituency, would and
do belong to different parties. In India, we have adopted PR system
Proportional Representation in Israel
Israel follows proportional representation system of election. Elections to
the legislature (Knesset) take place every four years. Every party declares a
list of its candidates, but voters vote for the party and not for the candidates.
A party gets seats in the legislature in proportion to the votes polled by it.
This allows even smaller parties with very small support base to get
representation in the legislature. (A party must get a minimum of 3.25%
votes to be eligible to get seats in the legislature.) This often leads to a
multi-party coalition government.
The following table shows the result of the 2015 elections to the Knesset.
Based on this, you can find out what percentage of seats various parties got
in that election.
Name of List (Party) % of total Number of % of total
votes seats seats
Likud 23.40 30
Zionist Camp 18.67 24
Joint List (Hadash, National
Democratic Assembly, Arab Movement
for Renewal, United Arab List) 10.61 13
Yesh Atid 8.82 11
Kulanu 7.49 10
Habayit Hayehudi 6.74 8
Shas 5.74 7
Yisrael Beitenu 5.10 6
United Torah Judaism 4.99 6
58
Israel’s Left 3.93 5
Other Parties 4.51 0
Total 100 120
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 73 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
on a limited scale for indirect elections. The Constitution prescribes
a third and complex variation of the PR system for the election of 59
President, Vice President, and for the election to the Rajya Sabha
and Vidhan Parishads.
Comparison of FPTP and PR system of election
FPTP PR
The country is divided Large geographical areas
into small geographical are demarcated as
units called constituencies constituencies. The entire
or districts country may be a single
constituency
Every constituency elects More than one
one representative representative may be
elected from one
constituency
Voter votes for a candidate Voter votes for the party
A party may get more seats Every party gets seats in the
than votes in the legislature legislature in proportion to
the percentage of votes
that it gets
Candidate who wins the Candidate who wins the
election may not get elections gets majority of
majority (50%+1) votes votes.
Examples: U.K., India Examples: Israel,
Netherlands
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 74 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
How does PR work in Rajya Sabha elections
A third variant of PR, the Single Transferable Vote system
(STV), is followed for Rajya Sabha elections. Every State
has a specific quota of seats in the Rajya Sabha. The
members are elected by the respective State legislative
assemblies. The voters are the MLAs in that State. Every
voter is required to rank candidates according to her or
his preference. To be declared the winner, a candidate
must secure a minimum quota of votes, which is
determined by a formula:
 
Totalvotespolled
 +1
 Total number of candidatesto beelected+1
For example if 4 Rajya Sabha members have to be
elected by the 200 MLAs in Rajasthan, the winner would
require (200/4+1= 40+1) 41 votes. When the votes are
counted it is done on the basis of first preference votes
secured by each candidate, of which the candidate has
secured the first preference votes. If after the counting of
all first preference votes, required number of candidates
fail to fulfil the quota, the candidate who secured the
lowest votes of first preference is eliminated and his/her
votes are transferred to those who are mentioned as
second preference on those ballot papers. This process
continues till the required number of candidates are
declared elected.
Why did India adopt the FPTP system?
The answer is not very difficult to guess. If you have carefully read
the box explaining the Rajya Sabha elections, you would have noticed
that it is a complicated system which may work in a small country,
but would be difficult to work in a sub-continental country like India.
60
The reason for the popularity and success of the FPTP system is its
simplicity. The entire election system is extremely simple to
understand even for common voters who may have no specialised
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 75 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
knowledge about politics and elections. There is also a clear choice
presented to the voters at the time of elections. Voters have to simply 61
endorse a candidate or a party while voting. Depending on the nature
of actual politics, voters may either give greater importance to the
party or to the candidate or balance the two. The FPTP system offers
voters a choice not simply between parties but specific candidates.
In other electoral systems, especially PR systems, voters are often
asked to choose a party and the representatives are elected on the
basis of party lists. As a result, there is no one representative who
represents and is responsible for one locality. In constituency based
system like the FPTP, the voters know who their own representative
is and can hold him or her accountable.
R C
EAD A ARTOON
These members of the ruling party are trying to listen to the
‘tiny’ opposition! Was this the effect of our electoral system?
More importantly, the makers of our Constitution also felt that
PR based election may not be suitable for giving a stable government
in a parliamentary system. We shall study the nature of parliamentary
system of executive in the next chapter. This system requires that
the executive has majority in the legislature. You will notice that the
PR system may not produce a clear majority because seats in the
legislature would be divided on the basis of share of votes. The FPTP
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
29 May 1949
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 76 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Check your progress
Here are the results of the Tamil Nadu Assembly
Election held in 2016.
± What would be the composition of the
Assembly if it was a PR system like in Israel?
± Which party would have a majority?
± Who would form the government?
± What would be the effect of this system on
the relationship of political parties?
Total Seats: 234 (Election held in 232)
Party % of total Number of Seats in PR
votes seats
AIADMK 40.77 135
DMK 31.64 88
INC 6.42 8
PMK 5.32 0
BJP 2.84 0
DMDK 2.39 0
CPI 0.79 0
IUML 0.73 1
Others Parties 6.37 0
Independents 1.43 0
NOTA 1.30 –
system generally gives the largest party or coalition some extra bonus
seats, more than their share of votes would allow. Thus this system
makes it possible for parliamentary government to function smoothly
and effectively by facilitating the formation of a stable government.
Finally, the FPTP system encourages voters from different social
groups to come together to win an election in a locality. In a diverse
country like India, a PR system would encourage each community
to form its own nation-wide party. This may also have been at the
back of the mind of our constitution makers.
The experience of the working of the Constitution has confirmed
62 the expectation of the constitution makers. The FPTP system has
proved to be simple and familiar to ordinary voters. It has helped
larger parties to win clear majorities at the centre and the State level.
The system has also discouraged political parties that get all their
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 77 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
votes only from one caste or community. Normally, the working of
the FPTP system results in a two-party system. This means that 63
there are two major competitors for power and power is often shared
by these two parties alternately. It is difficult for new parties or the
third party to enter the competition and share power. In this respect,
the experience of FPTP in India is slightly different. After
independence, though we adopted the FPTP system, there emerged
a one party dominance and along with it, there existed many smaller
parties. After 1989, India is witnessing the functioning of the multi-
party coalitions. At the same time, gradually, in many States, a two-
party competition is emerging. But the distinguishing feature of
India’s party system is that the rise of coalitions has made it possible
for new and smaller parties to enter into electoral competition in spite
of the FPTP system.
R
ESERVATION OF CONSTITUENCIES
We have noticed that in the FPTP election system, the candidate who
secures the highest votes in a particular constituency is declared
elected. This often works to the disadvantage of the smaller social
groups. This is even more significant in the Indian social context. We
have had a history of caste-based discrimination. In such a social
system, the FPTP electoral system can mean that the dominant social
groups and castes can win everywhere and the oppressed social
groups may continue to remain unrepresented. Our Constitution
makers were aware of this difficulty and the need to provide a way to
ensure fair and just representation to the oppressed social groups.
This issue was debated even before independence and the British
government had introduced ‘separate electorates’. This system meant
“Separate electorates have been a curse to India, have
done incalculable harm to this country… Separate
electorates have barred our progress… We (Muslims)
want to merge in the nation. ...for God’s sake keep
your hands off reservation for the Muslim
community.”
Tajamul Husain, CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 333, 26 May 1949
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 78 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
that for electing a representative from a particular community, only
those voters would be eligible who belong to that community. In the
Constituent Assembly, many members expressed a fear that this
will not suit our purposes. Therefore, it was decided to adopt the
system of reserved constituencies. In this system, all voters in a
constituency are eligible to vote but the candidates must belong to
only a particular community or social section for which the seat is
reserved.
There are certain social groups which may be spread across the
country. In a particular constituency, their numbers may not be
sufficient to be able to influence a victory of a candidate. However,
taken across the country they are a significantly sizeable group. To
ensure their proper representation, a system of reservation becomes
necessary. The Constitution provides for reservation of seats in the
Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies for the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. This provision was made initially for a period
of 10 years and as a result of successive constitutional amendments,
has been extended up to 2020. The Parliament can take a decision
to further extend it, when the period of reservation expires. The
number of seats reserved for both of these groups is in proportion to
their share in the population of India. Of the 543 elected seats in the
Lok Sabha, 84 are reserved for Scheduled Castes and 47 are reserved
for Scheduled Tribes (as on 26 January 2019).
“…But I have come to say a few words on behalf of the
Adivasis of India…. In the past, thanks to the major
political parties, thanks to the British Government and
thanks to every enlightened Indian citizen, we have been
isolated and kept, as it were, in a zoo. ...We are willing to
mix with you, and it is for that reason, ..., that we have
insisted on a reservation of seats as far as the Legislatures
are concerned. We have not asked ...(for) separate
electorates; ...Under the 1935 Act, throughout the
Legislatures in India, there were altogether only 24
64 Adivasi MLAs out of a total of 1585, …and not a single
representative at the Centre.”
Jaipal Singh, CAD, Vol. V, pp. 209-210, 27 August 1947
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 79 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Who decides which constituency is to be reserved? On what basis
is this decision taken? This decision is taken by an independent 65
body called the Delimitation Commission. The Delimitation
Commission is appointed by the President of India and works in
collaboration with the Election Commission of India. It is appointed for
the purpose of drawing up the boundaries of constituencies all over the
country. A quota of constituencies to be reserved in each State is fixed
depending on the proportion of SC or ST in that State. After drawing
the boundaries, the Delimitation Commission looks at the composition
of population in each constituency. Those constituencies that have the
highest proportion of Scheduled Tribe population are reserved for ST.
In the case of Scheduled Castes, the Delimitation Commission looks at
two things. It picks constituencies that have higher proportion of
Scheduled Caste population. But it also spreads these constituencies
in different regions of the State. This is done because the Scheduled
Caste population is generally spread evenly throughout the country.
These reserved constituencies can be rotated each time the
Delimitation exercise is undertaken.
The Constitution does not make similar reservation for other
disadvantaged groups. Of late there has been a strong demand
seeking reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha and State Assemblies
for women. Given the fact that very few women are elected to
representative bodies, the demand for reserving one-third seats for
women is increasingly being articulated. Reservation of seats for
women has been provided for in rural and urban local bodies. We
shall discuss this in the chapter on Local Governments. A similar
provision for Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabhas would require an
amendment to the Constitution. Such an amendment has been
proposed several times in the Parliament but has not yet been passed.
F F E
REE AND AIR LECTIONS
The true test of any election system is its ability to ensure a free and
fair electoral process. If we want democracy to be translated into
reality on the ground, it is important that the election system is
impartial and transparent. The system of election must also allow
the aspirations of the voter to find legitimate expression through the
electoral results.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 80 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Check your progress
The proportion of Muslims in the population of India
is about 14.2 per cent. But the number of Muslim
MPs in the Lok Sabha has usually been less than 6
per cent, less than half of their share in population. A
similar situation prevails in most State Assemblies.
Three students drew different conclusions from this
fact. Write down whether and why you agree or
disagree with each of them.
Hilal: This demonstrates the unfairness of the
FPTP system. We should have opted for PR system.
Arif: This shows the wisdom of granting
reservations to SC and ST. What is needed is a
reservation of seats for Muslims on the same lines as
for SC and ST.
Saba: There is no point in talking about Muslims
as a whole. Muslim women are not going to get any
share in any of these systems. We need a separate
quota for Muslim women.
Universal franchise and right to contest
Apart from laying down a method of elections, the
Constitution answers two basic questions about elections:
Who are the voters? Who can contest elections? In both
these respects our Constitution follows the well established
democratic practices.
Am I or am I not an adult? I
You already know that democratic elections require
am mature enough to choose
that all adult citizens of the country must be eligible to
my future career, old enough
vote in the elections. This is known as universal adult
to get a driving license, but not
franchise. In many countries, citizens had to fight long
old enough to vote! If laws
battles with the rulers to get this right. In many countries,
can apply to me, why can’t I
decide on who makes those women could get this right very late and only after
laws? struggle. One of the important decisions of the framers of
the Indian Constitution was to guarantee every adult
citizen in India, the right to vote.
66
Till 1989, an adult Indian meant an Indian citizen
above the age of 21. An amendment to the Constitution
in 1989, reduced the eligibility age to 18. Adult franchise
ensures that all citizens are able to participate in the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 81 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
process of selecting their representative. This is consistent with the
principle of equality and non-discrimination that we studied in the 67
chapter on rights. Many people thought and many think so today
that giving the right to vote to
everyone irrespective of
educational qualification was not
R A C
EAD ARTOON
right. But our Constitution
makers had a firm belief in the
ability and worth of all adult
citizens as equals in the matter
of deciding what is good for the
society, the country and for their
own constituencies.
What is true of the right to
vote is also true of right to contest
election. All citizens have the right
to stand for election and become
the representative of the people.
However, there are different
minimum age requirements for
contesting elections. For example,
in order to stand for Lok Sabha
or Assembly election, a candidate
must be at least 25 years old.
There are some other restrictions
also. For instance, there is a legal
provision that a person who has
undergone imprisonment for two
or more years for some offence is
disqualified from contesting
elections. But there are no
restrictions of income, education Why is universal adult franchise compared
or class or gender on the right to to an elephant? Is it unmanageable? Or is it
contest elections. In this sense, like the story in which everyone describes the
our system of election is open to elephant only by its parts?
all citizens.
Independent Election Commission
Several efforts have been made in India to ensure the free and fair
election system and process. The most important among these is the
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
21 October 1951
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 82 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
creation of an independent Election Commission to ‘supervise and
conduct’ elections. Do you know that in many countries, there is an
absence of an independent mechanism for conducting elections?
Article 324: (1)
The superintendence, direction and control of
the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and
the conduct of, all elections to Parliament and
to the Legislature of every State and of
elections to the offices of President and Vice-
President held under this Constitution shall
be vested in a Commission (referred to in this
Constitution as the Election Commission).
Article 324 of the Indian Constitution provides for an independent
Election Commission for the ‘superintendence, direction and control
of the electoral roll and the conduct of elections’ in India. These words
in the Constitution are very important, for they give the Election
Commission a decisive role in virtually everything to do with elections.
The Supreme Court has agreed with this interpretation of the
Constitution.
To assist the Election Commission of India there is a Chief Electoral
Officer in every state. The Election Commission is not responsible for
the conduct of local body elections. As we shall study in the chapter
on Local Government, the State Election Commissioners work
independently of the Election Commission of India and each has its
own sphere of operation.
The Election Commission of India can either be a single member
or a multi-member body. Till 1989, the Election Commission was
single member. Just before the 1989 general elections, two Election
Commissioners were appointed, making the body multi-member.
Soon after the elections, the Commission reverted to its single member
status. In 1993, two Election Commissioners were once again
68 appointed and the Commission became multi-member and has
remained multi-member since then. Initially there were many
apprehensions about a multi-member Commission. There was a
sharp difference of opinion between the then Chief Election
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 83 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
Commissioner and the other Commissioners about who
had how much power. The matter had to be settled by the 69
Supreme Court. Now there is a general consensus that a
multi-member Election Commission is more appropriate
as power is shared and there is greater accountability.
The Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) presides over
the Election Commission, but does not have more powers
than the other Election Commissioners. The CEC and the
two Election Commissioners have equal powers to take
all decisions relating to elections as a collective body. They
are appointed by the President of India on the advice of
the Council of Ministers. It is therefore possible for a ruling
party to appoint a partisan person to the Commission
who might favour them in the elections. This fear has led
many to suggest that this procedure should be changed.
Many persons have suggested that a different method Has this now been settled? Or
should be followed that makes consultation with the leader can the government go back to
of opposition and the Chief Justice of India necessary for a single member Election
the appointment of CEC and Election Commissioners. Commission? Does the
The Constitution ensures the security of the tenure of Constitution allow this game?
the CEC and Election Commissioners. They are appointed
for a six year term or continue till the age of 65, whichever
is earlier. The CEC can be removed before the expiry of
Special majority
Special majority means:
± Two-thirds majority of those present and voting, and
± Simple majority of the total membership of the House.
Let us say that you have to pass a resolution in your class
with a special majority. Imagine further that your class has a total
student strength of 57. But on the day of voting, only 51 students
are present and 50 students participated in voting. When would
you say that the resolution has been passed with ‘special majority’
in this situation?
In this book you will find mention of ‘special majority’ in at
least three other chapters. One is in the next chapter on Executive,
where we discuss the impeachment of the President of India. Find
out the other two places where special majority is discussed.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 84 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
the term, by the President if both Houses of Parliament make such a
recommendation with a special majority. This is done to ensure that
a ruling party cannot remove a CEC who refuses to favour it in
elections. The Election Commissioners can be removed by the
President of India.
The Election Commission of India has a wide range of functions.
± It supervises the preparation of up-to-date voters’ list. It makes
every effort to ensure that the voters’ list is free of errors like non-
existence of names of registered voters or existence of names of
those non-eligible or non-existent.
± It also determines the timing of elections and prepares the election
schedule. The election schedule includes the notification of
elections, date from which nominations can be filed, last date for
filing nominations, last date of scrutiny, last date of withdrawal,
date of polling and date of counting and declaration of results.
± During this entire process, the Election Commission has the power
to take decisions to ensure a free and fair poll. It can postpone or
cancel the election in the entire country or a specific State or
constituency on the grounds that the atmosphere is vitiated and
therefore, a free and fair election may not be possible. The
Commission also implements a model code of conduct for parties
and candidates. It can order a re-poll in a specific constituency.
It can also order a recount of votes when it feels that the counting
process has not been fully fair and just.
± The Election Commission accords recognition to political parties
and allots symbols to each of them.
The Election Commission has very limited staff of its own. It
conducts the elections with the help of the administrative machinery.
However, once the election process has begun, the commission has
control over the administration as far as election related work is
concerned. During the election process, the administrative officers of
the State and central governments are assigned election related duty
and in this respect, the Election Commission has full control over
them. The EC can transfer the officers, or stop their transfers; it can
take action against them for failing to act in a non-partisan manner.
Over the years, the Election Commission of India has emerged as
70 an independent authority which has asserted its powers to ensure
fairness in the election process. It has acted in an impartial and
unbiased manner in order to protect the sanctity of the electoral
process. The record of Election Commission also shows that every
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 85 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
improvement in the functioning of institutions does not require legal
71
or constitutional change. It is widely agreed that the Election
Commission is more independent and assertive now than it was till
25 years ago. This is not because the powers and constitutional
protection of the Election Commission have increased. The Election
Commission has started using more effectively the powers it always
had in the Constitution.
Since 1951–52, seventeen
Lok Sabha elections have been
held. Many more State assembly
R A C
elections and by-elections have EAD ARTOON
been conducted by the Election
Commission. The EC has faced
many difficult situations such as
holding elections in militancy
affected areas like Assam,
Punjab or Jammu and Kashmir.
It has also faced the difficult
situation of having to postpone
the election process mid-way in
1991 when the ex-Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated
during campaigning. In 2002,
the Election Commission faced
another critical situation when
the Gujarat Assembly was
dissolved and elections had to be
conducted. But the Election
Commission found that
unprecedented violence in
that State had made it
impossible to hold free and fair
elections immediately. The
Election Commission decided
to postpone elections to the
The Netaji is afraid of EC. Why do leaders
State Assembly by a few
months. The Supreme Court fear the Election Commission? Is this good
upheld this decision of the for democracy?
Election Commission.
.aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
K
R
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 86 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Check your progress
Why do you think does the Election Commission
have the following powers and privileges? What
could have happened if these did not exist?
The Commission can issue orders to
government employees engaged in any election
related duty.
The government cannot remove the Chief
Election Commissioner.
The Commission can cancel an election if it
thinks that it was not fair.
E R
LECTORAL EFORMS
No system of election can ever be perfect. And in actual
election process, there are bound to be many flaws and
limitations. Any democratic society has to keep searching
for mechanisms to make elections free and fair to the
maximum. With the acceptance of adult suffrage, freedom
to contest elections, and the establishment of an
independent Election Commission, India has tried to make
Can we reduce the influence of
its election process free and fair. However, the experience
money and muscle power by
of the past 66 years has given rise to many suggestions
changing the law? Does
for reforming our election system. The Election
anything change in reality by
Commission, political parties, various independent
changing the law?
groups, and many scholars have come up with proposals
for electoral reform. Some of these suggestions are about
72 changing the constitutional provisions discussed in this
Chapter:
± Our system of elections should be changed from the
FPTP to some variant of the PR system. This would
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 87 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
ensure that parties get seats, as far as possible, in proportion to
the votes they get. 73
± There should be a special provision to ensure that at least one-
third women are elected to the parliament and assemblies.
± There should be stricter provisions to control the role of money
in electoral politics. The
elections expenses should
be paid by the government R A C
EAD ARTOON
out of a special fund.
± Candidates with any
criminal case should be
barred from contesting
elections, even if their
appeal is pending before a
court.
± There should be complete
ban on the use of caste and
religious appeals in the
campaign.
± There should be a law to
regulate the functioning of
political parties and to
ensure that they function in
a transparent and
democratic manner.
These are but a few
suggestions. There is no
consensus about these
suggestions. Even if there was
a consensus, there are limits to
what the laws and formal
provisions can do. Free and fair
elections can be held only if the
Should a person accused of a serious crime
candidates, the parties and
be barred from contesting elections?
those involved in the election
process agree to abide by the
spirit of democratic competition.
Apart from legal reforms, there are two other ways of ensuring
that elections reflect the expectations and democratic aspirations of
the people. One is, of course, that people themselves have to be more
.aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
K
R
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 88 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
vigilant, more actively involved in political activities. But there are
limits to the extent to which ordinary people can engage in politics
on a regular basis. Therefore, it is necessary that various political
institutions and voluntary organisations are developed and are active
in functioning as watchdog for ensuring free and fair elections.
Conclusion
In countries where representative democracy is practiced,
elections and the representative character of those elections
are crucial factors in making democracy effective and
trustworthy. The success of India’s election system can be
gauged from a number of factors.
± Our election system has allowed the voters not only to freely
choose representatives, but also to change governments
peacefully both at the State and national level.
± Secondly, voters have consistently taken a keen interest in
the election process and participated in it. The number of
candidates and parties that contest elections is on the rise.
± Thirdly, the system of election has proved to be
accommodative and inclusive. The social composition of our
representatives has changed gradually. Now our representatives
come from many different social sections, though the number
of women legislators has not increased satisfactorily.
± Fourthly, the election outcome in most parts of the country
does not reflect electoral malpractices and rigging. Of course,
many attempts at rigging do take place. You must have read
about violence, about complaints that voters’ names disappear
from the voters’ list, about intimidation, and so on. Yet, such
instances rarely directly affect the outcome of the election.
± Finally and most importantly, elections have become a part
and parcel of our democratic life. No one can imagine a situation
where a government would disrespect the verdict of an election.
Similarly, no one can imagine that a government would be
74
formed without holding elections. In fact, regularity and
periodicity of elections has earned fame for India as a great
democratic experiment.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 89 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
All these factors have earned for our election system a
respect within and outside the country. The voter in India has 75
gained confidence. The legitimacy of the Election Commission
has increased in the eyes of the people. This vindicates the
basic decisions taken by our Constitution makers. If the election
process becomes more flawless, we as voters and citizens would
be able to share more effectively in this carnival of democracy
and make it more meaningful.
Exercises
1. Which of the following resembles most a direct democracy?
a. Discussions in a family meeting
b. Election of the class monitor
c. Choice of a candidate by a political party
d. Decisions taken by the Gram Sabha
e. Opinion polls conducted by the media
2. Which of the following tasks are not performed by the Election
Commission?
a. Preparing the Electoral Rolls
b. Nominating the candidates
c. Setting up polling booths
d. Implementing the model code of conduct
e. Supervising the Panchayat elections
3. Which of the following is common to the method of election of the
members of Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha?
a. Every citizen above the age of 18 is an eligible voter
b. Voter can give preference order for different candidates
c. Every vote has equal value
d. The winner must get more than half the votes
4. In the First Past the Post system, that candidate is declared winner
who
a. Secures the largest number of postal ballots
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 90 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
b. Belongs to the party that has highest number of votes in the
country
c. Has more votes than any other candidate in the constituency
d. Attains first position by securing more than 50% votes
5. What is the difference between the system of reservation of
constituencies and the system of separate electorate? Why did the
Constitution makers reject the latter?
6. Which of the following statements are incorrect? Identify and correct
them by substituting, adding or rearranging only one word or phrase.
a. FPTP system is followed for all the elections in India.
b. Election Commission does not supervise Panchayat and
Municipal elections.
c. President of India cannot remove an Election Commissioner.
d. Appointment of more than one Election Commissioner in the
Election Commission is mandatory.
7. Indian electoral system aims at ensuring representation of socially
disadvantaged sections. However we have only 12 per cent women
members in our legislatures. What measures would you suggest to
improve the situation?
8. Here are some wishes expressed in a conference to discuss a
constitution for a new country. Write against each of these whether
FPTP or Proportional Representation system is more suited to meet
each of these wishes.
a. People should clearly know who is their representative so that
they can hold him or her personally accountable.
b. We have small linguistic minorities who are spread all over the
country; we should ensure fair representation to them.
c. There should be no discrepancy between votes and seats for
different parties.
d. People should be able to elect a good candidate even if they do
not like his or her political party.
9. A former Chief Election Commissioner joined a political party and
contested elections. There are various views on this issue. One
76 view is that a former Election Commissioner is an independent
citizen and has a right to join any political party and to contest
election. According to the other view, leaving this possibility open
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 91 ---
Chapter 3: Election and Representation
can affect the impartiality of the Election Commission. So, former
Election Commissioners must not be allowed to contest any 77
elections. Which position do you agree with and why?
10. “Indian democracy is now ready to shift from a crude First Past the
Post system to a system of Proportional Representation”. Do you
agree with this statement? Give your reasons for or against this
statement.
National Voters’ Day (NVD) Pledge
We, the citizens of India, having abiding faith in democracy, hereby
pledge to uphold the democratic traditions of our country and the
dignity of free, fair and peaceful elections, and to vote in every election
fearlessly and without being influenced by considerations of religion,
race, caste, community, language or any inducement.
For details about Systematic Voters’ Education and Electoral Participation (SVEEP)
programme of the Election Commission of India and Electoral Literacy Club (ELC),
visit http://ecisveep.nic.in
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 92 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Four
EXECUTIVE
I
NTRODUCTION
Legislature, executive and judiciary are the three organs of government. Together,
they perform the functions of the government, maintain law and order and look
after the welfare of the people. The Constitution ensures that they work in
coordination with each other and maintain a balance among themselves. In a
parliamentary system, executive and the legislature are interdependent: the
legislature controls the executive, and, in turn, is controlled by the executive.
In this chapter we shall discuss the composition, structure and function of the
executive organ of the government. This chapter will also tell you about the
changes that have occurred in recent times due to political practice. After reading
this chapter, you will be able to
± make a distinction between the parliamentary and the presidential executive;
± understand the constitutional position of the President of India;
78
± know the composition and functioning of the Council of Ministers and the
importance of the Prime Minister; and
± understand the importance and functioning of the administrative machinery.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 93 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
W E ?
HAT IS AN XECUTIVE
79
Who is in charge of the administration of your school?
Who takes important decisions in a school or a university?
In any organisation, some office holder has to take
decisions and implement those decisions. We call this
activity administration or management. But
administration requires a body at the top that will take
policy decisions or the big decisions and supervise and
coordinate the routine administrative functioning. You
may have heard about the executives of big companies,
banks or industrial units. Every formal group has a body
of those who function as the chief administrators or the
executives of that organisation. Some office holders decide
the policies and rules and regulations and then some office
holders implement those decisions in actual day-to-day
functioning of the organisation. The word executive means
a body of persons that looks after the implementation of
rules and regulations in actual practice.
In the case of government also, one body may take
policy decisions and decide about rules and regulations,
while the other one would be in charge of implementing
those rules. The organ of government that primarily looks
after the function of implementation and administration
is called the executive.
What are the principal functions of the executive?
Executive is the branch of government responsible for the
implementation of laws and policies adopted by the
legislature. The executive is often involved in framing of
policy. The official designations of the executive vary from
country to country. Some countries have presidents, while
others have chancellors. The executive branch is not just
about presidents, prime ministers and ministers. It also I remember somebody saying
extends to the administrative machinery (civil servants). that the executive in a democracy
While the heads of government and their ministers, saddled is accountable to people. Is that
with the overall responsibility of government policy, are also true of executives in big
together known as the political executive, those companies? Aren’t they called
responsible for day to day administration are called the CEOs? Who are they
permanent executive. accountable to?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 94 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
W D T E ?
HAT ARE THE IFFERENT YPES OF XECUTIVE
Every country may not have the same type of executive. You may
have heard about the President of the USA and the Queen of England.
But the powers and functions of the President of the USA are very
different from the powers of the President of India. Similarly, the
powers of the Queen of England are different from the powers of the
King of Bhutan. Both India and France have prime ministers, but
their roles are different from each other. Why is this so?
Activity
Procure a photograph of the SAARC summit
meeting or the meeting of G-7 countries and list
those who attended the meeting. Can you imagine
why those people and not some others are attending
the meeting?
To answer this question we will briefly outline the nature of
executive existing in some of these countries. The USA has a
presidential system and executive powers are in the hands of the
president. Canada has a parliamentary democracy with a
constitutional monarchy where Queen Elizabeth II is the formal chief
of state and the prime minister is the head of government. In France,
both the president and the prime minister are a part of the semi-
presidential system. The president appoints the prime minister as
well as the ministers but cannot dismiss them as they are responsible
to the parliament. Japan has a parliamentary system with the
Emperor as the head of the state and the prime minister as the head
of government. Italy has a parliamentary system with the president
as the formal head of state and the prime minister as the head of
government. Russia has a semi-presidential system where president
is the head of state and prime minister, who is appointed by the
president, is the head of government. Germany has a parliamentary
system in which president is the ceremonial head of state and the
chancellor is the head of government.
80 In a presidential system, the president is the Head of state as well
as head of government. In this system the office of president is very
powerful, both in theory and practice. Countries with such a system
include the United States, Brazil and most nations in Latin America.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 95 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
81
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 96 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Semi-Presidential Executive in Sri Lanka
In 1978 the constitution of Sri Lanka was amended and the system of
Executive Presidency was introduced. Under the system of Executive
Presidency, people directly elect the President. It may happen that both
the President and the Prime Minister belong to the same political party
or to different political parties.
The President has vast powers under the constitution. The President
chooses the Prime Minister from the party that has a majority in the
Parliament. Though ministers must be members of the Parliament, the
President has the power to remove the Prime Minister, or ministers.
Apart from being the elected Head of State and the Commander-in-
Chief of the Armed Forces, the President is also the Head of the
Government.
Elected for a term of six years, the President cannot be removed
except by a resolution in the parliament passed by at least two-thirds
of the total number of Members of Parliament. If it is passed by not less
than one-half of the total number of Members of Parliament and the
Speaker is satisfied that such allegations merit inquiry then the Speaker
can report the matter to the Supreme Court.
How is the position of the President and Prime Minister in Sri Lanka
different from India? Compare the role of Supreme Court in the
impeachment of the President in India and Sri Lanka.
In a parliamentary system, the prime minister is the head of
government. Most parliamentary systems have a president or a
monarch who is the nominal Head of state. In such a system, the
role of president or monarch is primarily ceremonial and prime
minister along with the cabinet wields effective power. Countries with
such system include Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom as well
as Portugal. A semi-presidential system has both a president and a
prime minister but unlike the parliamentary system the president
may possess significant day-to-day powers. In this system, it is
82 possible that sometimes the president and the prime minister may
belong to the same party and at times they may belong to two different
parties and thus, would be opposed to each other. Countries with
such a system include France, Russia, Sri Lanka, etc.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 97 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
Check your progress
Neha: It is really very simple. A country having 83
a president has a presidential executive and
one with a prime minister has parliamentary
executive.
How would you explain to Neha that this is not
always the case?
P E I
ARLIAMENTARY XECUTIVE IN NDIA
When the Constitution of India was written, India already
had some experience of running the parliamentary system
under the Acts of 1919 and 1935. This experience had
shown that in the parliamentary system, the executive
can be effectively controlled by the representatives of the
people. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted to
ensure that the government would be sensitive to public
expectations and would be responsible and accountable.
The other alternative to the parliamentary executive was
the presidential form of government. But the presidential
executive puts much emphasis on the president as the
chief executive and as source of all executive power. There
is always the danger of personality cult in presidential
executive. The makers of the Indian Constitution wanted
a government that would have a strong executive branch,
but at the same time, enough safeguards should be there
to check against the personality cult. In the parliamentary
form there are many mechanisms that ensure that the Haven’t we had very strong
executive will be answerable to and controlled by the Prime Ministers? Does it mean
legislature or people’s representatives. So the Constitution that even the parliamentary
adopted the parliamentary system of executive for the system is not fool proof against
governments both at the national and State levels. personality cult? That means
According to this system, there is a President who is people and the legislatures have
the formal Head of the state of India and the Prime Minister to be constantly vigilant!
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 98 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
and the Council of Ministers, which run the government at the
national level. At the State level, the executive comprises the Governor
and the Chief Minister and Council of Ministers.
The Constitution of India vests the executive power of the Union
formally in the President. In reality, the President exercises these powers
through the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The
President is elected for a period of five years. But there is no direct
election by the people for the office of President. The President is elected
indirectly. This means that the president is elected not by the ordinary
citizens but by the elected MLAs and MPs. This election takes place in
accordance with the principle of proportional representation with single
transferable vote.
The President can be removed from office only by Parliament by
following the procedure for impeachment. This procedure requires a
special majority as explained in the last chapter. The only ground
for impeachment is violation of the Constitution.
Power and position of President
Article 74 (1): There shall be a Council of
Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head
to aid and advise the President who shall
in the exercise of his functions, act in
accordance with such advice.
Provided that the President may require
the Council of Ministers to reconsider such
advice….., and the President shall act in
accordance with the advice tendered after
such reconsideration.
Do you know what the word shall means here? It indicates that the
advice is binding on the President. In view of the controversy about the
scope of the President’s powers, a specific mention was made in the
Constitution by an amendment that the advice of the Council of
Ministers will be binding on the President. By another amendment
84
made later, it was decided that the President can ask the Council of
Ministers to reconsider its advice but, has to accept the reconsidered
advice of the Council of Ministers.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 99 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
We have already seen that President is the formal head
of the government. In this formal sense, the President has 85
wide ranging executive, legislative, judicial and emergency
powers. In a parliamentary system, these powers are in
reality used by the President only on the advice of the
Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister and the Council
of Ministers have support of the majority in the Lok Sabha
and they are the real executive. In most of the cases, the
President has to follow the advice of the Council of
Ministers.
“We did not give him any real
power but we have made his
position one of authority and
dignity. The constitution wants
to create neither a real
executive nor a mere
figurehead, but a head that
neither reigns nor governs; it
wants to create a great
figurehead...”
Jawaharlal Nehru
CAD, Vol. VI, p. 734
Discretionary Powers of the President
On the basis of the above discussion can we infer that the
President has no discretionary power under any
circumstances? This will be an incorrect assessment.
Constitutionally, the President has a right to be informed
Am I just a figurehead or am I
of all important matters and deliberations of the Council
asking real questions? Did the
of Ministers. The Prime Minister is obliged to furnish all
textbook writers give me power
the information that the President may call for. The
to ask questions I wish to ask
President often writes to the Prime Minister and expresses
or am I asking questions they
his views on matters confronting the country.
have in their mind?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 100 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Besides this, there are at least three situations where
the President can exercise the powers using his or her
own discretion. In the first place, we have already noted
that the President can send back the advice given by the
Council of Ministers and ask the Council to reconsider
the decision. In doing this, the President acts on his (or
her) own discretion. When the President thinks that the
advice has certain flaws or legal lacunae, or that it is not
in the best interests of the country, the President can ask
the Council to reconsider the decision. Although, the
It is very well to talk of the
Council can still send back the same advice and the
President as He or She, but
President would then be bound by that advice, such a
has a woman ever become the
request by the President to reconsider the decision, would
President?
naturally carry a lot of weight. So, this is one way in which
the president can act in his own discretion.
Secondly, the President also has veto power by which
he can withhold or refuse to give assent to Bills (other
than Money Bill) passed by the Parliament. Every bill
passed by the Parliament goes to the President for his
assent before it becomes a law. The President can send
the bill back to the Parliament asking it to reconsider the
We saw that there is no time limit on the President for
giving his assent to a bill. Do you know that such a thing
has already happened? In 1986, the Parliament passed a
bill known as Indian Post office (amendment) bill. This bill
was widely criticised by many for it sought to curtail the
freedom of the press. The then President, Gyani Zail Singh,
did not take any decision on this bill. After his term was
over, the next President, Venkataraman sent the bill finally
back to the Parliament for reconsideration. By that time,
the government that brought the bill before the Parliament
had changed and a new government was elected in 1989.
This government belonged to a different coalition and did
86 not bring the bill back before the Parliament. Thus, Zail
Singh’s decision to postpone giving assent to the bill
effectively meant that the bill could never become a law!
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 101 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
bill. This ‘veto’ power is limited because, if the Parliament passes the
same bill again and sends it back to the President, then, the President 87
has to give assent to that bill. However, there is no mention in the
Constitution about the time limit within which the President must
send the bill back for reconsideration. This means that the President
can just keep the bill pending with him without any time limit. This
gives the President an informal power to use the veto in a very effective
manner. This is sometimes referred to as ‘pocket veto’.
Then, the third kind of discretion arises more out of political
circumstances. Formally, the President appoints the Prime Minister.
Normally, in the parliamentary system, a leader who has the support
of the majority in the Lok Sabha would be appointed as Prime
Minister and the question of discretion would not arise. But imagine
a situation when after an election, no leader has a clear majority in
the Lok Sabha. Imagine further that after attempts to forge alliances,
two or three leaders are claiming that they have the support of the
majority in the house. Now, the President has to decide whom to
appoint as the Prime Minister. In such a situation, the President has
to use his own discretion in judging who really may have the support
of the majority or who can actually form and run the government.
Since 1989 major political changes have considerably increased
the importance of the presidential office. In the four parliamentary
elections held from 1989 to 1998, no single party or coalition attained
President’s role in choosing the Prime Minister
After 1977, party politics in India became more competitive
and there have been many instances when no party had
clear majority in the Lok Sabha. What does the President do
in such situations? No political party or coalition secured
majority in the elections held in March 1998. The BJP and
its allies secured 251 seats, 21 short of a majority. President
Narayanan adopted an elaborate procedure. He asked the
leader of the alliance, Atal Behari Vajpayee, “to furnish
documents in support of his claim from concerned political
parties.” Not stopping at this the President also advised
Vajpayee to secure a vote of confidence within ten days of
being sworn in.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 102 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
a majority in the Lok Sabha. These situations demanded presidential
intervention either in order to constitute governments or to grant a
request for dissolution of Lok Sabha by a Prime Minister who could
not prove majority in the House. It may thus be said that presidential
discretion is related to political conditions. There is greater scope for
presidential assertiveness when governments are not stable and
coalitions occupy power.
For the most part, the President is a formal power holder and a
ceremonial head of the nation. You may wonder why then do we
need a President? In a parliamentary system, the Council of Ministers
is dependent on the support of the majority in the legislature. This
also means that the Council of Ministers may be removed at any
time and a new Council of Ministers will have to be put in place.
Such a situation requires a Head of the state who has a fixed term,
who may be empowered to appoint the Prime Minister and who may
symbolically represent the entire country. This is exactly the role of
the President in ordinary circumstances. Besides, when no party
has a clear majority, the President has the additional responsibility
of making a choice and appointing the Prime Minister to run the
government of the country.
The Vice President of India
The Vice President is elected for five years. His election
method is similar to that of the President, the only
difference is that members of State legislatures are
not part of the electoral college. The Vice President
may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
Rajya Sabha passed by a majority and agreed to by
the Lok Sabha. The Vice President acts as the ex-
officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha and takes over
the office of the President when there is a vacancy by
reasons of death, resignation, removal by
impeachment or otherwise. The Vice President acts
as the President only until a new President is elected.
88 B. D. Jatti acted as President on the death of
Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed until a new President was
elected.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 103 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
Check your progress
Imagine that the Prime Minister wants to impose 89
‘President’s rule’ in one State because the State
government has failed to effectively curb atrocities
against the Dalits in that State. The President has a
different position. He is saying that the provision
regarding President’s rule should be used only
sparingly. In this situation which of the following courses
are open to the President?
a. Tell the Prime Minister that he will not sign on
the order promulgating President’s rule.
b. Dismiss the Prime Minister.
c. Ask the Prime Minister to send CRPF to that State.
d. Make a press statement about how the Prime
Minister is wrong.
e. Discuss the matter with the Prime Minister and
try to dissuade him from taking this action, but
if he insists, agreeing to sign the said order.
P M C M
RIME INISTER AND OUNCIL OF INISTERS
R C
EAD A ARTOON
There is no Council of Ministers without the Prime Minister. This
cartoon shows how, literally, the Prime Minister ‘leads’ the Council
of Ministers!
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
22 August 1954
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 104 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
No discussion of government or politics in India, would normally
take place without mentioning one office: the Prime Minister of India.
Can you imagine why this is so?
We have already seen earlier in this
chapter that the President exercises his
powers only on the advice of the Council of
Ministers. The Council of Ministers is headed
by the Prime Minister. Therefore, as head of
the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister
becomes the most important functionary of
the government in our country.
In the parliamentary form of executive,
it is essential that the Prime Minister has the
support of the majority in the Lok Sabha.
This support by the majority also makes the
Prime Minister very powerful. The moment
this support of the majority is lost, the Prime
Minister loses the office. For many years after
independence, the Congress party had the
majority in the Lok Sabha and its leader
would become the Prime Minister. Since
1989, there have been many occasions when
no party had majority in the Lok Sabha.
Various political parties have come together
and formed a coalition that has majority in
the House. In such situations, a leader who
is acceptable to most partners of the
coalition becomes the Prime Minister.
Formally, a leader who has the support of
the majority is appointed by the President as Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister then decides who will be the ministers in the
Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister allocates ranks and
portfolios to the ministers. Depending upon the seniority and political
importance, the ministers are given the ranks of cabinet minister,
90 minister of State or deputy minister. In the same manner, Chief
Ministers of the States choose ministers from their own party or
coalition. The Prime Minister and all the ministers have to be members
of the Parliament. If someone becomes a minister or Prime Minister
.aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
K
R
R C EAD A ARTOON
Why do people want to be
ministers? This cartoon seems to
suggest that it is only for perks
and status! Then why is there
competition for some portfolios?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 105 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
without being an MP, such a person has to get elected to the
Parliament within six months. 91
There were some members in the Constituent Assembly
who felt that ministers should be elected by the legislature
and not selected by the Prime Minister or Chief Minister:
“Swiss system under which the legislature elects the
executive for a certain period …is to my mind the best
form of government for the provinces… The system of the
single transferable vote is ...the best system that can be
adopted for the appointment of the executive because in
that all interests will be represented and no party in the
legislature will have any occasion to feel that it is not
represented.”
Begum Aizaz Rasul, CAD, Vol. IV, p. 631, 17 July 1947
Size of the Council of Ministers
Before the 91st Amendment Act (2003), the size of the Council
of Ministers was determined according to exigencies of time and
requirements of the situation. But this led to very large size of
the Council of Ministers. Besides, when no party had a clear
majority, there was a temptation to win over the support of the
members of the Parliament by giving them ministerial positions
as there was no restriction on the number of the members of
the Council of Ministers. This was happening in many States
also. Therefore, an amendment was made that the Council of
Ministers shall not exceed 15 percent of total number of members
of the House of the People (or Assembly, in the case of the States).
In the chapter on the legislature, you will study in detail the
various mechanisms through which the Parliament controls the
executive. But remember that the most important feature of
parliamentary executive is that the executive is routinely under the
control and supervision of the legislature.
The Council of Ministers is collectively responsible to the Lok
Sabha. This provision means that a Ministry which loses confidence
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 106 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
of the Lok Sabha is obliged to resign. The principle
indicates that the ministry is an executive committee of
the Parliament and it collectively governs on behalf of the
Parliament. Collective responsibility is based on the
principle of the solidarity of the cabinet. It implies that a
vote of no confidence even against a single minister leads
to the resignation of the entire Council of Ministers. It also
indicates that if a minister does not agree with a policy or
decision of the cabinet, he or she must either accept the
decision or resign. It is binding on all ministers to pursue
or agree to a policy for which there is collective
responsibility.
In India, the Prime Minister enjoys a pre-eminent place
in the government. The Council of Ministers cannot exist
without the Prime Minister. The Council comes into
existence only after the Prime Minister has taken the oath
of office. The death or resignation of the Prime Minister
automatically brings about the dissolution of the Council
of Ministers but the demise, dismissal or resignation of a
minister only creates a ministerial vacancy. The Prime
Minister acts as a link between the Council of Ministers
on the one hand and the President as well as the Parliament
on the other. It is this role of the Prime Minister which led
Pt. Nehru to describe him as ‘the linchpin of Government’.
It is also the constitutional obligation of the Prime Minister
to communicate to the President all decisions of the
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the
affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation. The Prime
Is it that a person becomes Prime
Minister is involved in all crucial decisions of the
Minister because he/she is
powerful or is it that you government and decides on the policies of the government.
become powerful once you have Thus, the power wielded by the Prime Minister flows from
become the Prime Minister? various sources: control over the Council of Ministers,
leadership of the Lok Sabha, command over the
bureaucratic machine, access to media, projection of
92 personalities during elections, projection as national
leader during international summitry as well as foreign
visits.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 107 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
However, the power which the Prime Minister wields and actually
puts into use depends upon the prevailing political conditions. The 93
position of the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers has been
unassailable whenever a single political party has secured majority
in the Lok Sabha. However, this has not
been the case when governments have been
led by coalitions of political parties. Since
1989, we have witnessed many coalition
governments in India. Many of these
governments could not remain in power for
the full term of the Lok Sabha. They were
either removed or they resigned due to loss
of support of the majority. These
developments have affected the working of
the parliamentary executive.
In the first place, these developments
have resulted in a growing discretionary role
of the President in the selection of Prime
Ministers. Secondly, the coalitional nature
of Indian politics in this period has
necessitated much more consultation
between political partners, leading to
erosion of prime ministerial authority.
Thirdly, it has also brought restrictions on
various prerogatives of the Prime Minister
like choosing the ministers and deciding
their ranks and portfolios. Fourthly, even
the policies and programmes of the
government cannot be decided by the Prime
Minister alone. Political parties of different ideologies come together
both as pre-poll and post-poll allies to form a government. Policies
are framed after a lot of negotiations and compromises among the
allies. In this entire process, the Prime Minister has to act more as a
negotiator than as leader of the government.
At the State level, a similar parliamentary executive exists, though
with some variations. The most important variation is that there is a
Governor of the State appointed by the President (on the advice of
.aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
K
R
R C
EAD A ARTOON
This Chief Minster is not happy
even after winning the
confidence motion! Can you
imagine why this is so?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 108 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
the central government). Though the Chief Minister, like the Prime
Minister is the leader of the majority party in the Assembly, the
Governor has more discretionary powers. However, the main
principles of parliamentary system operate at the State level too.
Check your progress
Suppose the Prime Minister is to select the Council of
Ministers. What will he/she do?
a. Select those who are experts in the various
subjects.
b. Select only those who are from his/her party.
c. Select those who are personally loyal and
dependable.
d. Select those who are supporters of the
government.
e. Take into account the political weight of the
various aspirants and choose from among them.
P E : B
ERMANENT XECUTIVE UREAUCRACY
Who implements the decisions of the ministers?
The Executive organ of the government includes the Prime
Minister, the ministers and a large organisation called the
bureaucracy or the administrative machinery. To underline the
difference between this machinery and the military service, it is
described as civil service. Trained and skilled officers who work as
permanent employees of the government are assigned the task of
assisting the ministers in formulating policies and implementing these
policies.
In a democracy, the elected representatives and the ministers are
in charge of government and the administration is under their control
and supervision. In the parliamentary system, the legislature also
exercises control over the administration. The administrative officers
94
cannot act in violation of the policies adopted by the legislature. It is
the responsibility of the ministers to retain political control over the
administration. India has established professional administrative
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 109 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
machinery. At the same time, this machinery is made
politically accountable. The bureaucracy is also expected 95
to be politically neutral. This means that the bureaucracy
will not take any political position on policy matters. In a
democracy, it is always possible that a party is defeated
in elections and the new government wants to opt for new
policies in the place of policies of the previous government.
In such a situation, it is the responsibility of the
administrative machinery to faithfully and efficiently
participate in drafting the policy and in its
implementation.
The Indian bureaucracy today is an enormously
complex system. It consists of the All-India services, State
services, employees of the local governments, and
technical and managerial staff running public sector
undertakings. Makers of our Constitution were aware of
the importance of the non-partisan and professional
bureaucracy. They also wanted the members of the civil
services or bureaucracy to be impartially selected on the
basis of merit. So, the Union Public Service Commission
has been entrusted with the task of conducting the process
of recruitment of the civil servants for the government of
India. Similar public service commissions are provided for
the States also. Members of the Public Service Commissions
are appointed for a fixed term. Their removal or suspension
is subject to a thorough enquiry made by a judge of the
Supreme Court.
While efficiency and merit are the norms for recruitment,
the Constitution also ensures that all sections of the society
including the weaker sections have an opportunity to be
part of the public bureaucracy. For this purpose, the
Constitution has provided for reservation of jobs for the
Dalits and Adivasis. Subsequently, reservations have also Yes, I know that the officers
been provided for women and other backward classes. are there to serve the people.
These provisions ensure that the bureaucracy would be But people are always afraid of
more representative and social inequalities will not come these officers. And officers also
behave as if they were the
in the way of recruitment to the civil service.
masters!
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 110 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Persons selected by the UPSC for Indian Administrative Service
and Indian Police Service constitute the backbone of the higher level
bureaucracy in the States. You may know that the collector of a district
is the most important officer of the government at the district level.
Do you know that the collector is normally an IAS officer and that
the officer is governed by the service conditions laid down by the
central government? An IAS or IPS officer is assigned to a particular
State, where he or she works under the supervision of the State
government. However, the IAS or IPS officers are appointed by the
central government, they can go back into the service of the central
government and most importantly, only the central government can
take disciplinary action against them. This means that the key
administrative officers of the States are under the supervision and
control of the central government. Apart from the IAS and the IPS
officers appointed by the UPSC, the administration of the State is
looked after by officers appointed through the State Public Service
Commissions. As we shall study later in the chapter on federalism,
this feature of the bureaucracy strengthens the control of the central
government over the administration of the States.
The bureaucracy is an instrument through which welfare policies
of the government must reach the people. But most often, it is so
powerful that people are afraid of approaching a government officer.
It is a common experience of the people that bureaucracy is
insensitive to the demands and expectations of the ordinary citizen.
Only if the democratically elected government controls the
bureaucracy, some of these problems can be effectively handled. On
96 the other hand, too much political interference turns the bureaucracy
into an instrument in the hands of the politician. Though the
Constitution has created independent machinery for recruitment,
many people think that there is no provision for protecting the civil
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 111 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
servants from political interference in the performance of their duties.
It is also felt that enough provisions are not there to ensure the 97
accountability of the bureaucracy to the citizen. There is an
expectation that measures like the Right to Information may make
the bureaucracy a little more responsive and accountable.
Conclusion
The modern executive is a very powerful institution of
government. The executive enjoys greater powers compared to
other organs of the government. This generates a greater need
to have democratic control over the executive. The makers of
our Constitution thought with foresight that the executive must
be put firmly under regular supervision and control. Thus, a
parliamentary executive was chosen. Periodic elections,
constitutional limits over the exercise of powers and democratic
politics have ensured that executive organ cannot become
unresponsive.
Exercises
1. A parliamentary executive means:
a. Executive where there is a parliament
b. Executive elected by the parliament
c. Where the parliament functions as the Executive
d. Executive that is dependent on support of the majority in the
parliament
2. Read this dialogue. Which argument do you agree with? Why?
Amit: Looking at the constitutional provisions, it seems that the
President is only a rubber stamp.
Shama: The President appoints the Prime Minister. So, he must
have the powers to remove the Prime Minister as well.
Rajesh: We don’t need a President. After the election, the
Parliament can meet and elect a leader to be the Prime Minister.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 112 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
3. Match the following
i. Works within the particular State in a. Indian Foreign
which recruited Service
ii. Works in any central government b. State Civil
office located either at the national Services
capital or elsewhere in the country
iii. Works in a particular State to which c. All India Services
allotted; can also be sent on
deputation to the centre
iv. Works in Indian missions abroad d. Central Services
4. Identify the ministry which may have released the following news
items. Would this be a ministry of the central government or the
State government? Why?
a. An official release said that in 2004-05 the Tamil Nadu
Textbooks Corporation would release new versions for
standards VII, X and XI.
b. A new railway loop line bypassing the crowded Tiruvallur-
Chennai section to help iron ore exporters. The new line, likely
to be about 80 km long, will branch off at Puttur and then
reach Athipattu near the port.
c. The three-member sub-divisional committee formed to verify
suicide by farmers in Ramayampet mandal has found that
the two farmers who committed suicide this month have had
economic problems due to failure of crops.
5. While appointing the Prime Minister, the President selects
a. Leader of the largest party in the Lok Sabha
b. Leader of the largest party in the alliance which secures a
majority in the Lok Sabha
c. The leader of the largest party in the Rajya Sabha
98 d. Leader of the alliance or party that has the support of the
majority in Lok Sabha
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 113 ---
Chapter 4: Executive
6.Read this discussion and say which of these statements applies
most to India. 99
Alok: Prime Minister is like a king, he decides everything in our
country.
Shekhar: Prime Minister is only ‘first among equals’, he does not
have any special powers. All ministers and the PM have similar
powers.
Bobby: Prime Minister has to consider the expectations of the
party members and other supporters of the government. But after
all, the Prime Minister has a greater say in policy making and in
choosing the ministers.
7. Why do you think is the advice of the Council of Ministers binding
on the President? Give your answer in not more than 100 words.
8. The parliamentary system of executive vests many powers in the
legislature for controlling the executive. Why, do you think, is it
so necessary to control the executive?
9.It is said that there is too much political interference in the working
of the administrative machinery. It is suggested that there should
be more and more autonomous agencies which do not have to
answer to the ministers.
a. Do you think this will make administration more people-
friendly?
b. Do you think this will make administration more efficient?
c. Does democracy mean full control of elected representatives
over the administration?
10. Write an essay of two hundred words on the proposal to have an
elected administration instead of an appointed administration.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 114 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Five
LEGISLATURE
I
NTRODUCTION
You have already studied the importance of elections and the method of election
adopted in India. Legislatures are elected by the people and work on behalf of
the people. In this chapter you would study how elected legislatures function
and help in maintaining democratic government. You will also learn about the
composition and functioning of the parliament and State legislatures in India
and their importance in democratic government. After reading this chapter you
would know
± the importance of the legislature;
± the functions and powers of the Parliament of India;
100 ± the law making procedure;
± how the Parliament controls the executive; and
± how the Parliament regulates itself.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 115 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
W P ?
HY DO WE NEED A ARLIAMENT
101
Legislature is not merely a law making body. Lawmaking is but one
of the functions of the legislature. It is the centre of all democratic
political process. It is packed with action; walkouts, protests,
demonstration, unanimity, concern and co-operation. All these serve
very vital purposes. Indeed, a genuine democracy is inconceivable
without a representative, efficient and effective legislature. The
legislature also helps people in holding the representatives
accountable. This is indeed, the very basis of representative
democracy.
Yet, in most democracies, legislatures are losing central place to
the executive. In India too, the Cabinet initiates policies, sets the
agenda for governance and carries them through. This has led some
critics to remark that the Parliament has declined. But even very
strong cabinets must retain majority in the legislature. A strong leader
has to face the Parliament and answer to the satisfaction of the
Parliament. Herein lies the democratic potential of the Parliament. It
is recognised as one of the most democratic and open forum of debate.
On account of its composition, it is the most representative of all
organs of government. It is above all, vested with the power to choose
and dismiss the government.
Activity
Consider these newspaper reports and then think:
what would happen if there were no legislatures?
After reading each news report, state how the
legislature succeeded or failed in maintaining
control over the executive.
l 28th February 2002: The Union Finance
Minister, Jaswant Singh, announced in the
Union budget proposal an increase of Rs. 12
in the price of a 50 kg bag of urea and a smaller
increase in the price of two other fertilizers which
constituted about 5 per cent rise in prices. The
current urea price of Rs. 4,830 a tonne carries
a subsidy of as much as 80 per cent.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 116 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
l 11 March 2002. The Finance Minister had to
roll back the increases in fertilizer prices
under intense opposition pressure (The Hindu,
12 March 2002)
l On 4 June 1998, the Lok Sabha witnessed
acrimonious scenes over the hike in urea and
petroleum process. The entire opposition
staged a walkout. The issue rocked the house
for two days leading to walkout by opposition.
The finance minister in his budget proposal had
proposed a hike of 50 paisa per kilogram of
urea to reduce subsidy on it. This forced the
finance minister Mr. Yashwant Sinha to roll
back the hike in urea prices ( Hindustan Times,
4 and 5 June 1998)
l 22 February 1983: In a rare move, the Lok
Sabha today unanimously decided to suspend
official business and give precedence to debate
on Assam. Home Minister P.C.Sethi made a
statement “I seek the cooperation of all members
whatever their views and policies, in promoting
harmony among different communities and
groups living in Assam. What is needed now is
not acrimony but a healing touch.” (Hindustan
Times, 22 February 1983)
l Congress Members voiced protest against
atrocities on Harijans in Andhra Pradesh (The
Hindu, 3 March 1985)
W T H P ?
HY DO WE NEED WO OUSES OF ARLIAMENT
The term ‘Parliament’ refers to the national legislature. The legislature
of the States is described as State legislature. The Parliament in India
has two houses. When there are two houses of the legislature, it is
called a bicameral legislature. The two Houses of the Indian
Parliament are the Council of States or the Rajya Sabha and the
102
House of the People or the Lok Sabha. The Constitution has given
the States the option of establishing either a unicameral or bicameral
legislature. At present only six States have a bicameral legislature.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 117 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
103
States having a bicameral legislature are given below:
(i) Andhra Pradesh
(ii) Bihar
(iii) Karnataka
(iv) Maharashtra
(v) Telangana
(vi) Uttar Pradesh
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 118 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Countries with large size and much diversity usually prefer to
have two houses of the national legislature to give representation to
all sections in the society and to give representation to all geographical
regions or parts of the country. A bicameral legislature has one more
advantage. A bicameral legislature makes it possible to have every
decision reconsidered. Every decision taken by one house goes to
the other house for its decision. This means that every bill and policy
would be discussed twice. This ensures a double check on every
matter. Even if one house takes a decision in haste, that decision will
come for discussion in the other house and reconsideration will be
possible.
“...an Upper House could perform
the...useful function of being a
revising body, and ...its views may
count but not its votes... ...,those
who could not enter into the rough
and tumble of active politics
could...advise the Lower House.”
Purnima Banerji
CAD, Vol. IX, p. 33, 30 July 1949
Rajya Sabha
Each of the two Houses of Parliament has different bases of
representation. The Rajya Sabha represents the States of India. It is
an indirectly elected body. Residents of the State elect members to
State Legislative Assembly. The elected members of State Legislative
Assembly in turn elect the members of the Rajya Sabha.
We can imagine two different principles of representation in the
104 second chamber. One way is to give equal representation to all the
parts of the country irrespective of their size or population. We may
call this as symmetrical representation. On the other hand, parts of
the country may be given representation according to their
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 119 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
population. This second method means
Bicameralism in Germany
that regions or parts having larger 105
Germany has a bicameral
population would have more legislature. The two Houses
representatives in the second chamber are known as Federal
than regions having less population. Assembly (Bundestag) and
In the USA, every state has equal Federal Council (Bundesrat).
representation in the Senate. This Assembly is elected by a
complex system combining
ensures equality of all the states. But
direct and proportional
this also means that a small state would
representation for a period of
have the same representation as the
four years.
larger states. The system of
The 16 federal states of
representation adopted for the Rajya Germany are represented in
Sabha is different from that in the USA. the Federal Council. The 69
The number of members to be elected seats of the Bundesrat are
from each State has been fixed by the divided among states on the
fourth schedule of the Constitution. basis of a range of populations.
These members are generally
What would happen if we were to
the ministers in the
follow the American system of equality
governments at the state level
of representation in the Rajya Sabha?
and are appointed, not elected,
Uttar Pradesh with a population of
by the governments of the
1998.12 lakhs would get seats equal
federal states. According to the
to that of Sikkim whose population is German law, all the members
only 6.10 lakhs. The framers of the from one state have to vote as
Constitution wanted to prevent such a bloc as per the instructions
discrepancy. States with larger of the state governments.
population get more representatives Sometimes due to coalition
government at the state level,
than States with smaller population get.
they fail to reach an agreement
Thus, a more populous State like Uttar
and may have to abstain.
Pradesh sends 31 members to the
The Bundesrat does not
Rajya Sabha, while a smaller and less
vote on all legislative initiatives
populous State like Sikkim has one seat
but all the policy areas on
in the Rajya Sabha. which the federal states have
Members of the Rajya Sabha are concurrent powers and are
elected for a term of six years. They can responsible for federal
get re-elected. All members of the Rajya regulations must be passed by
it. It can also veto such
Sabha do not complete their terms at
legislation.
the same time. Every two years, one
third members of the Rajya Sabha
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 120 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
complete their term and elections are held for those one
third seats only. Thus, the Rajya Sabha is never fully
dissolved. Therefore, it is called the permanent House of
the Parliament. The advantage of this arrangement is that
even when the Lok Sabha is dissolved and elections are
yet to take place, the meeting of the Rajya Sabha can be
called and urgent business can be conducted.
Apart from the elected members, Rajya Sabha also
has twelve nominated members. The President nominates
these members. These nominations are made from among
those persons who have made their mark in the fields of
literature, science, art and social service.
Activity
Find out the number of representatives elected from
different States. Prepare a chart showing number of
representatives and the population of the State
according to the 2011 census.
Lok Sabha
The Lok Sabha and the State Legislative Assemblies are
directly elected by the people. For the purpose of election,
the entire country (State, in case of State Legislative
Assembly) is divided into territorial constituencies of
I don’t understand why there
roughly equal population. One representative is elected
is a provision for nominating
from each constituency through universal adult suffrage
these sportspersons and artists
where the value of vote of every individual would be equal
and scientists. Whom do they
to another. At present there are 543 constituencies. This
represent? And, do they really
number has not changed since 1971 census.
contribute much to the
The Lok Sabha is elected for a period of five years.
proceedings of the Rajya Sabha?
This is the maximum. We have seen in the chapter on the
executive that before the completion of five years, the Lok
Sabha can be dissolved if no party or coalition can form
106
the government or if the Prime Minister advises the
President to dissolve the Lok Sabha and hold fresh
elections.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 121 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
107
Check your progress
± Do you think that composition of Rajya Sabha
has protected the position of States of India?
± Should indirect election of Rajya Sabha be
replaced by direct elections? What would be
its advantages and disadvantages?
± Since 1971 census the number of seats in the
Lok Sabha has not increased. Do you think that
it should be increased? What should be the
basis for this?
W P ?
HAT DOES THE ARLIAMENT DO
What is the function of the legislature? Do both Houses of the
Parliament have similar functions? Is there a difference in the powers
of the two Houses?
Apart from law making, the Parliament is engaged in many other
functions. Let us list the functions of the Parliament:
± Legislative Function: The Parliament enacts legislations for the
country. Despite being the chief law making body, the Parliament
often merely approves legislations. The actual task of drafting
the bill is performed by the bureaucracy under the supervision
of the minister concerned. The substance and even the timing of
the bill are decided by the Cabinet. No major bill is introduced in
the Parliament without the approval of the Cabinet. Members
other than ministers can also introduce bills but these have no
chance of being passed without the support of the government.
± Control of Executive and ensuring its accountability: Perhaps
the most vital function of the Parliament is to ensure that the
executive does not overstep its authority and remains responsible
to the people who have elected them. We shall discuss this function
in greater detail later in this chapter.
± Financial Function: Government is about spending a lot of money
on various matters. Where does this money come from? Every
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 122 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
government raises resources through taxation. However, in a
democracy, legislature controls taxation and the way in which
money is used by the government. If the Government of India
proposes to introduce any new tax, it has to get the approval of
the Lok Sabha. The financial powers of the Parliament involve
grant of resources to the government to implement its
programmes. The government has to give an account to the
legislature about the money it has spent and resources that it
wishes to raise. The legislature also ensures that the government
does not misspend or overspend. This is done through the budget
and annual financial statements.
The Parliament is the boss and the ministers are looking very
humble here. That is the effect of the Parliament’s power to
sanction money to different ministries.
± Representation: Parliament represents the divergent views of
members from different regional, social, economic, religious
groups of different parts of the country.
± Debating Function: The Parliament is the highest forum of debate
in the country. There is no limitation on its power of discussion.
108
Members are free to speak on any matter without fear. This makes
it possible for the Parliament to analyse any or every issue that
faces the nation. These discussions constitute the heart of
democratic decision making.
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
R C
EAD A ARTOON
3 April 1955
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 123 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
± Constituent Function: The Parliament has the power of discussing
109
and enacting changes to the Constitution. The constituent powers
of both the houses are similar. All constitutional amendments
have to be approved by a special majority of both Houses.
± Electoral functions: The Parliament also performs some electoral
functions. It elects the President and Vice President of India.
± Judicial functions: The judicial functions of the Parliament
include considering the proposals for removal of President,
Vice-President and Judges of High Courts and Supreme Court.
Powers of Rajya Sabha
We discussed above, the functions that are performed by the
Parliament in general. However, in a bicameral legislature, there is
some difference between the powers of the two Houses. Look at the
charts showing the powers of Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha.
Powers of the Lok Sabha Powers of Rajya Sabha
± Makes Laws on matters ± Considers and approves
included in Union List and non money bills and
Concurrent List. Can suggests amendments to
introduce and enact money money bills.
and non money bills.
± Approves constitutional
± Approves proposals for amendments.
taxation, budgets and
± Exercises control over
annual financial statements.
executive by asking
± Controls the executive by
questions, introducing
asking questions,
motions and resolutions.
supplementary questions,
resolutions and motions and ± Participates in the election
and removal of the
through no confidence motion.
President, Vice President,
± Amends the Constitution.
Judges of Supreme Court
± Approves the Proclamation of
and High Court.It can
emergency.
alone initiate the
± Elects the President and Vice
procedure for removal of
President and removes
Vice President.
Judges of Supreme Court and
High Court. ± Can give the Union
± Establishes committees and parliament power to make
commissions and considers laws on matters included
their reports. in the State list.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 124 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Special Powers of Rajya Sabha
As you know, the Rajya Sabha is an institutional
mechanism to provide representation to the States. Its
purpose is to protect the powers of the States. Therefore,
any matter that affects the States must be referred to it for
its consent and approval. Thus, if the Union Parliament
wishes to remove a matter from the State list (over which
only the State Legislature can make law) to either the Union
List or Concurrent List in the interest of the nation, the
approval of the Rajya Sabha is necessary. This provision
adds to the strength of the Rajya Sabha. However,
experience shows that the members of the Rajya Sabha
represent their parties more than they represent their
States.
Powers exercised only by the Lok Sabha: Then, there
are powers that only the Lok Sabha exercises. The Rajya
Sabha cannot initiate, reject or amend money bills. The
Council of Ministers is responsible to the Lok Sabha and
not Rajya Sabha. Therefore, Rajya Sabha can criticise the
government but cannot remove it.
Can you explain why? The Rajya Sabha is elected by
the MLAs and not directly by the people. Therefore, the
Constitution stopped short of giving certain powers to the
Rajya Sabha. In a democratic form as adopted by our
Constitution, the people are the final authority. By this
logic, the representatives, directly elected by the people,
should have the crucial powers of removing a government
and controlling the finances.
In all other spheres, including passing of non-money
bills, constitutional amendments, and impeaching the
So, the Lok Sabha controls the
President and removing the Vice President the powers of
purse! Then it must be the more
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha are co-equal.
powerful House.
H P L ?
OW DOES THE ARLIAMENT MAKE AWS
110
The basic function of any legislature is to make laws for
its people. A definite procedure is followed in the process
of making law. Some of the procedures of law making are
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 125 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
mentioned in the Constitution, while some have evolved from
conventions. Follow a bill through the legislative process and 111
you will clearly see that the law making process is technical and
even tedious.
Peoples' inputs
Committee
gives
Bill Sent to report House may
Committee or or may not
discussed in accept the
the House itself. report
Bill
Detailed
Introduction
discussion
in either
of bill in
House in
House
case of
non-money
bill
Bill is accepted
or rejected
Bill
becomes
Sent to the
Law Other House
President
approves or Other House
sends approves or gives
back for recommendations
reconsideration
Joint Session of
Parliament
(if required)
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 126 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
A bill is a draft of the proposed law. There can be different types of
bills. When a non-minister proposes a bill, it is called private member’s
Bill. A bill proposed by a minister is described as Government Bill. Let
us now see the different stages in the life of a bill.
Types of Bills
Private Member’s
Government Bill
Bill
Non-Money
Money Bill
Bill
Constitution
Ordinary Bill
Amendment Bill
Even before a bill is introduced in the Parliament there may be a
lot of debate on the need for introducing such a bill. A political party
may pressurise the government to initiate a bill in order to fulfil its
election promises or to improve its chances of winning forthcoming
elections. Interest groups, media and citizens’ forums may also
persuade the government for a particular legislation. Law making is
thus not merely a legal procedure but also a political course of action.
112 The preparation of a bill itself involves many considerations such as
resources required to implement the law, the support or opposition
that the bill is likely to produce, the impact that the law may have on
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 127 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
the electoral prospect of the ruling party etc. In the era of coalition
politics especially, a bill proposed by the government has to be 113
acceptable to all the partners of the coalition. Such practical
considerations can hardly be ignored. The Cabinet considers all these
before arriving at a decision to enact a law.
Once the Cabinet approves the policy behind the legislation, the
task of drafting the legislation begins. The draft of any bill is prepared
by the concerned ministry. For instance a bill raising the marriageable
age of girls from 18 to 21 will be prepared by the law ministry. The
ministry of women and child welfare may also be involved in it.
Within the Parliament, a bill may be introduced in the Lok Sabha or
Rajya Sabha by a member of the House (but often a minister
responsible for the subject introduces the bill). A money bill can be
introduced only in Lok Sabha. Once passed there, it is sent to the
Rajya Sabha.
A large part of the discussion on the bills takes place in the
committees. The recommendation of the committee is then sent to the
House. That is why committees are referred to as
miniature legislatures. This is the second stage in
the law making process. In the third and final stage, R EAD A C ARTOON
the bill is voted upon. If a non-money bill is passed
by one House, it is sent to the other House where it
goes through exactly the same procedure.
As you know, a bill has to be passed by both
Houses for enactment. If there is disagreement
between the two Houses on the proposed bill,
attempt is made to resolve it through Joint Session
of Parliament. In the few instances when joint
sessions of the parliament were called to resolve a
deadlock, the decision has always gone in favour of
the Lok Sabha.
If it is a money bill, the Rajya Sabha can either
approve the bill or suggest changes but cannot reject
it. If it takes no action within 14 days the bill is
deemed to have been passed. Amendments to the
bill, suggested by Rajya Sabha, may or may not be Is this how they follow
accepted by the Lok Sabha. the ‘rules of the game’?
.aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
K
R
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 128 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Article 109
Special procedure in respect of
Money Bills.—(1)
A Money Bill shall not be
introduced in the Council of
States
When a bill is passed by both Houses, it is sent to the President for
his assent. The assent of the President results in the enactment of a
bill into a law.
Check your progress
± From the discussion of the law making
process, do you think that Parliament can
devote enough time for thorough
discussion of the bills? If not, then what
remedies would you suggest to overcome
this difficulty?
H P C E ?
OW DOES THE ARLIAMENT ONTROL THE XECUTIVE
In a parliamentary democracy, the executive is drawn from the party
or a coalition of parties that has a majority in Lok Sabha. It is not
difficult for the executive to exercise unlimited and arbitrary powers
with the support of the majority party. In such a situation,
parliamentary democracy may slip into Cabinet dictatorship, where
the Cabinet leads and the House merely follows. Only if the Parliament
is active and vigilant, can it keep regular and effective check on the
114 executive. There are many ways in which the Parliament can control
the executive. But basic to them all is the power and freedom of the
legislators as people’s representatives to work effectively and
fearlessly. For instance, no action can be taken against a member for
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 129 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
whatever the member may have said in the legislature.
This is known as parliamentary privilege. The presiding 115
officer of the legislature has the final powers in deciding
matters of breach of privilege.
The main purpose of such privileges is to enable the
members of the legislature to represent the people and
exercise effective control over the executive. How does the
Parliament exercise such control? What are the means
available at its disposal? Is parliamentary control
successful in curbing executive excesses?
Instruments of Parliamentary Control
The legislature in parliamentary system ensures executive
accountability at various stages: policy making,
implementation of law or policy and during and post-
implementation stage. The legislature does this through
the use of a variety of devices:
± Deliberation and discussion
± Approval or Refusal of laws
± Financial control
± No confidence motion
Deliberation and discussion: During the law making
process, members of the legislature get an opportunity to
deliberate on the policy direction of the executive and the
ways in which policies are implemented. Apart from
deliberating on bills, control may also be exercised during
the general discussions in the House. The Question Hour,
which is held every day during the sessions of Parliament,
where Ministers have to respond to searching questions
raised by the members; Zero Hour where members are
free to raise any matter that they think is important
(though the ministers are not bound to reply),
half-an-hour discussion on matters of public importance,
adjournment motion, etc., are some instruments of
exercising control.
Perhaps the question hour is the most effective method With so many sting operations
are MPs still free to speak
of keeping vigil on the executive and the administrative
anything anywhere?
agencies of the government. Members of Parliament have
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 130 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
shown great interest in question hour and maximum
attendance is recorded during this time. Most of the
questions aim at eliciting information from the government
on issues of public interest such as, price rise, availability
of food grains, atrocities on weaker sections of the society,
riots, black-marketing, etc. This gives the members an
opportunity to criticise the government, and represent the
problems of their constituencies. The discussions during
It must be difficult to be a
the question hour are so heated that it is not uncommon
minister. This is like giving an
examination almost every day! to see members raise their voice, walk to the well of the
house or walk out in protest to make their point. This
results in considerable loss of legislative time. At the same
time, we must remember that many of these actions are
political techniques to gain concessions from government
and in the process force executive accountability.
Approval and ratification of laws: Parliamentary
control is also exercised through its power of ratification.
A bill can become a law only with the approval of the
Parliament. A government that has the support of a
disciplined majority may not find it difficult to get the
approval of the Legislature. Such approvals however,
cannot be taken for granted. They are the products of
intense bargaining and negotiations amongst the
members of ruling party or coalition of parties and even
government and opposition. If the government has
majority in Lok Sabha but not in the Rajya Sabha, as has
happened during the Janata Party rule in 1977 and
N.D.A. rule in 2000, the government will be forced to make
substantial concessions to gain the approval of both the
Houses. Many bills, such as the Lok Pal Bill have failed
enactment, Prevention of Terrorism bill (2002) was rejected
by the Rajya Sabha.
Financial control: As mentioned earlier, financial
resources to implement the programmes of the
116 government are granted through the budget. Preparation
and presentation of budget for the approval of the
legislature is constitutional obligation of the government.
This obligation allows the legislature to exercise control
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 131 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
over the purse strings of the government. The legislature may refuse
to grant resources to the government. This seldom happens because 117
the government ordinarily enjoys support of the majority in the
parliamentary system. Nevertheless, before granting money the Lok
Sabha can discuss the reasons for which the government requires
money. It can enquire into cases of misuse of funds on the basis of
the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General and Public
Accounts committees. But the legislative control is not only aimed at
financial propriety. The legislature is concerned about the policies of
the government that are reflected in the budget. Through financial
control, the legislature controls the policy of the government.
No Confidence Motion: The most powerful weapon that enables
the Parliament to ensure executive accountability is the no-confidence
motion. As long as the government has the support of its party or
coalition of parties that have a majority in the Lok Sabha, the power
of the House to dismiss the government is fictional rather than real.
However, after 1989, several governments have been forced to resign
due to lack of confidence of the house. Each of these governments
lost the confidence of the Lok Sabha because they failed to retain the
support of their coalition partners.
Thus, the Parliament can effectively control the executive and
ensure a more responsive government. It is however important for
this purpose, that there is adequate time at the disposal of the House,
the members are interested in discussion and participate effectively
and there is willingness to compromise amongst the government and
the opposition. In the last two decades, there has been a gradual
decline in sessions of the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies
and time spent on debates. Moreover, the Houses of the Parliament
have been plagued by absence of quorum, boycott of sessions by
members of opposition which deprive the house the power to control
the executive through discussion.
Activity
Watch the Dooradarshan telecast of Parliament
sessions for three continuous days. Or collect the
newspaper reports for three continuous days and
make a wallpaper. Take care to observe the issues
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 132 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
being discussed, the role of the speaker, questions
being asked, the political parties of the
representatives, representatives from your region,
nature of the issues of discussion – whether they
were all of national or regional in character.
R C
EAD A ARTOON
W C
HAT DO THE OMMITTEES OF
P ?
ARLIAMENT DO
A significant feature of the legislative process
is the appointment of committees for various
legislative purposes. These committees play a
vital role not merely in law making, but also in
the day-to-day business of the House. Since
the Parliament meets only during sessions, it
has very limited time at its disposal. The
making of law for instance requires in-depth
study of the issue under consideration. This
in turn demands more attention and time.
Similarly, there are other important functions
also, like studying the demands for grants
made by various ministries, looking into
expenditure incurred by various departments,
investigating cases of corruption etc.
Walkout is a frequently Parliamentary committees perform such
adopted measure by the functions. Since 1983, India has developed a
opposition to register their system of parliamentary standing committees.
protest against the There are over twenty such departmentally
government. Has there been related committees. Standing Committees
an overuse of that weapon?
supervise the work of various departments,
their budget, their expenditure and bills
that come up in the house relating to
the department.
118 Apart from standing committees, the Joint Parliamentary
Committees have occupied a position of eminence in our country.
Joint Parliamentary Committees (JPCs) can be set up for the purpose
of discussing a particular bill, like the joint committee to discuss
nafrI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 133 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
bill, or for the purpose of investigating financial
irregularities. Members of these committees are selected 119
from both Houses.
The committee system has reduced the burden on the
Parliament. Many important bills have been referred to
committees. The Parliament has merely approved the work
done in the committees with few occasional alterations.
Of course legally speaking, no bill can become law, and
no budget will be sanctioned unless approved by the
Parliament. But the Parliament rarely rejects the
suggestions made by the committees.
“The nature of the
legislature is such that
there are restrictions
only so far as procedure
is concerned. But in
substance there is no
restriction, no limitation
on the sovereignty of the
legislature or
Parliament…”
N.V. Gadgil, CAD, Vol. XI, p.659, 18 November 1949
H P R I ?
OW DOES THE ARLIAMENT EGULATE TSELF
Parliament as mentioned earlier is a debating forum. It is
through debates that the parliament performs all its vital
functions. Such discussions must be meaningful and
orderly so that the functions of the Parliament are carried
out smoothly and its dignity is intact. The Constitution
itself has made certain provisions to ensure smooth
conduct of business. The presiding officer of the legislature
So, the lawmakers too, are
is the final authority in matters of regulating the business
subject to some laws!
of the legislature.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 134 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
R C
EAD A ARTOON
“We are not walking out, we have been ordered out,” said the MPs.
Why do you think such situations occur?
There is one more way in which the presiding officers
control the behaviour of the members. You may have
heard about the anti-defection law. Most of the members
of the legislatures are elected on the ticket of some political
party. What would happen if they decide to leave the party
after getting elected? For many years after independence,
this issue was unresolved. Finally there was an agreement
I don’t understand why they among the parties that a legislator who is elected on one
change parties. Do they even party’s ticket must be restricted from ‘defecting’ to another
come back to the party they once
party. An amendment to the Constitution was made (52nd
left?
amendment act) in 1985. This is known as anti-defection
amendment. It has also been subsequently modified by
120 the 91st amendment. The presiding officer of the House is
the authority who takes final decisions on all such cases.
If it is proved that a member has ‘defected’, then such
nafrI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 135 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
member loses the membership of the House. Besides, such a
person is also disqualified from holding any political office like 121
ministership, etc.
What is defection? If a member remains absent in the House when
asked by the party leadership to remain present or votes against the
instructions of the party or voluntarily leaves the membership of the
party, it is deemed as defection.
Experience of the past twenty years shows that the anti-defection
amendment has not been able to curb defections, but it has given
additional powers to the party leadership and the presiding officers
of the legislatures over the members.
Conclusion
Have you watched the live telecast of the proceeding of the
Parliament? You will find that our Parliament is truly a rainbow
of colourful dresses symbolising different regions of the country.
Members speak different languages in the course of the
proceedings. They come from various castes, religions and sects.
They often fight bitterly. Many times an impression is created
that they are wasting the time and money of the nation. But we
have seen in this chapter that these same parliamentarians
can effectively control the executive. They can express the
interests of various sections of our society. On account of its
composition, Legislature is the most representative of all organs
of government. The sheer presence of members of diverse social
backgrounds makes the legislatures more representative and
potentially more responsive to people’s expectations. In a
parliamentary democracy, legislature, as a body representing
the wishes of the people occupies a high position of power and
responsibility. Herein lies the democratic potential of the
Parliament.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 136 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Exercises
1. Alok thinks that a country needs an efficient government that looks
after the welfare of the people. So, if we simply elected our Prime
Minister and Ministers and left to them the task of government, we
will not need a legislature. Do you agree? Give reasons for your
answer.
2. A class was debating the merits of a bicameral system. The following
points were made during the discussion. Read the arguments and
say if you agree or disagree with each of them, giving reasons.
√
Neha said that bicameral legislature does not serve any purpose.
√
Shama argued that experts should be nominated in the second
chamber.
√
Tridib said that if a country is not a federation, then there is no
need to have a second chamber.
3. Why can the Lok Sabha control the executive more effectively than
the Rajya Sabha can?
4. Rather than effective control of the executive, the Lok Sabha is a
platform for the expression of popular sentiments and people’s
expectations. Do you agree? Give reasons.
5. The following are some proposals for making the Parliament more
effective. State if you agree or disagree with each of them and give
your reasons. Explain what would be the effect if these suggestions
were accepted.
√
Parliament should work for longer period.
√
Attendance should be made compulsory for members of
Parliament.
√
Speakers should be empowered to penalise members for
interrupting the proceedings of the House.
6. Arif wanted to know that if ministers propose most of the important
bills and if the majority party often gets the government bills passed,
122 what is the role of the Parliament in the law making process? What
answer would you give him?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 137 ---
Chapter 5: Legislature
7. Which of the following statements you agree with the most? Give
your reasons. 123
√
Legislators must be free to join any party they want.
√
Anti-defection law has contributed to the domination of the party
leaders over the legislators.
√
Defection is always for selfish purposes and therefore, a
legislator who wants to join another party must be disqualified
from being a minister for the next two years.
8. Dolly and Sudha are debating about the efficiency and effectiveness
of the Parliament in recent times. Dolly believed that the decline of
Indian Parliament is evident in the less time spent on debate and
discussion and increase in the disturbances of the functioning of
the House and walkouts etc. Sudha contends that the fall of different
governments on the floor of Lok Sabha is a proof of its vibrancy.
What other arguments can you provide to support or oppose the
positions of Dolly and Sudha?
9. Arrange the different stages of passing of a bill into a law in their
correct sequence:.
√
A resolution is passed to admit the bill for discussion
√
The bill is referred to the President of India – write what happens
next if s/he does not sign it
√
The bill is referred to other House and is passed
√
The bill is passed in the house in which it was proposed
√
The bill is read clause by clause and each is voted upon
√
The bill is referred to the subcommittee – the committee makes
some changes and sends it back to the house for discussion
√
The concerned minister proposes the need for a bill
√
Legislative department in ministry of law, drafts a bill
10. How has the system of parliamentary committee affected the
overseeing and appraisal of legislation by the Parliament?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 138 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Six
JUDICIARY
I
NTRODUCTION
Many times, courts are seen only as arbitrators in disputes between individuals
or private parties. But judiciary performs some political functions also. Judiciary
is an important organ of the government. The Supreme Court of India is in fact,
one of the very powerful courts in the world. Right from 1950 the judiciary has
played an important role in interpreting and in protecting the Constitution. In
this chapter you will study the role and importance of the judiciary. In the
chapter on fundamental rights you have already read that the judiciary is very
important for protecting our rights. After studying this chapter, you would be
able to understand
± the meaning of independence of judiciary;
± the role of Indian Judiciary in protecting our rights;
124
± the role of the Judiciary in interpreting the Constitution; and
± the relationship between the Judiciary and the Parliament of India.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 139 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
W N I J ?
HY DO WE EED AN NDEPENDENT UDICIARY
125
In any society, disputes are bound to arise between individuals,
between groups and between individuals or groups and government.
All such disputes must be settled by an independent body in
accordance with the principle of rule of law. This idea of rule of law
implies that all individuals — rich and poor, men or women, forward
or backward castes — are subjected to the same law. The principal
role of the judiciary is to protect rule of law and ensure supremacy
of law. It safeguards rights of the individual, settles disputes in
accordance with the law and ensures that democracy does not give
way to individual or group
dictatorship. In order to be able to do
all this, it is necessary that the
R
judiciary is independent of any EAD A CARTOON
political pressures.
What is meant by an independent
judiciary? How is this independence
ensured?
Independence of Judiciary
Simply stated independence of
judiciary means that
± the other organs of the government
like the executive and legislature
must not restrain the functioning
of the judiciary in such a way that
it is unable to do justice.
± the other organs of the government
should not interfere with the
decision of the judiciary.
± judges must be able to perform
their functions without fear or
favour.
Independence of the judiciary does
not imply arbitrariness or absence of
accountability. Judiciary is a part of
the democratic political structure of the No fisticuffs please, this is rule of law!
.aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
K
R
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 140 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
country. It is therefore accountable to the Constitution,
to the democratic traditions and to the people of the
country.
How can the independence of judiciary be provided
and protected?
The Indian Constitution has ensured the
I remember the case of Machal
independence of the judiciary through a number of
mentioned in chapter two.
measures. The legislature is not involved in the process of
Don’t they say, ‘justice delayed
appointment of judges. Thus, it was believed that party
is justice denied’? Somebody
politics would not play a role in the process of
should do something about
appointments. In order to be appointed as a judge, a
this.
person must have experience as a lawyer and/or must be
well versed in law. Political opinions of the person or his/
her political loyalty should not be the criteria for
appointments to judiciary.
The judges have a fixed tenure. They hold office till
reaching the age of retirement. Only in exceptional cases,
judges may be removed. But otherwise, they have security
of tenure. Security of tenure ensures that judges could
function without fear or favour. The Constitution
prescribes a very difficult procedure for removal of judges.
The Constitution makers believed that a difficult
procedure of removal would provide security of office to
the members of judiciary.
The judiciary is not financially dependent on either
the executive or legislature. The Constitution provides that
the salaries and allowances of the judges are not subjected
to the approval of the legislature. The actions and
decisions of the judges are immune from personal
criticisms. The judiciary has the power to penalise those
who are found guilty of contempt of court. This authority
of the court is seen as an effective protection to the judges
from unfair criticism. Parliament cannot discuss the
conduct of the judges except when the proceeding to
126 remove a judge is being carried out. This gives the
judiciary independence to adjudicate without fear of being
criticised.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 141 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
Activity
Hold a debate in class on the following 127
topic.
Which of the following factors do you think,
work as constraints over the judges in
giving their rulings? Do you think these are
justified?
± Constitution
± Precedents
± Opinion of other courts
± Public opinion
± Media
± Traditions of law
± Laws
± Time and staff constraints
± Fear of public criticism
± Fear of action by executive
Appointment of Judges
The appointment of judges has never been free from
political controversy. It is part of the political process. It
makes a difference who serves in the Supreme Court and
High Court— a difference in how the Constitution is
interpreted. The political philosophy of the judges, their
views about active and assertive judiciary or controlled
and committed judiciary have an impact on the fate of the
legislations enacted. Council of Ministers, Governors and
Chief Ministers and Chief Justice of India — all influence
the process of judicial appointment.
As far as the appointment of the Chief Justice of India
(CJI) is concerned, over the years, a convention had I am afraid, I am getting
developed whereby the senior-most judge of the Supreme confused. In a democracy, you
Court was appointed as the Chief Justice of India. This can criticise the Prime Minister
convention was however broken twice. In 1973 A. N. Ray or even the President, but not
was appointed as CJI superseding three senior Judges. the judges! And what is this
Again, Justice M.H. Beg was appointed superseding contempt of court? But am I
Justice H.R. Khanna (1975). being guilty of contempt if I
asked about these matters?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 142 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
The other Judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Court are appointed by the President after ‘consulting’
the CJI. This, in effect, meant that the final decisions in
matters of appointment rested with the Council of
Ministers. What then, was the status of the consultation
with the Chief Justice?
This matter came up before the Supreme Court again
and again between 1982 and 1998. Initially, the court
But I think, finally the Council felt that role of the Chief Justice was purely consultative.
of Ministers would have greater Then it took the view that the opinion of the Chief Justice
say in appointing judges. Or is must be followed by the President. Finally, the Supreme
it that the judiciary is a self- Court has come up with a novel procedure: it has
appointing body? suggested that the Chief Justice should recommend
names of persons to be appointed in consultation with
four senior-most judges of the Court. Thus, the Supreme
Court has established the principle of collegiality in
making recommendations for appointments. At the
moment therefore, in matters of appointment the decision
of the group of senior judges of the Supreme Court carries
greater weight. Thus, in matters of appointment to the
judiciary, the Supreme Court and the Council of Ministers
play an important role.
Removal of Judges
The removal of judges of the Supreme Court and the High
Courts is also extremely difficult. A judge of the Supreme
Court or High Court can be removed only on the ground
of proven misbehaviour or incapacity. A motion
containing the charges against the judge must be
approved by special majority in both Houses of the
Parliament. Do you remember what special majority
means? We have studied this in the chapter on Elections.
It is clear from this procedure that removal of a judge is a
very difficult procedure and unless there is a general
128 consensus among Members of the Parliament, a judge
cannot be removed. It should also be noted that while in
making appointments, the executive plays a crucial role;
the legislature has the powers of removal. This has ensured
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 143 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
both balance of power and independence of the judiciary. So far,
129
only one case of removal of a judge of the Supreme Court came up
for consideration before Parliament. In that case, though the motion
got two-thirds majority, it did not have the support of the majority of
the total strength of the House and therefore, the judge was not
removed.
Unsuccessful Attempt to Remove a Judge
In 1991 the first-ever motion to remove a Supreme Court
Justice was signed by 108 members of Parliament. Justice
V. Ramaswami, during his tenure as the Chief Justice of
the Punjab and Haryana High Court was accused of
misappropriating funds. In 1992, a year after Parliament
had started the removal proceedings, a high-profile inquiry
commission consisting of Judges of the Supreme Court
found Justice V. Ramaswami “guilty of wilful and gross
misuses of office . . . and moral turpitude by using public
funds for private purposes and reckless disregard of
statutory rules” while serving as the Chief Justice of the
Punjab and Haryana High Court. Despite this strong
indictment, Ramaswami survived the parliamentary
motion recommending removal. The motion
recommending his removal got the required two-thirds
majority among the members who were present and voting,
but the Congress party abstained from voting in the
House. Therefore, the motion could not get the support of
one-half of the total strength of the House.
Check your progress
± Why is independence of the judiciary
important?
± Do you think that executive should have
the power to appoint judges?
± If you were asked to make suggestions
for changing the procedure of appointing
judges, what changes would you
suggest?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 144 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
S J
TRUCTURE OF THE UDICIARY
The Constitution of India provides for a single integrated judicial
system. This means that unlike some other federal countries of the
world, India does not have separate State courts. The structure of
the judiciary in India is pyramidal with the Supreme Court at the
top, High Courts below them and district and subordinate courts at
the lowest level (see the diagram below). The lower courts function
under the direct superintendence of the higher courts.
Supreme Court of India
± Its decisions are binding on all courts.
± Can transfer Judges of High Courts.
± Can move cases from any court to itself.
± Can transfer cases from one High Court to
another.
High Court
± Can hear appeals from lower courts.
± Can issue writs for restoring Fundamental
Rights.
± Can deal with cases within the
jurisdiction of the State.
± Exercises superintendence and control
over courts below it.
District Court
± Deals with cases arising in the
District.
± Considers appeals on decisions
given by lower courts.
± Decides cases involving serious
criminal offences.
Subordinate Courts
± Consider cases of
civil and criminal
130
nature
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 145 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
Jurisdiction of Supreme Court
The Supreme Court of India is one of the very powerful courts 131
anywhere in the world. However, it functions within the limitations
imposed by the Constitution. The functions and responsibilities of
the Supreme Court are defined by the Constitution. The Supreme
Court has specific jurisdiction or scope of powers.
Jurisdiction
of Supreme
Court
of India
Original
Appellate Advisory
Settles
Tries appeals Advises the
disputes
from lower President on
between
courts in Civil, matters of
Union and
Criminal and public
States and
Constitutional importance
amongst
cases and law
States.
Writ:
Can issue writs of
Habeas Corpus,
Mandamus, Prohibition,
Certiorari and Quo
warranto to protect the
Fundamental Rights of the
individual.
Special Powers
Can grant special leave to an appeal from any judgement or
matter passed by any court in the territory of India.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 146 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Original Jurisdiction
Original jurisdiction means cases that can be directly considered by
the Supreme Court without going to the lower courts before that.
From the diagram above, you will notice that cases involving federal
relations go directly to the Supreme Court. The Original Jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court establishes it as an umpire in all disputes
regarding federal matters. In any federal country, legal disputes are
bound to arise between the Union and the States; and among the
States themselves. The power to resolve such cases is entrusted to
the Supreme Court of India. It is called original jurisdiction because
the Supreme Court alone has the power to deal with such cases.
Neither the High Courts nor the lower courts can deal with such
cases. In this capacity, the Supreme Court not just settles disputes
but also interprets the powers of Union and State government as
laid down in the Constitution.
Writ Jurisdiction
As you have already studied in the chapter on fundamental rights,
any individual, whose fundamental right has been violated, can
directly move the Supreme Court for remedy. The Supreme Court
can give special orders in the form of writs. The High Courts can also
issue writs, but the persons whose rights are violated have the choice
of either approaching the High Court or approaching the Supreme
Court directly. Through such writs, the Court can give orders to the
executive to act or not to act in a particular way.
Appellate Jurisdiction
The Supreme Court is the highest court of appeal. A person can
appeal to the Supreme Court against the decisions of the High Court.
However, High Court must certify that the case is fit for appeal, that
is to say that it involves a serious matter of interpretation of law or
Constitution. In addition, in criminal cases, if the lower court has
sentenced a person to death then an appeal can be made to the High
Court or Supreme Court. Of course, the Supreme Court holds the
132 powers to decide whether to admit appeals even when appeal is not
allowed by the High Court. Appellate jurisdiction means that the
Supreme Court will reconsider the case and the legal issues involved
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 147 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
in it. If the Court thinks that the law or the Constitution
has a different meaning from what the lower courts 133
understood, then the Supreme Court will change the
ruling and along with that also give new interpretation of
the provision involved.
The High Courts too, have appellate jurisdiction over
the decisions given by courts below them.
Advisory Jurisdiction
In addition to original and appellate jurisdiction, the
Supreme Court of India possesses advisory jurisdiction
also. This means that the President of India can refer any
matter that is of public importance or that which involves
interpretation of Constitution to Supreme Court for advice.
However, the Supreme Court is not bound to give advice
on such matters and the President is not bound to accept
such an advice.
What then is the utility of the advisory powers of the
Supreme Court? The utility is two-fold. In the first place,
it allows the government to seek legal opinion on a matter
of importance before taking action on it. This may prevent
unnecessary litigations later. Secondly, in the light of the
advice of the Supreme Court, the government can make
suitable changes in its action or legislations.
Article 137
…….. the Supreme Court shall
have power to review any
judgment pronounced or order
made by it.
Article 144
…… All authorities, civil and Isn’t it funny that giving advice
judicial, in the territory of India is optional and accepting that
shall act in aid of the Supreme advice is also optional? I
Court. thought that the Courts gave
decisions that were binding!
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 148 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Read the articles quoted above. These articles help us
to understand the unified nature of our judiciary and the
powers of the Supreme Court. Decisions made by the
Supreme Court are binding on all other courts within the
territory of India. Orders passed by it are enforceable
throughout the length and breadth of the country. The
Supreme Court itself is not bound by its decision and
can at any time review it. Besides, if there is a case of
contempt of the Supreme Court, then the Supreme Court
itself decides such a case.
Why is the Supreme Court
allowed to change its own
ruling? Is it because courts can
Check your progress
also make mistakes? Is it
Match the following
possible that the same judge is
part of the ‘Bench’ that revises
Dispute between High Court
the ruling and was also on the
State of Bihar and
Bench that gave the ruling in
Union of India will be
the first place?
Advisory Jurisdiction
heard by
Appeal from District
Judicial review
court of Haryana
will go to
Original Jurisdiction
Single Integrated
Supreme Court
Judiciary
Declaring a law
Single Constitution
unconstitutional
J A
UDICIAL CTIVISM
Have you heard of the term judicial activism? Or, Public
Interest Litigation?
134 Both these terms are often used in the discussions
about judiciary in recent times. Many people think that
these two things have revolutionised the functioning of
judiciary and made it more people-friendly.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 149 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
R EAD A CARTOON 135
Do you know that in recent times the judiciary has ruled that
bandhs and hartals are illegal?
The chief instrument through which judicial activism has
flourished in India is Public Interest Litigation (PIL) or Social Action
Litigation (SAL). What is PIL or SAL? How and when did it emerge?
In normal course of law, an individual can approach the courts only
if he/she has been personally aggrieved. That is to say, a person
whose rights have been violated, or who is involved in a dispute,
could move the court of law. This concept underwent a change
around 1979. In 1979, the Court set the trend when it decided to
hear a case where the case was filed not by the aggrieved persons
but by others on their behalf. As this case involved a consideration
of an issue of public interest, it and such other cases came to be
known as public interest litigations. Around the same time, the
Supreme Court also took up the case about rights of prisoners. This
opened the gates for large number of cases where public spirited
citizens and voluntary organisations sought judicial intervention for
protection of existing rights, betterment of life conditions of the poor,
nafrI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 150 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
protection of the environment, and many other issues in
the interest of the public. PIL has become the most
important vehicle of judicial activism.
Judiciary, which is an institution that traditionally
confined to responding to cases brought before it, began
considering many cases merely on the basis of newspaper
reports and postal complaints received by the court.
Therefore, the term judicial activism became the more
popular description of the role of the judiciary.
Some Early PILs
I have heard someone say that
± In 1979, newspapers published reports about
PIL means ‘private interest
‘under trials’. There were many prisoners in
litigation’. Why would that
Bihar who had spent long years in jail, longer
be so?
than what they would have spent if they had
been punished for the offences for which they
were arrested. This report prompted an
advocate to file a petition. The Supreme Court
heard this case. It became famous as one of
the early Public Interest Litigations (PILs). This
was the Hussainara Khatoon vs. Bihar case.
± In 1980, a prison inmate of the Tihar jail
managed to send a scribbled piece of paper to
Justice Krishna Iyer of the Supreme Court
narrating physical torture of the prisoners.
The judge got it converted into a petition.
Though later on, the Court abandoned the
practice of considering letters, this case,
known as Sunil Batra vs. Delhi Administration
(1980) also became one of the pioneers of
public interest litigation.
Through the PIL, the court has expanded the idea of
rights. Clean air, unpolluted water, decent living, etc., are
rights for the entire society. Therefore, it was felt by the
courts that individuals as parts of the society must have
136 the right to seek justice wherever such rights were violated.
Secondly, through PIL and judicial activism of the
post-1980 period, the judiciary has also shown readiness
to take into consideration rights of those sections who
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 151 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
cannot easily approach the courts. For this purpose, the
judiciary allowed public spirited citizens, social 137
organisations and lawyers to file petitions on behalf of the
needy and the deprived.
It must be remembered that the problems of
the poor …are qualitatively different from those which
have hitherto occupied the attention of the Court and
they need ….a different kind of judicial approach. If
we blindly follow the adversarial procedure in their
case, they would never be able to enforce their
fundamental rights. — Justice Bhagwati in Bandhua
Mukti Morcha vs. Union of India, 1984.
Activity
Find out the details about at least
one case involving a PIL and study
the way in which that case helped
in serving public interest.
Judicial activism has had manifold impact on the
political system. It has democratised the judicial system
by giving not just to individuals but also groups access
to the courts. It has forced executive accountability. It
has also made an attempt to make the electoral system
much more free and fair. The court asked candidates
contesting elections to file affidavits indicating their assets
and income along with educational qualifications so that
the people could elect their representatives based on
accurate knowledge.
There is however a negative side to the large number
of PILs and the idea of a proactive judiciary. In the first I think judicial activism is more
place it has overburdened the courts. Secondly, judicial about telling the legislature and
the executive what they should
activism has blurred the line of distinction between the
do. What will happen if the
executive and legislature on the one hand and the judiciary
legislature and executive started
on the other. The court has been involved in resolving
giving justice?
questions which belong to the executive. Thus, for
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 152 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
instance, reducing air or sound pollution or investigating cases of
corruption or bringing about electoral reform is not exactly the duty
of the Judiciary. These are matters to be handled by the
administration under the supervision of the legislatures. Therefore,
some people feel that judicial activism has made the balance among
the three organs of government very delicate. Democratic government
is based on each organ of government respecting the powers and
jurisdiction of the others. Judicial activism may be creating strains
on this democratic principle.
Y J
OU ARE THE UDGE
A group of citizens from a city have
approached the court through a PIL
asking for an order to the city municipal
authorities to remove slums and
beautify the city in order to attract
investors to the city. They argue that
this is in the ‘public interest.’ The
residents of the slum localities have
responded by saying that this will
encroach on their right to life. They
argue that right to life is more central
to ‘public interest’ than the right to a
clean city.
Imagine that you are the judge.
Write a judgement deciding if the PIL involves ‘public interest’.
J R
UDICIARY AND IGHTS
We have already seen that the judiciary is entrusted with the task of
protecting rights of individuals. The Constitution provides two ways
in which the Supreme Court can remedy the violation of rights.
± First it can restore fundamental rights by issuing writs of Habeas
138 Corpus; mandamus etc. (article 32). The High Courts also have
the power to issue such writs (article 226).
± Secondly, the Supreme Court can declare the concerned law as
unconstitutional and therefore non-operational (article 13).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 153 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
Together these two provisions of the Constitution
establish the Supreme Court as the protector of 139
fundamental rights of the citizen on the one hand and
interpreter of Constitution on the other. The second of
the two ways mentioned above involves judicial review.
Perhaps the most important power of the Supreme
Court is the power of judicial review. Judicial Review
means the power of the Supreme Court (or High Courts)
to examine the constitutionality of any law if the Court
arrives at the conclusion that the law is inconsistent with
the provisions of the Constitution, such a law is declared
as unconstitutional and inapplicable. The term judicial
review is nowhere mentioned in the Constitution. However,
the fact that India has a written constitution and the
Supreme Court can strike down a law that goes against
fundamental rights, implicitly gives the Supreme Court
the power of judicial review.
Besides, as we saw in the section on jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court, in the case of federal relations too, the
Supreme Court can use the review powers if a law is
inconsistent with the distribution of powers laid down by
the Constitution. Suppose, the central government makes
a law, which according to some States, concerns a subject
from the State list. Then the States can go to the Supreme
Court and if the court agrees with them, it would declare
that the law is unconstitutional. In this sense, the review
power of the Supreme Court includes power to review
legislations on the ground that they violate fundamental
rights or on the ground that they violate the federal
distribution of powers. The review power extends to the
laws passed by State legislatures also.
Together, the writ powers and the review power of the
Court make judiciary very powerful. In particular, the
review power means that the judiciary can interpret the
Constitution and the laws passed by the legislature. Many
people think that this feature enables the judiciary to I think I’d rather become a
protect the Constitution effectively and also to protect the judge! Then, I won’t have to
rights of citizens. The practice of entertaining PILs has worry about elections and
further added to the powers of the judiciary in protecting public support, and can still
rights of citizens. have really lots of power.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 154 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Did you know that the practice of public interest litigation is now
becoming more and more acceptable in many other countries?
While many courts across the world, particularly in South Asia
and Africa practice some form of judicial activism comparable to
that of the Indian judiciary, the constitution of South Africa has
incorporated public interest litigation in its bill of rights. Thus,
in South Africa, it is a fundamental right of the citizen to bring
before the Constitutional Court, cases of violation of other persons’
rights.
Do you remember that in the chapter on rights we mentioned the
right against exploitation? This right prohibits forced labour, trade
in human flesh and prohibits employment of children in hazardous
jobs. But the question is: how could those, whose rights were violated,
approach the court? PIL and judicial activism made it possible for
courts to consider these violations. Thus, the court considered a whole
set of cases: the blinding of the jail inmates by the police, inhuman
working conditions in stone quarries, sexual exploitation of children,
and so on. This trend has made rights really meaningful for the poor
and disadvantaged sections.
Check your progress
± When does the Court use the review powers?
± What is the difference between judicial review
and writ?
J P
UDICIARY AND ARLIAMENT
Apart from taking a very active stand on the matter of rights, the
court has been active in seeking to prevent subversion of the
140 Constitution through political practice. Thus, areas that were
considered beyond the scope of judicial review such as powers of the
President and Governor were brought under the purview of the
courts.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 155 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
There are many other instances in which the Supreme Court
actively involved itself in the administration of justice by giving 141
directions to executive agencies. Thus, it gave directions to CBI to
initiate investigations against politicians and bureaucrats in the
hawala case, the Narasimha Rao case, illegal allotment of petrol
pumps case etc. You may have heard about some of these cases.
Many of these instances are the products of judicial activism.
The Indian Constitution is based on a delicate principle of limited
separation of powers and checks and balances. This means that each
organ of the government has a clear area of functioning. Thus, the
Parliament is supreme in making laws and amending the
Constitution, the executive is supreme in implementing them while
the judiciary is supreme in settling disputes and deciding whether
the laws that have been made are in accordance with the provisions
of the Constitution. Despite such clear cut division of power the
conflict between the Parliament and judiciary, and executive and
the judiciary has remained a recurrent theme in Indian politics.
We have already mentioned the differences that emerged between
the Parliament and the judiciary over right to property and the
Parliament’s power to amend the Constitution. Let us recapitulate
that briefly:
Immediately after the implementation of the Constitution began,
a controversy arose over the Parliament’s power to restrict right to
property. The Parliament wanted to put some restrictions on the
right to hold property so that land reforms could be implemented.
The Court held that the Parliament cannot thus restrict fundamental
rights. The Parliament then tried to amend the Constitution. But the
Court said that even through an amendment, a fundamental right
cannot be abridged.
The following issues were at the centre of the controversy between
the Parliament and the judiciary.
± What is the scope of right to private property?
± What is the scope of the Parliament’s power to curtail, abridge or
abrogate fundamental rights?
± What is the scope of the Parliament’s power to amend the
constitution?
± Can the Parliament make laws that abridge fundamental rights
while enforcing directive principles?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 156 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
“While there can be no two opinions
on the need for the maintenance of
judicial independence, ...it is also
necessary to keep in view one
important principle. The doctrine of
independence is not to be raised to
the level of a dogma so as to enable
the judiciary to function as a kind
of super-legislature or super-
executive. The judiciary is there to
interpret the Constitution or
adjudicate upon the rights...”
Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 837, 23 November 1949
During the period 1967 and 1973, this controversy became very
serious. Apart from land reform laws, laws enforcing preventive
detention, laws governing reservations in jobs, regulations acquiring
private property for public purposes, and laws deciding the
compensation for such acquisition of private property were some
instances of the conflict between the legislature and the judiciary.
In 1973, the Supreme Court gave a decision that has become
very important in regulating the relations between the Parliament
and the Judiciary since then. This case is famous as the Kesavananda
Bharati case. In this case, the Court ruled that there is a basic
structure of the Constitution and nobody—not even the Parliament
(through amendment)—can violate the basic structure. The Court
did two more things. First, it said that right to property (the disputed
issue) was not part of basic structure and therefore could be suitably
abridged. Secondly, the Court reserved to itself the right to decide
whether various matters are part of the basic structure of the
Constitution. This case is perhaps the best example of how judiciary
142 uses its power to interpret the Constitution.
This ruling has changed the nature of conflicts between the
legislature and the judiciary. As we studied earlier, the right to
property was taken away from the list of fundamental rights in 1979
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 157 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
and this also helped in changing the nature of the
relationship between these two organs of government. 143
Some issues still remain a bone of contention between
the two — can the judiciary intervene in and regulate the
functioning of the legislatures? In the parliamentary
system, the legislature has the power to govern itself and
regulate the behaviour of its members. Thus, the
legislature can punish a person who the legislature holds
guilty of breaching privileges of the legislature. Can a
person who is held guilty for breach of parliamentary
privileges seek protection of the courts? Can a member of
the legislature against whom the legislature has taken
disciplinary action get protection from the court? These
issues are unresolved and are matters of potential conflict
between the two. Similarly, the Constitution provides that Why can’t the Court tell us once
the conduct of judges cannot be discussed in the and for all what are those
aspects that are ‘basic structure’
Parliament. There have been several instances where the
of the Constitution?
Parliament and State legislatures have cast aspersions
on the functioning of the judiciary. Similarly, the judiciary
too has criticised the legislatures and issued instructions
to the legislatures about the conduct of legislative
business. The legislatures see this as violating the principle
of parliamentary sovereignty.
These issues indicate how delicate the balance between
any two organs of the government is and how important
it is for each organ of the government in a democracy to
respect the authority of others.
Check your progress
The main issues in the conflict between
the judiciary and the Parliament have
been:
± Appointment of judges
± Salaries and allowances of judges
± Scope of Parliament’s power to
amend the Constitution
± Interference by the Parliament in
the functioning of the judiciary
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 158 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have studied
the role of the judiciary in our
democratic structure. In spite of
the tensions that arose from time
R
EAD A CARTOON to time between the judiciary and
the executive and the legislature,
the prestige of the judiciary has
increased considerably. At the
same time, there are many more
expectations from the judiciary.
Ordinary citizens also wonder
how it is possible for many people
to get easy acquittals and how
witnesses change their
testimonies to suit the wealthy
and the mighty. These are some
issues about which our judiciary
is concerned too.
You have seen in this chapter
that judiciary in India is a very
powerful institution. This power
has generated much awe and
many hopes from it. Judiciary in
India is also known for its
independence. Through various
decisions, the judiciary has given
new interpretations to the
Constitution and protected the
How active is the judiciary in trying to
rights of citizens. As we saw in
curb corruption in public life?
this chapter, democracy hinges
on the delicate balance of power
between the judiciary and the
Parliament and both institutions
have to function within the
limitations set by the
144
Constitution.
.aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
K
R
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 159 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
145
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 160 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Exercises
1. What are the different ways in which the independence of the
judiciary is ensured? Choose the odd ones out.
i. Chief Justice of the Supreme Court is consulted in the
appointment of other judges of Supreme Court.
ii. Judges are generally not removed before the age of retirement.
iii. Judge of a High Court cannot be transferred to another High
Court.
iv. Parliament has no say in the appointment of judges.
2. Does independence of the judiciary mean that the judiciary is not
accountable to any one? Write your answer in not more than 100
words.
3. What are the different provisions in the constitution in order to
maintain the independence of judiciary?
4. Read the news report below and identify the following aspects:
√
What is the case about?
√
Who has been the beneficiary in the case?
√
Who is the petitioner in the case?
√
Visualise what would have been the different arguments put
forward by the company.
√
What arguments would the farmers have put forward?
Supreme Court orders REL to pay Rs 300 crore to Dahanu
farmers
Our Corporate Bureau 24 March 2005
Mumbai: The Supreme Court has ordered Reliance Energy to pay
Rs. 300 crore to farmers who grow the chikoo fruit in the Dahanu
area outside Mumbai. The order comes after the chikoo growers
petitioned the court against the pollution caused by Reliance’s
thermal power plant.
Dahanu, which is 150 km from Mumbai, was a self-sustaining
agricultural and horticultural economy known for its fisheries
146
and forests just over a decade ago, but was devastated in 1989
when a thermal power plant came into operation in the region.
The next year, this fertile belt saw its first crop failure. Now, 70
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 161 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
per cent of the crop of what was once the fruit bowl of Maharashtra
is gone. The fisheries have shut and the forest cover has thinned. 147
Farmers and environmentalists say that fly ash from the power
plant entered ground water and polluted the entire eco-system.
The Dahanu Taluka Environment Protection Authority ordered
the thermal station to set up a pollution control unit to reduce
sulphur emissions, and in spite of a Supreme Court order backing
the order the pollution control plant was not set up even by 2002.
In 2003, Reliance acquired the thermal station and re-submitted
a schedule for installation process in 2004. As the pollution control
plant is still not set up, the Dahanu Taluka Environmental
Protection Authority asked Reliance for a bank guarantee of Rs.
300 crores.
5. Read the following news report and,
√
Identify the governments at different levels
√
Identify the role of Supreme Court
√
What elements of the working of judiciary and executive can
you identify in it?
√
Identify the policy issues, matters related to legislation,
implementation and interpretation of the law involved in this
case.
Centre, Delhi join hands on CNG issue
By Our Staff Reporter, The Hindu 23 September 2001
NEW DELHI, SEPT. 22. The Centre and the Delhi Government
today agreed to jointly approach the Supreme Court this coming
week… for phasing out of all non-CNG commercial vehicles in
the Capital. They also decided to seek a dual fuel policy for the
city instead of putting the entire transportation system on the
single-fuel mode “which was full of dangers and would result in
disaster.’’
It was also decided to discourage the use of CNG by private
vehicle owners in the Capital. Both governments would press for
allowing the use of 0.05 per cent low sulphur diesel for running of
buses in the Capital. In addition, it would be pleaded before the
Court that all commercial vehicles, which fulfil the Euro-II
standards, should be allowed to ply in the city. Though both the
Centre and the State would file separate affidavits, these would
contain common points. The Centre would also go out and support
the Delhi Government’s stand on the issues concerning CNG.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 162 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
These decisions were taken at a meeting between the Delhi Chief
Minister, Ms. Sheila Dikshit, and the Union Petroleum and Natural
Gas Minister, Mr. Ram Naik.
Ms. Dikshit said the Central Government would request the
court that in view of the high powered Committee appointed under
Dr. R.A. Mashelkar to suggest an “Auto Fuel Policy”’ for the entire
country, it would be appropriate to extend the deadline as it was
not possible to convert the entire 10,000-odd bus fleet into CNG
during the prescribed time frame. The Mashelkar Committee is
expected to submit its report within a period of six months.
The Chief Minister said time was required to implement the
court directives. Referring to the coordinated approach on the
issue, Ms. Dikshit said this would take into account the details
about the number of vehicles to be run on CNG, eliminating long
queues outside CNG filling stations, the CNG fuel requirements
of Delhi and the ways and means to implement the directive of
the court.
The Supreme Court had …refused to relax the only CNG norm
for the city’s buses but said it had never insisted on CNG for
taxis and auto rickshaws. Mr. Naik said the Centre would insist
on allowing use of low sulphur diesel for buses in Delhi as putting
the entire transportation system dependent on CNG could prove
to be disastrous. The Capital relied on pipeline supply for CNG
and any disruption would throw the public transport system out
of gear.
6. The following is a statement about Ecuador. What similarities or
differences do you find between this example and the judicial system
in India?
“It would be helpful if a body of common law, or judicial precedent,
existed that could clarify a journalist’s rights. Unfortunately,
Ecuador’s courts don’t work that way. Judges are not forced to
respect the rulings of higher courts in previous cases. Unlike the
US, an appellate judge in Ecuador (or elsewhere in South America,
148 for that matter) need not provide a written decision explaining
the legal basis of a ruling. A judge may rule one way today and
the opposite way, in a similar case, tomorrow, without explaining
why.”
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 163 ---
Chapter 6: Judiciary
7. Read the following statements: Match them with the different 149
jurisdictions the Supreme Court can exercise - Original, Appellate,
and Advisory.
√
The government wanted to know if it can pass a law about the
citizenship status of residents of Pakistan-occupied areas of
Jammu and Kashmir.
√
In order to resolve the dispute about river Cauvery the
government of Tamil Nadu wants to approach the court.
√
Court rejected the appeal by people against the eviction from
the dam site.
8. In what way can public interest litigation help the poor?
9. Do you think that judicial activism can lead to a conflict between
the judiciary and the executive? Why?
10. How is judicial activism related to the protection of fundamental
rights? Has it helped in expanding the scope of fundamental rights?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 164 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Seven
FEDERALISM
I
NTRODUCTION
Look at the political maps (on next two pages) of India 1947 and 2017. They
have changed dramatically over the years. Boundaries of States have changed,
names of States have changed, and the number of States has changed. When
India became independent, we had a number of provinces that the British
government had organised only for administrative convenience. Then a number
of princely states merged with the newly independent Indian union. These
were joined to the existing provinces. This is what you see in the first map.
Since then boundaries of States have been reorganised many times. During this
entire period, not only did boundaries of States change, but in some cases, even
their names changed according to the wishes of the people of those States. Thus,
Mysore changed to Karnataka and Madras became Tamil Nadu. The maps show
these large scale changes that have taken place in the span of over seventy years.
In a way, these maps also tell us the story of functioning of federalism in India.
After studying this chapter you will be able to understand the following:
± what is Federalism;
± the federal provisions in the Indian Constitution;
± the issues involved in the relations between the centre and the States; and
150
± the special provisions for certain States having a distinct composition and
historical features.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 165 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
151
7491
NI
AIDNI
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 166 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
152
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 167 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
W F ?
HAT IS EDERALISM
153
USSR was one of the world’s super
powers, but after 1989 it simply
Federalism in West Indies
broke up into several independent You may have heard about
countries. One of the major the cricket team of West
reasons for its break up was the Indies. But is there a country
excessive centralisation and called West Indies?
concentration of power, and the Like India, West Indies
was also colonised by the
domination of Russia over other
British. In 1958, the
regions with independent
federation of West Indies
languages and cultures of their
came into being. It had a
own e.g. Uzbekistan. Some other
weak central government
countries like Czechoslovakia,
and the economy of each unit
Yugoslavia, and Pakistan also had
was independent. These
to face a division of the country. features and political
Canada came very close to a break competition among the units
up between the English-speaking led to the formal dissolution
and the French-speaking regions of the federation in
of that country. Isn’t it a great 1962. Later, in 1973 by
Treaty of Chiguaramas
achievement that India, which
the independent islands
emerged as an independent
established joint authorities
nation-state in 1947 after a painful
in the form of a common
partition, has remained united over
legislature, supreme court, a
seven decades of its independent
common currency, and, to a
existence? What accounts for
degree, a common market
this achievement? Can we attribute known as the Caribbean
it to the federal structure Community. The Caribbean
of governance that we in Community has even a
India adopted through our common executive, and
Constitution? All the countries Heads of the governments of
member countries are
mentioned above, were federations.
members of this executive.
Yet they could not remain united.
Thus, the units could
Therefore, apart from adopting a
neither live together as one
federal constitution, the nature of
country, nor can they live
that federal system and the
separately!
practice of federalism must also be
important factors.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 168 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
India is a land of continental proportions and immense
diversities. There are more than 20 major languages and
several hundred minor ones. It is the home of several major
religions. There are several million indigenous peoples
living in different parts of the country. In spite of all these
diversities we share a common land mass. We have also
participated in a common history, especially, when we
fought for independence. We also share many other
important features. This has led our national leaders to
visualise India as a country where there is unity in
diversity. Sometimes it is described as unity with diversity.
Federalism does not consist of a set of fixed principles,
which are applied, to different historical situations. Rather,
federalism as a principle of government has evolved
differently in different situations. American federalism –
one of the first major attempts to build a federal polity – is
different from German or Indian federalism. But there are
also a few key ideas and concepts associated with
federalism.
± Essentially, federalism is an institutional mechanism
to accommodate two sets of polities—one at the
regional level and the other at the national level. Each
government is autonomous in its own sphere. In some
federal countries, there is even a system of dual
citizenship. India has only a single citizenship.
± The people likewise, have two sets of identities and
I get it! It’s like our school. We
loyalties—they belong to the region as well as the
have our identity as students
nation, for example we are Gujaratis or Jharkhandis
of class XI or XII and so on.
as well as Indians. Each level of the polity has distinct
And we also have competition
powers and responsibilities and has a separate system
among the various divisions.
of government.
But we all belong to the school
± The details of this dual system of government are
and are proud of it.
generally spelt out in a written constitution, which is
considered to be supreme and which is also the source
154 of the power of both sets of government. Certain
subjects, which concern the nation as a whole, for
example, defence or currency, are the responsibility
of the union or central government. Regional or local
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 169 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
matters are the responsibility of the regional or State
government. 155
± To prevent conflicts between the centre and the State,
there is an independent judiciary to settle disputes.
The judiciary has the powers to resolve disputes
between the central government and the States on legal
matters about the division of power.
Real politics, culture, ideology and history determine
the actual working of a federation. A culture of trust,
cooperation, mutual respect and restraint helps
federations to function smoothly. Political parties also
determine the way a constitution would work. If any single
Yes, I remember what we read
unit or State or linguistic group or ideology comes to
in the first chapter: a
dominate the entire federation it could generate a deep
constitution decides who
resentment among people or its units not sharing the should have how much power.
dominant voice. These situations could lead to demands
for secession by the aggrieved units or could even result
in civil wars. Many countries are embroiled in such conflict
situations.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 170 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Federalism in Nigeria
If the regions and various communities do not trust each
other, even a federal arrangement can fail to produce unity.
The example of Nigeria is instructive:
Till 1914, Northern and Southern Nigeria were two
separate British colonies. At the Ibadan Constitutional
Conference of 1950 Nigerian leaders decided to form a
federal constitution. The three major ethnic groups of
Nigeria—Yoruba, Ibo and Hausa-Fulani—controlled the
regions of the West, the East and the North respectively.
Their attempt to spread their influence to other regions
led to fears and conflicts. These led to a military regime.
In the 1960 constitution, both federal and regional
governments jointly controlled the Nigerian police. In the
military-supervised constitution of 1979, no state was
allowed to have any civil police.
Though democracy was restored in Nigeria in 1999,
religious differences along with conflicts over who will
control revenues from the oil resources continue to present
problems before the Nigerian federation. Local ethnic
communities resist centralised control of the oil resources.
Thus, Nigeria is an example of overlap of religious, ethnic
and economic differences among the units.
Check your progress
± Who decides the powers of the central
government in a federation?
± How are conflicts between the central
government and the States resolved in a
federation?
156
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 171 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
F I C
EDERALISM IN THE NDIAN ONSTITUTION
157
Even before Independence, most leaders of our national
movement were aware that to govern a large country like
ours, it would be necessary to divide the powers between
provinces and the central government. There was also
awareness that Indian society had regional diversity and
linguistic diversity. This diversity needed recognition.
People of different regions and languages had to share
power and in each region, people of that region should
govern themselves. This was only logical if we wanted a
democratic government.
The only question was what should be the extent of
powers to be enjoyed by the regional governments. In view
After all, the purpose of living
of the agitation of the Muslim League for greater
together must be that all of us
representation to the Muslims, a compromise formula to
are happy and must make each
give very large powers to the regions was discussed during
other be happy.
the negotiations before Partition. Once the decision to
partition India was taken, the Constituent Assembly
decided to frame a government that would be based on
the principles of unity and cooperation between the centre
and the States and separate powers to the States. The
most important feature of the federal system adopted by
the Indian Constitution is the principle that relations
between the States and the centre would be based on
cooperation. Thus, while recognising diversity, the
Constitution emphasised unity.
Do you know for example, that the Constitution of
India does not even mention the word federation? This is
how the Constitution describes India —
Article 1: (1) India, that is Bharat,
shall be a Union of States.
(2) The States and the territories
thereof shall be as specified in the
First Schedule.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 172 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Division of Powers
There are two sets of government created by the Indian
Constitution: one for the entire nation called the union
government (central government) and one for each unit
or State called the State government. Both of these have a
constitutional status and clearly identified area of activity.
If there is any dispute about which powers come under
the control of the union and which under the States, this
I feel that States would have
can be resolved by the Judiciary on the basis of the
very little money of their own.
constitutional provisions. The Constitution clearly
How can they manage their
demarcates subjects, which are under the exclusive
affairs? It is like some families
domain of the Union and those under the States. (Study
where the money is with the
the chart given on the next page carefully. It shows how
husband and the wife has to
powers are distributed between the centre and the States.)
manage the household.
One of the important aspects of this division of powers is
that economic and financial powers are centralised in the
hands of the central government by the Constitution. The
States have immense responsibilities but very meagre
revenue sources.
Check your progress
± Do you think that there is a need for
mentioning Residuary powers
separately? Why?
± Why do the States feel dissatisfied
about the division of powers?
158
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 173 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
159
Constitution of India
Union List State List Concurrent
Includes subjects Includes subjects List
like, like Includes
± Defence ± Agriculture subjects like,
± Atomic ± Police ± Education
Energy ± Prison ± Transfer of
± Foreign ± Local Property
Affairs Government other than
± War and ± Public Heath Agricultural
Peace ± Land land
± Banking ± Liquor ± Forests
± Railways ± Trade and ± Trade
± Post and Commerce Unions
Telegraph ± Livestock ± Adulteration
± Airways and Animal ± Adoption
± Ports Husbandry and
± Foreign Trade ± State Public Succession
± Currency & Services
Coinage Both Union and
Normally only the State
Union Legislature State Legislature Legislature
alone can make can make laws on alone can make
laws on these these matters laws on these
matters. matters.
Residuary Powers
Include all other matters not mentioned in any of the Lists.
± Cyber Laws
Union Legislature alone has the power to legislate on such
matters
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 174 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
F S C G
EDERALISM WITH A TRONG ENTRAL OVERNMENT
It is generally accepted that the Indian Constitution has created a
strong central government. India is a country of continental
dimensions with immense diversities and social problems. The
framers of the Constitution believed that we required a federal
constitution that would accommodate diversities. But they also
wanted to create a strong centre to stem disintegration and bring
about social and political change. It was necessary for the centre to
have such powers because India at the time of independence was
not only divided into provinces created by the British; but there were
more than 500 princely states which had to be integrated into existing
States or new States had to be created.
“Let me tell my honourable Friends
in the House that the drift… in all
constitutions has been towards the
centre... because of circumstances
that have now come into being
that the States have become,
...federal or unitary, welfare states
from being Police States and the
ultimate responsibility as for the
economic well-being of the country
has become the paramount
responsibility of the centre.”
T.T. Krishnamachari, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 955-956, 25 November 1949
Besides the concern for unity, the makers of the Constitution
also believed that the socio-economic problems of the country needed
to be handled by a strong central government in cooperation with
the States. Poverty, illiteracy and inequalities of wealth were some of
the problems that required planning and coordination. Thus, the
160 concerns for unity and development prompted the makers of the
Constitution to create a strong central government.
Let us look at the important provisions that create a strong central
government:
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 175 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
± The very existence of a State including its territorial
integrity is in the hands of Parliament. The Parliament 161
is empowered to ‘form a new State by separation of
territory from any State or by uniting two or more
States…’. It can also alter the boundary of any State
or even its name. The Constitution provides for some
safeguards by way of securing the view of the
concerned State legislature.
± The Constitution has certain very powerful emergency
provisions, which can turn our federal polity into a
highly centralised system once emergency is declared.
During an emergency, power becomes lawfully
centralised. Parliament also assumes the power to
I now understand why our
make laws on subjects within the jurisdiction of
Constitution is not only about
the States.
borrowing from others. It must
± Even during normal circumstances, the central
have designed federalism
government has very effective financial powers and according to our needs.
responsibilities. In the first place, items generating
revenue are under the control of the central
government. Thus, the central government has many
revenue sources and the States are mostly dependent
on the grants and financial assistance from the centre.
Secondly, India adopted planning as the instrument
of rapid economic progress and development after
independence. Planning led to considerable
centralisation of economic decision making. Planning
commission appointed by the union government is
the coordinating machinery that controls and
supervises the resources management of the States.
Besides, the Union government uses its discretion to
give grants and loans to States. This distribution of
economic resources is considered lopsided and has
led to charges of discrimination against States ruled
by an opposition party.
± As you will study later, the Governor has certain
powers to recommend dismissal of the State
government and the dissolution of the Assembly.
Besides, even in normal circumstances, the Governor
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 176 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
has the power to reserve a bill passed by the State
legislature, for the assent of the President. This gives
the central government an opportunity to delay the
State legislation and also to examine such bills and
veto them completely.
± There may be occasions when the situation may
demand that the central government needs to legislate
on matters from the State list. This is possible if the
move is ratified by the Rajya Sabha. The Constitution
clearly states that executive powers of the centre are
superior to the executive powers of the States.
Furthermore, the central government may choose to
give instructions to the State government.
The following extract from an article of the Constitution
makes this clear.
Article 257 (1): The executive
power of every State shall be so
exercised as not to impede or
prejudice the exercise of the
executive power of the Union, and
the executive power of the Union
shall extend to the giving of such
directions to a State as may
appear to the Government of India
to be necessary for that purpose.
± You have already studied in the chapter on executive
that we have an integrated administrative system. The
Oh! The central government
all-India services are common to the entire territory of
appears to me to be all-
India and officers chosen for these services serve in
powerful. Don’t the States
the administration of the States. Thus, an IAS officer
complain about it?
who becomes the collector or an IPS officer who serves
as the Commissioner of Police, are under the control
of the central government. States can neither take
162
disciplinary action nor can they remove these officers
from service.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 177 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
± Articles 33 and 34 authorise the Parliament to protect persons in the
service of the union or a state in respect of any action taken by 163
them during martial law to maintain or restore order. This
provisions further strengthens the powers of the union government.
The Armed Forces Special Powers Act has been made on the basis
of these provisions. This Act has created tensions between the
people and the armed forces on some occasions.
Check your progress
± Give two reasons for the claim that our
Constitution has a unitary bias.
± Do you think that:
√
a strong centre makes the States weak?
√
strong States will weaken the centre?
C I ’ F S
ONFLICTS IN NDIA S EDERAL YSTEM
In the previous section, we have seen that the Constitution has vested
very strong powers in the centre. Thus, the Constitution recognises
the separate identity of the regions and yet gives more powers to the
centre. Once the principle of identity of the State is accepted, it is
quite natural that the States would expect a greater role and powers
in the governance of the State and the country as a whole. This leads
to various demands from the States. From time to time, States have
demanded that they should be given more powers and more
autonomy. This leads to tensions and conflicts in the relations between
the centre and the States. While the legal disputes between the centre
and the States (or between States) can be resolved by the judiciary,
demands for autonomy are of political nature and need to be resolved
through negotiations.
Centre-State Relations
The Constitution is only a framework or a skeleton, its flesh and
blood is provided by the actual processes of politics. Hence federalism
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 178 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
in India has to a large extent been influenced by the
changing nature of the political process. In the 1950s and
early 1960s the foundation of our federalism was laid
under Jawaharlal Nehru. It was also a period of Congress
dominance over the centre as well as the States. Except
on the issue of formation of new States, the relations
between the centre and the States remained quite normal
during this period. The States were hopeful that they would
be making progress with the help of the grants-in-aid from
the centre. Besides, there was considerable optimism
about the policies of socio-economic development designed
by the centre.
In the middle of the 1960s Congress dominance
declined somewhat and in a large number of States
opposition parties came to power. It resulted in demands
for greater powers and greater autonomy to the States. In
fact, these demands were a direct fallout of the fact that
different parties were ruling at the centre and in many
States. So, the State governments were protesting against
what they saw as unnecessary interference in their
governments by the Congress government at the centre.
The Congress too, was not very comfortable with the idea
of dealing with governments led by opposition parties.
This peculiar political context gave birth to a discussion
about the concept of autonomy under a federal system.
Finally, since the 1990s, Congress dominance has
largely ended and we have entered an era of coalition
politics especially at the centre. In the States too, different
parties, both national and regional, have come to power.
This is quite interesting. So, laws
This has resulted in a greater say for the States, a respect
and constitutions alone do not
for diversity and the beginning of a more mature
decide everything. After all,
federalism. Thus, it is in the second phase that the issue
actual politics decides the nature
of autonomy became very potent politically.
of our government!
Demands for Autonomy
Many States and even many political parties have, from
164
time to time, demanded that States should have more
autonomy vis-à-vis the central government. However,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 179 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
‘autonomy’ refers to different things for different States
and parties. 165
± Sometimes, these demands expect that the division of
powers should be changed in favour of the States and
more powers and important powers be assigned to the
States. Many States (Tamil Nadu, Punjab, West Bengal)
and many parties (DMK, Akali Dal, CPI-M) have made
demands of autonomy from time to time.
± Another demand is that States should have independent
sources of revenue and greater control over the resources.
This is also known as financial autonomy. In 1977, the
Left Front Government in West Bengal brought out a
Yes, I know that Hindi is
document demanding a restructuring of centre-State
India’s official language. But
relations in India. In the autonomy demands of Tamil
many of my friends from
Nadu and Punjab also, there was an implicit support to
different parts of the country
the idea of greater financial powers.
don’t know Hindi.
± The third aspect of the autonomy demands relates to
administrative powers of the States. States resent the
control of the centre over the administrative machinery.
± Fourthly, autonomy
demands may also be R EAD A CARTOON
related to cultural and
linguistic issues. The
opposition to the
domination of Hindi (in
Tamil Nadu) or demand
for advancing the Punjabi
language and culture are
instances of this. Some
States also feel that there
is a domination of the
Hindi-speaking areas
over the others. In fact,
during the decade of
1960s, there were During discussion on the national language in the
agitations in some States Constituent Assembly, Nehru had to appeal to the Hindi-
against the imposition of speaking provinces to show greater tolerance towards
others. Don’t spare me Shankar, p.24
the Hindi language.
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
18 September 1949
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 180 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Role of Governors and President’s Rule
R
EAD A CARTOON The role of Governors has always been a
controversial issue between the States and
the central government. The Governor is not
an elected office-holder. Many Governors
have been retired military officers or civil
servants or politicians. Besides, the Governor
is appointed by the central government and
therefore, actions of the Governor are often
viewed as interference by the Central
government in the functioning of the State
government. When two different parties are
in power at the centre and the State, the role
of the Governor becomes even more
controversial. The Sarkaria Commission that
was appointed by the central government
(1983; it submitted its report in 1988) to
examine the issues relating to centre-State
“When Nehru was appointing relations, recommended that appointments
governors, some were reluctant to
of Governors should be strictly non-partisan.
quit ministerial chairs.”
Powers and role of the Governor become
Don’t spare me Shankar, p.89
controversial for one more reason. One of the
most controversial articles in the Constitution is Article 356, which
provides for President’s rule in any State. This provision is to be
applied, when ‘a situation has arisen in which the Government of the
State cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this
Constitution.’ It results in the takeover of the State government by
the Union government. The President’s proclamation has to be ratified
by Parliament. President’s rule can be extended till three years. The
Governor has the power to recommend the dismissal of the State
government and suspension or dissolution of State assembly. This
has led to many conflicts. In some cases, State governments were
dismissed even when they had a majority in the legislature, as had
happened in Kerala in 1959 or without testing their majority, as
166 happened in several other States after 1967. Some cases went to the
Supreme Court and the Court has ruled that constitutional validity
of the decision to impose President’s rule can be examined by the
judiciary.
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
27 April 1952
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 181 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
Article 356 was very
R EAD A CARTOON sparingly used till 1967. After 167
1967 many States had non-
Congress governments and the
Congress was in power at the
centre. The centre has often
used this provision to dismiss
State governments or has used
the office of the Governor to
prevent the majority party or
coalition from assuming office.
For instance, the central
government removed elected
governments in Andhra
Pradesh and Jammu and
Kashmir in the decade of 1980s.
Demands for New States
The other dimension of tension
Toppling the State governments. in our federal system has been
Everyone loves to play this game!
the demand to create new
States. The national movement R
EAD A CARTOON
not only created a pan-Indian
national unity; it also generated
distinct unity around a common
language, region and culture. Our
national movement was also a
movement for democracy.
Therefore, in the course of the
national movement itself, it was
decided that as far as possible,
States would be created on the
basis of common cultural and
linguistic identity.
This ultimately led to the
Flood of demands for creating new States
demand for the creation of
.aidnI
fo
semiT
ehT
ni
namxaL
K
R
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
26 July 1953
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 182 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
linguistic States after Independence. In December 1953,
the States Reorganisation Commission was set up and it
recommended the creation of linguistic States, at least for
the major linguistic groups. In 1956, reorganisation of
some States took place. This saw the beginning of the
creation of linguistic States and the process is still
continuing. Gujarat and Maharashtra were created in
1960; Punjab and Haryana were separated from each other
in 1966. Later, the North Eastern region was reorganised
and new States like Manipur, Tripura, Meghalaya,
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh were created.
Activity
Make a list of the States of India and find
out the year in which each of the States
was created.
In 2000, some of the larger States were further divided
both to meet the demands for a separate State as well as
to meet the need for greater administrative efficiency. Thus
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar were divided
to create three new States. They are: Chhattisgarh,
Uttarakhand and Jharkhand respectively. In 2014, the
State of Telangana was formed by dividing Andhra
Pradesh. Some regions and linguistic groups are still
struggling for separate Statehood like Vidarbha in
Maharashtra.
So, federalism is all about Interstate Conflicts
conflicts! First, we talked about
While the States keep fighting with the centre over
Centre-State conflicts and now
autonomy and other issues like the share in revenue
conflict among States. Can’t we
resources, there have been many instances of disputes
live together peacefully?
between two States or among more than two States. It is
true that the judiciary acts as the arbitration mechanism
168 on disputes of a legal nature but these disputes are in
reality not just legal. They have political implications and
therefore they can best be resolved only through
negotiations and mutual understanding.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 183 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
Broadly, two types of disputes keep recurring. One is
the border dispute. States have certain claims over 169
territories belonging to neighbouring States. Though
language is the basis of defining boundaries of the States,
often border areas would have populations speaking more
than one language. So, it is not easy to resolve this dispute
merely on the basis of linguistic majority. One of the long-
standing border disputes is the dispute between
Maharashtra and Karnataka over the city of Belgaum.
Manipur and Nagaland too, have a long-standing border
dispute. The carving out of Haryana from the erstwhile
State of Punjab has led to dispute between the two States
not only over border areas, but over the capital city of
Chandigarh. This city today houses the capital of both
these States. In 1985, the then Prime Minister Rajiv
Gandhi reached an understanding with the leadership of
Punjab. According to this understanding, Chandigarh
was to be handed over to Punjab. But this has not
happened yet.
While border disputes are more about sentiment, the
disputes over the sharing of river waters are even more
serious, because they are related to problems of drinking
water and agriculture in the concerned States. You might
have heard about the Cauvery water dispute. This is a
major issue between Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Farmers
in both the States are dependent on Cauvery waters.
Though there is a river water tribunal to settle water
disputes, this dispute has reached the Supreme Court.
In another similar dispute Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra are battling over sharing the waters of
Narmada river. Rivers are a major resource and therefore,
disputes over river waters test the patience and cooperative
spirit of the States.
Activity Yes, conflict over Governors,
Collect information about at least one over language, over borders and
dispute about river waters involving two over water….and yet we
manage to live together!
or more States.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 184 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Check your progress
± Why do States want more autonomy?
± What is the difference between autonomy
and secession?
S P
PECIAL ROVISIONS
The most extra-ordinary feature of the federal arrangement
created in India is that many States get a differential
treatment. We have already noted in the chapter on
Legislature that the size and population of each State being
different, an asymmetrical representation is provided in
the Rajya Sabha. While ensuring minimum representation
to each of the smaller States, this arrangement also
ensures that larger States would get more representation.
In the case of division of powers, too, the Constitution
provides a division of powers that is common to all the
States. And yet, the Constitution has some special
provisions for some States given their peculiar social and
historical circumstances. Most of the special provisions
pertain to the north eastern States (Assam, Nagaland,
Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, etc.) largely due to their
sizeable indigenous tribal population with a distinct
history and culture. However, these provisions have not
been able to stem alienation and the insurgency in parts
of the region. Special provisions also exist for hilly States
I now understand what they
like Himachal Pradesh and some other States like Andhra
meant by ‘intelligent and
Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Maharashtra Sikkim and
balanced design’ in the first
Telangana.
chapter.
Jammu and Kashmir
The other State which had a special status was Jammu
170 and Kashmir (J&K) (Art. 370). Jammu and Kashmir was
one of the large princely States, which had the option of
joining India or Pakistan or remaining independent.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 185 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
However, immediately after independence in October, 1947 Pakistan
171
sent tribal infiltrators from its side to capture Kashmir. This forced
the Maharaja Hari Singh to ask for Indian help and acceded to the
Indian Union.
Many of the Muslim majority areas in the Western and Eastern
parts joined Pakistan but J&K was an exception. Under these
circumstances, it was given much greater autonomy by the
Constitution. According to Article 370, the concurrence of the State
was required for making any laws in matters mentioned in the Union
and Concurrent lists. This was different from the position of other
states. In the case of the other States, the division of powers as listed
through three lists automatically applies. In the case of Jammu and
Kashmir, the central government had only limited powers and other
powers listed in the Union list and Concurrent list could be used
only with the consent of the State government. This gave greater
autonomy to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Earlier, there was a constitutional provision that allowed the
President, with the concurrence of the State government, to specify
which parts of the Union list should apply to the State. The President
had issued two Constitutional orders in concurrence with the
government of J&K making large parts of the Constitution applicable
to the State. As a result, though J&K had a separate constitution
and a flag, the Parliament’s power to make laws on subjects in the
Union List was fully accepted.
The remaining difference between the other States and the State
of J&K were that no emergency due to internal disturbances could
be declared in J&K without the concurrence of the State. The Union
government could not impose a financial emergency in the State and
the Directive Principles did not apply in J&K. Amendments to the
Indian Constitution (under Art. 368) could apply in concurrence
with the government of J&K.
At present, the special status given under 370 no longer exists.
By the Jammu and Kashmir reorganisation Act 2019, the State has
been bifurcated into two Union Territories viz., (i) Jammu and
Kashmir and (ii) Ladakh. The new arrangement has come into effect
from 31 October, 2019.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 186 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Conclusion
Federalism is like a rainbow, where each colour is separate, yet
together they make a harmonious pattern. Federalism has to
continuously maintain a difficult balance between the centre
and the States. No legal or institutional formula can guarantee
the smooth functioning of a federal polity. Ultimately, the people
and the political process must develop a culture and a set of
values and virtues like mutual trust, toleration and a spirit of
cooperation. Federalism celebrates both unity as well as
diversity. National unity cannot be built by streamlining
differences. Such forced unity only generates greater social strife
and alienation and tends finally to destroy unity. A responsive
polity sensitive to diversities and to the demands for autonomy
can alone be the basis of a cooperative federation.
Exercises
1. From the list of following events which ones would you identify with
the functioning of federalism? Why?
√
The Centre on Tuesday announced Sixth Schedule status to
GNLF-led Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council, which would ensure
greater autonomy to the governing body in the Hill district of
West Bengal. A tripartite Memorandum of Settlement was
signed in New Delhi between the Centre, West Bengal
government and the Subhas Ghising-led Gorkha National
Liberation Front (GNLF) after two days of hectic deliberations.
√
Government for action plan for rain-hit States: Centre has asked
the rain-ravaged States to submit detailed plans for
reconstruction to enable it to respond to their demands for extra
relief expeditiously.
√
New Commissioner for Delhi: The Capital is getting a new
municipal commissioner. Confirming this, present MCD
Commissioner Rakesh Mehta said he has received his transfer
172 orders and that he is likely to be replaced by IAS officer Ashok
Kumar, who is serving as the Chief Secretary in Arunachal
Pradesh. Mehta, a 1975 batch IAS officer, has been heading
the MCD for about three-and-a-half years.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 187 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
√
CU Status for Manipur University: Rajya Sabha on Wednesday
173
passed a Bill to convert the Manipur University into a Central
University with the Human Resource Development Minister
promising such institutions in the North Eastern States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and Sikkim as well.
√
Funds released: The Centre has released Rs. 553 lakh to
Arunachal Pradesh under its rural water supply scheme. The
first instalment was of Rs. 466.81 lakh.
√
We’ll teach the Biharis how to live in Mumbai: Around 100 Shiv
Sainiks stormed J. J. Hospital, disrupted daily operations, raised
slogans and threatened to take matters into their own hands if
no action was taken against non-Maharashtrian students.
√
Demand for dismissal of Government: The Congress Legislature
Party (CLP) in a representation submitted to State Governor
recently, has demanded dismissal of the ruling Democratic
Alliance of Nagaland (DAN) government for its alleged financial
mismanagement and embezzlement of public money.
√
NDA government asks naxalites to surrender arms: Amid a
walkout by opposition RJD and its allies Congress and CPI (M),
the Bihar government today appealed to the naxalites to shun
the path of violence and reaffirmed its pledge to root out
unemployment to usher in a new era of development in Bihar.
2. Think which of the following statements would be correct. State
why.
√
Federalism enhances the possibility of people from different
regions to interact without the fear of one’s culture being
imposed upon them by others.
√
Federal system will hinder easier economic transaction between
two different regions that have distinct types of resources.
√
A federal system will ensure that the powers of those at the
centre will remain limited.
3. Based on the first few articles of Belgian constitution – given below
– explain how federalism is visualised in that country. Try and
write a similar Article for the Constitution of India.
Title I: On Federal Belgium, its components and its
territory.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 188 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Article 1 : Belgium is a Federal State made up of
communities and regions.
Article 2 : Belgium is made up of three communities: The
French Community, the Flemish Community and the
German Community.
Article 3 : Belgium is made up of three regions: The Walloon
region, the Flemish region and the Brussels region.
Article 4 : Belgium has four linguistic regions: The French-
speaking region, the Dutch-speaking region, the bilingual
region of Brussels Capital and the German-speaking region.
Each «commune» (county borough) of the Kingdom is part of
one of these linguistic regions. ……..
Article 5 : The Walloon region is made up of the following
provinces: The Walloon Brabant, Hainault, Liege, Luxemburg
and Namur. The Flemish region is made up of the following
provinces: Antwerp, the Flemish Brabant, West Flanders,
East Flanders and Limburg. ……
4. Imagine that you were to rewrite the provisions regarding federalism.
Write an essay of not more than 300 words making your suggestions
about:
a. division of powers among the centre and the States,
b. distribution of financial resources,
c. methods of resolving inter-State disputes and
d. appointment of Governors
5. Which of the following should be the basis for formation of a State?
Why?
a. Common Language
b. Common economic interests
c. Common religion
d. Administrative convenience
6. Majority of people from the States of north India – Rajasthan, Madhya
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar—speak Hindi. If all these States are
combined to form one State, would it be in tune with the idea of
federalism? Give arguments.
174
7. List four features of the Indian Constitution that give greater power
to the central government than the State government.
8. Why are many States unhappy about the role of the Governor?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 189 ---
Chapter 7: Federalism
9. President’s rule can be imposed in a State if the government is not
being run according to the provisions of the Constitution. State 175
whether any of the following conditions are a fit case for imposition
of President’s rule in the State. Give reasons.
√
two members of the State legislative assembly belonging to the
main opposition party have been killed by criminals and the
opposition is demanding dismissal of the State government.
√
Kidnapping of young children for ransom is on rise. The number
of crimes against women are increasing.
√
No political party has secured majority in the recent elections
of the State Legislative Assembly. It is feared that some MLAs
from the other parties may be lured to support a political party
in return for money.
√
Different political parties are ruling in the State and at the centre
and they are bitter opponents of each other.
√
More than 2000 people have been killed in the communal riots.
√
In the water dispute between the two States, one State
government refused to follow the decision of the Supreme Court.
10. What are the demands raised by States in their quest for greater
autonomy?
11. Should some States be governed by special provisions?
Does this create resentment among other States? Does this help in
forging greater unity among the regions of the country?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 190 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Eight
LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS
I
NTRODUCTION
In a democracy, it is not sufficient to have an elected government at the centre
and at the State level. It is also necessary that even at the local level, there
should be an elected government to look after local affairs. In this chapter, you
will study the structure of local government in our country. You will also study
the importance of the local governments and ways to give them independent
powers. After studying this chapter, you will know:
176 ± the importance of local government bodies;
± the provisions made by the 73rd and 74th amendments; and
± functions and responsibilities of the local government bodies.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 191 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
W L G ?
HY OCAL OVERNMENTS
177
Geeta Rathore belongs to Jamonia Talab Gram Panchayat, Sehore
district, Madhya Pradesh. She was elected Sarpanch in 1995 from
a reserved seat; but in 2000, the village people rewarded her for her
admirable work by electing her again - this time from a non-reserved
seat. From a housewife, Geeta has grown into a leader displaying
political farsightedness - she has harnessed the collective energy of
her Panchayat to renovate water tanks, build a school building,
construct village roads, fight against domestic violence and atrocities
against women, create environmental awareness, and encourage
afforestation and water management in her village. —Panchayati
Raj Update, Vol. XI, No. 3, February 2004.
There is another story of yet another woman achiever. She was
the President (Sarpanch) of a Gram Panchayat of Vengaivasal village
in Tamil Nadu. In 1997, the Tamil Nadu government allotted two
hectares of land to 71 government employees. This piece of land fell
within the vicinity of this Gram Panchayat. On the instructions of
higher authorities the District Collector of Kancheepuram directed
the President of the Gram Panchayat to pass a resolution endorsing
the allotment of the said land for the purpose already decided. The
President and the Gram Panchayat refused to pass such an order
and the Collector issued an order to acquire the land. The Gram
Panchayat filed a writ petition in the Madras High Court against the
Collector’s action. The single judge bench of the High Court upheld
the Collector’s order and ruled that there was no need to take the
Panchayat’s consent. The Panchayat appealed to the Division bench
against the single judge’s order. In its order, the Division Bench
reversed the order of the single judge. The judges held that the
government order amounted to not only infringement of the powers
of the Panchayats but a gross violation of the constitutional status of
the Panchayats. — Panchayati Raj Update, Vol. XII,
June 2005. But aren’t there cases of male members
of the village panchayat harassing
Both these stories are not isolated incidents. They are the woman Sarpanch in some
places? Why are men not happy
representative of a larger transformation that is taking
when women assume positions of
place across India especially after constitutional status
responsibility?
was accorded to local government institutions in 1993.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 192 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Local government is government at the village and
district level. Local government is about government
closest to the common people. Local government is about
government that involves the day-to-day life and problems
of ordinary citizens. Local government believes that local
knowledge and local interest are essential ingredients for
democratic decision making. They are also necessary for
efficient and people-friendly administration. The
advantage of local government is that it is so near the
people. It is convenient for the people to approach the
local government for solving their problems both quickly
and with minimum cost. In the story of Geeta Rathore, we
noticed that she was able to bring about a significant
change in Jamonia Talab because of her pro-active role
as Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat. Vengaivasal village
is able to still retain its land and the right to decide what
to do with it because of the relentless efforts of its Gram
Panchayat President and members. So, local governments
can be very effective in protecting the local interests of the
people.
Democracy is about meaningful participation. It is also
about accountability. Strong and vibrant local
governments ensure both active participation and
purposeful accountability. Geeta Rathore’s story is one
of committed participation. Vengaivasal village Gram
Is it possible that we only had Panchayat’s relentless efforts to secure its rights over its
governments at the local level own land were an example of a mission to ensure
and a coordinating body at the accountability. It is at the level of local government that
national level? I think common citizens can be involved in decision making
Mahatma Gandhi advocated concerning their lives, their needs and above all their
some ideas along these lines.
development.
It is necessary that in a democracy, tasks, which can
be performed locally, should be left in the hands of the
local people and their representatives. Common people
178 are more familiar with their local government than with
the government at the State or national level. They are
also more concerned with what local government does or
has failed to do as it has a direct bearing and impact on
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 193 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
their day-to-day life. Thus, strengthening local
government is like strengthening democratic processes. 179
Check your progress
± How does local government strengthen
democracy?
± In the example given above, what do you think
the Government of Tamil Nadu should have
done?
G L G I
ROWTH OF OCAL OVERNMENT IN NDIA
Let us now discuss how local government has grown in
India and what our Constitution says about it. It is
believed that self-governing village communities existed
in India from the earliest times in the form of ‘sabhas’
(village assemblies). In the course of time, these village
bodies took the shape of Panchayats (an assembly of five
persons) and these Panchayats resolved issues at the
village level. Their role and functions kept on changing at
different points of time.
In modern times, elected local government bodies were
created after 1882. Lord Rippon, who was the Viceroy of
India at that time, took the initiative in creating these
bodies. They were called the local boards. However, due
to slow progress in this regard, the Indian National
Congress urged the government to take necessary steps
to make all local bodies more effective. Following the
Government of India Act 1919, village panchayats were
established in a number of provinces. This trend continued
after the Government of India Act of 1935. I don’t know about the past,
During India’s freedom movement, Mahatma Gandhi but I suspect that a non-elected
had strongly pleaded for decentralisation of economic and village panchayat would
political power. He believed that strengthening village naturally be dominated by the
village elders, the rich and men
panchayats was a means of effective decentralisation. All
from upper strata.
development initiatives must have local involvement in
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 194 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
order to be successful. Panchayats therefore were looked upon as
instruments of decentralisation and participatory democracy. Our
national movement was concerned about the enormous
concentration of powers in the hands of the Governor General sitting
at Delhi. Therefore, for our leaders, independence meant an assurance
that there will be decentralisation of decision making, executive and
administrative powers.
The independence of India should mean the independence
of the whole of India…Independence must begin at the
bottom. Thus every village will be a republic... It follows
therefore that every village has to be self-sustained and
capable of managing its affairs. In this structure
composed of innumerable villages, there will be ever-
widening, ever-ascending circles. Life will be a pyramid
with the apex sustained by the bottom - Mahatma Gandhi
When the Constitution was prepared, the subject of local
government was assigned to the States. It was also mentioned in the
Directive Principles as one of the policy directives to all governments
in the country. As you have read in Chapter 2, being a part of the
Directive Principles of State Policy, this provision of the Constitution
was non-justiciable and primarily advisory in its nature.
It is felt that the subject of local government including panchayats
did not receive adequate importance in the Constitution. Do you
know why this happened? A few reasons can be advanced here.
Firstly, the turmoil due to the Partition resulted in a strong unitary
inclination in the Constitution. Nehru himself looked upon extreme
localism as a threat to unity and integration of the nation. Secondly,
there was a powerful voice in the Constituent Assembly led by
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar which felt that the faction and caste-ridden nature
of rural society would defeat the noble purpose of local government
at the rural level.
180 However, nobody denied the importance of people’s participation
in development planning. Many members of the Constituent
Assembly wanted Village Panchayats to be the basis of democracy
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 195 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
in India but they were concerned about factionalism and
many other ills present in the villages. 181
“… in the interests of
democracy, the villages
maybe trained in the art of
self-government, even
autonomy... We must be able
to reform the villages and
introduce democratic
principles of government
there…”
Ananthasayanam Ayyangar, CAD, Vol. VII, p. 428, 17 November 1948
Local Governments in Independent India
Local governments got a fillip after the 73rd and 74th
Constitution Amendment Acts. But even before that, some
efforts in the direction of developing local government bodies
had already taken place. First in the line was the
Community Development Programme in 1952, which
sought to promote people’s participation in local
development in a range of activities. In this background, a
three-tier Panchayati Raj system of local government was
recommended for the rural areas. Some States (like Gujarat,
Maharashtra) adopted the system of elected local bodies
around 1960. But in many States those local bodies did
not have enough powers and functions to look after the
local development. They were very much dependent on the
State and central governments for financial assistance.
Many States did not think it necessary to establish elected
Why are people afraid of
local bodies. In many instances, local bodies were dissolved
factionalism at the village level
and the local government was handed over to government
when all the political parties and
officers. Many States had indirect elections to most local
organisations or even my class
bodies. In many States, elections to the local bodies were
has factions? Are groups and
postponed from time to time.
factions always so bad?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 196 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
After 1987, a thorough review of the functioning of local
government institutions was initiated. In 1989 the P.K.Thungon
Committee recommended constitutional recognition for the local
government bodies. A constitutional amendment to provide for
periodic elections to local government institutions, and enlistment of
appropriate functions to them, along with funds, was recommended.
Check your progress
± Both Nehru and Dr. Ambedkar were not very
enthusiastic about local government bodies.
Did they have similar objections to local
governments?
± What was the constitutional provision about
local governments before 1992?
± Which were the States that had established
local government during the 1960s and
1970s ?
73RD
AND
74TH A
MENDMENTS
In 1989, the central government introduced two constitutional
amendments. These amendments aimed at strengthening local
governments and ensuring an element of uniformity in their structure
and functioning across the country.
The Constitution of Brazil has created States, Federal
Districts and Municipal Councils. Each of these is
assigned independent powers and jurisdiction. Just as
the Republic cannot interfere in the affairs of the States
(except on grounds provided by the constitution), states
are prohibited from interfering in the affairs of the
municipal councils. This provision protects the powers of
the local government.
182 Later in 1992, the 73rd and 74th constitutional amendments were
passed by the Parliament. The 73rd Amendment is about rural local
governments (which are also known as Panchayati Raj Institutions
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 197 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
or PRIs) and the 74th amendment made the provisions relating to
urban local government (Nagarpalikas). The 73rd and 74th 183
Amendments came into force in 1993.
We have noticed earlier that local government is a ‘State
subject‘. States are free to make their own laws on this
subject. But once the Constitution was amended, the States
had to change their laws about local bodies in order to
bring these in conformity with the amended Constitution.
They were given one year’s time for making necessary
changes in their respective State laws in the light of these
amendments.
If I understand this correctly,
73rd Amendment
the centre forced local
Let us now examine the changes brought about by the government reforms on the
73rd amendment in Panchayati Raj institutions. States. This is funny: you adopt
decentralisation through a
Three Tier Structure centralised process!
All States now have a uniform three tier Panchayati Raj
structure. At the base is the ‘Gram Panchayat‘. A Gram
Panchayat covers a village or group of villages. The intermediary
level is the Mandal (also referred to as Block or Taluka). These bodies
are called Mandal or Taluka Panchayats. The intermediary level body
need not be constituted in smaller States. At the apex is the Zilla
Panchayat covering the entire rural area of the District.
The amendment also made a provision
for the mandatory creation of the Gram
Sabha. The Gram Sabha would comprise all
the adult members registered as voters in the
Panchayat area. Its role and functions are
decided by State legislation.
Elections
All the three levels of Panchayati Raj
Does a Gram sabha mean the institutions are elected directly by the people.
democratic forum of the entire The term of each Panchayat body is five years.
village? Do Gram sabhas If the State government dissolves the
actually meet regularly? Panchayat before the end of its five year term,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 198 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
fresh elections must be held within six months of such
dissolution. This is an important provision that ensures
the existence of elected local bodies. Before the 73rd
amendment, in many States, there used to be indirect
elections to the district bodies and there was no provision
for immediate elections after dissolution.
Reservations
One third of the positions in all panchayat institutions
are reserved for women. Reservations for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes are also provided for at all the three
levels, in proportion to their population. If the States find
it necessary, they can also provide for reservations for the
other backward classes (OBCs).
It is important to note that these reservations apply
We read in the chapter on not merely to ordinary members in Panchayats but also
Elections that the bill for to the positions of Chairpersons or ‘Adhyakshas‘ at all
reservations for women in the the three levels. Further, reservation of one-third of the
Assemblies and in the Parliament
seats for women is not merely in the general category of
could not be passed. How come
seats but also within the seats reserved for Scheduled
women’s reservations in local
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and backward castes. This
bodies were accepted so easily?
means that a seat may be reserved simultaneously for a
woman candidate and one belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or Scheduled Tribes. Thus, a Sarpanch would have
to be a Dalit woman or an Adivasi woman.
Transfer of Subjects
Twenty-nine subjects, which were earlier in the State list
of subjects, are identified and listed in the Eleventh
Schedule of the Constitution. These subjects are to be
transferred to the Panchayati Raj institutions. These
subjects were mostly linked to development and welfare
functions at the local level. The actual transfer of these
184 functions depends upon the State legislation. Each State
decides how many of these twenty-nine subjects would
be transferred to the local bodies.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 199 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
Article 243G. Powers, authority and
responsibilities of Panchayats.—………, the 185
Legislature of a State may, by law, endow
the Panchayats with such powers and
authority……. …with respect to—…...the
matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
Some subjects listed in the eleventh schedule
1. Agriculture, …
3. Minor irrigation, water management and
watershed development.
….
8. Small scale industries, including food
processing industries.
…..
10. Rural housing.
11. Drinking water.
.....
13. Roads, culverts,….
14. Rural electrification,….
.....
16. Poverty alleviation programme.
17. Education, including primary and
secondary schools.
18. Technical training and vocational
education.
19. Adult and non-formal education.
20. Libraries.
21. Cultural activities.
22. Markets and fairs.
23. Health and sanitation, including hospitals,
primary health centres and dispensaries.
24. Family welfare.
25. Women and child development.
26. Social welfare, …
27. Welfare of the weaker sections, and in Why are subjects only from
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the State list to be transferred? Why
Scheduled Tribes. can’t we transfer some subjects
28. Public distribution system. from the Union List also?
...…
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 200 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
The provisions of the 73rd amendment were not made
applicable to the areas inhabited by the Adivasi
populations in many States of India. In 1996, a separate
act was passed extending the provisions of the Panchayat
system to these areas. Many Adivasi communities have
their traditional customs of managing common resources
such as forests and small water reservoirs, etc. Therefore,
the new act protects the rights of these communities to
manage their resources in ways acceptable to them. For
this purpose, more powers are given to the Gram Sabhas
of these areas and elected village panchayats have to get
the consent of the Gram Sabha in many respects. The
idea behind this act is that local traditions of self
government should be protected while introducing
modern elected bodies. This is only consistent with the
spirit of diversity and decentralisation.
State Election Commissioners
The State government is required to appoint a State
Election Commissioner who would be responsible for
conducting elections to the Panchayati Raj institutions.
Earlier, this task was performed by the State
administration which was under the control of the State
government. Now, the office of the State Election
Commissioner is autonomous like the Election
Commissioner of India. However, the State Election
Commissioner is an independent officer and is not linked
to nor is this officer under the control of the Election
State governments themselves Commission of India.
are poor. In the last chapter we
read that they ask for money State Finance Commission
from the Central government. The State government is also required to appoint a State
How can they give money to Finance Commission once in five years. This Commission
the local government? would examine the financial position of the local
governments in the State. It would also review the
distribution of revenues between the State and local
186 governments on the one hand and between rural and
urban local governments on the other. This innovation
ensures that allocation of funds to the rural local
governments will not be a political matter.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 201 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
Activity 187
± Identify some of the powers that
your State government has
delegated to panchayats.
74th Amendment
As we mentioned earlier, the 74th amendment dealt with
urban local bodies or Nagarpalikas.
What is an urban area? It is very easy to identify a big
city like Mumbai or Kolkata, but it is not so easy to say
this about some very small urban areas that are
somewhere between a village and a town. The Census of
India defines an urban area as having: (i) a minimum
population of 5,000; (ii) at least 75 per cent of male
working population engaged in non-agricultural
occupations and (iii) a density of population of at least
400 persons per sq. km. As per the 2011 Census, about
31% of India’s population lives in urban areas.
In many ways the 74th amendment is a repetition of Can I hope that these urban
the 73rd amendment, except that it applies to urban areas. local bodies will do something
All the provisions of the 73rd amendment relating to direct for better housing for the slum
elections, reservations, transfer of subjects, State Election dwellers? Or at least provide
Commission and State Finance Commission are them toilets?
incorporated in the 74th amendment also and thus apply
to Nagarpalikas. The Constitution also mandated the
transfer of a list of functions from the State government to
the urban local bodies. These functions have been listed
in the Twelfth Schedule of the Constitution.
I
MPLEMENTATION OF
73RD
AND
74TH A
MENDMENTS
All States have now passed a legislation to implement the
provisions of the 73rd and 74th amendments. During the
ten years since these amendments came into force (1994-
2004) most States have had at least two rounds of elections
to the local bodies. States like Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan
and a few others have in fact held three elections so far.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 202 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Today there are more
R
EAD AN IMAGE
than 600 Zilla Panchayats,
about 6,000 block or
intermediary Panchayats, and
2,40,000 Gram Panchayats in
rural India and over 100 city
Corporations, 1400 town
Municipalities and over 2000
Nagar Panchayats in urban
India. More than 32 lakh
members are elected to these
bodies every five years. Of
these, at least 13 lakhs are
women. In the State
Assemblies and Parliament
put together we have less than
5000 elected representatives.
With local bodies, the number
of elected representatives has
increased significantly.
This flag is a symbol of the expectations of The 73rd and 74th
the people about local governments. People
amendments have created
don’t want only formal laws. They want
uniformity in the structures of
genuine implementation of those laws. Write
Panchayati Raj and
briefly what you think about this slogan —
Nagarpalika institutions
We are the government here in the village!
across the country. The
presence of these local
institutions is by itself a
significant achievement and would create an atmosphere and platform
for people’s participation in government.
The provision for reservation for women at the Panchayats and
Nagarpalikas has ensured the presence of a significant number of
women in local bodies. As this reservation is also applicable for the
positions of Sarpanch and Adhyaksha, a large number of women
188 elected representatives have come to occupy these positions. There
are at least 200 women Adhyakshas in Zilla Panchayats, another
2000 women who are Presidents of the block or taluka panchayats
and more than 80,000 women Sarpanchas in Gram Panchayats.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 203 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
189
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 204 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
We also have more than 30 women Mayors in Corporations, over
500 women Adhyakshas of Town Municipalities and nearly 650 Nagar
Panchayats headed by women. Women have gained more power and
confidence by asserting control over resources. Their presence in
these institutions has given many women a greater understanding
of the working of politics. In many cases, they have brought a new
perspective and a greater sensitivity to discussions at local bodies.
In many cases, women were unable to assert their presence or were
mere proxies for the male members of their family who sponsored
their election. Such instances, however are becoming fewer.
R
EAD AN IMAGE
Look at this photograph. The local Sarkar is sitting out in the
sun. Is there any other feature that strikes you?
While reservations for Scheduled Castes and Tribes are mandated
by the constitutional amendment, most States have also made a
provision to reserve seats for Backward Castes. As the Indian
190 population has 16.2 per cent Scheduled Castes and 8.2 per cent
Scheduled Tribes, about 6.6 lakh elected members in the urban
and local bodies hail from these two communities. This has
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 205 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
significantly altered the social profile of local bodies. These
bodies have thus become more representative of the social 191
reality they operate within. Sometimes this leads to
tensions. The dominant social groups which controlled
the village earlier do not wish to give up their power. This
leads to intensification of struggle for power. But tension
and struggle is not always bad. Whenever there is an
attempt to make democracy more meaningful and give
power to those who did not enjoy it earlier, there is bound
to be some conflict and tension in society.
The Constitutional amendments assigned as many as
29 subjects to the local governments. All these subjects
are related to functions linked to local welfare and So, the law is good but it is
development needs. The experience with the functioning mostly on paper. Is this what
of local government in the past decade has shown that they call the gap between theory
local governments in India enjoy limited autonomy to and practice?
perform the functions assigned to them. Many States have
not transferred most of the subjects to the local bodies.
This means that the local bodies cannot really function in
an effective manner. Therefore, the entire exercise of
electing so many representatives becomes somewhat
symbolic. Some people criticise the formation of the local
bodies because this has not changed the way in which
decisions are taken at the central and the State level. People
at the local level do not enjoy much powers of choosing
welfare programmes or allocation of resources.
Bolivia is frequently cited as one of the most successful cases
of democratic decentralisation in Latin America. In 1994, the
Popular Participation Law decentralised power to the local level,
allowing for the popular election of mayors, dividing the country
into municipalities, and crafting a system of automatic fiscal
transfers to the new municipalities. Bolivia is divided into 314
municipal governments. These governments in Bolivia are
headed by popularly-elected mayors (presidente municipal) and
a municipal council (cabildo). Local elections occur nationwide
every five years.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 206 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Bolivian local governments have been entrusted with building
local health and education facilities, as well as maintenance of
this infrastructure. In Bolivia, 20% of nationwide tax collections
are distributed among municipalities on a per capita basis.
While these municipalities may levy taxes on motor vehicles,
urban property, and large agricultural properties, fiscal
transfers provide the bulk of the operating budget for these
units.
Local bodies have very little funds of their own. The dependence of
local bodies on the State and central governments for financial
support has greatly eroded their capacity to operate effectively. While
rural local bodies raise 0.24% of the total revenues collected, they
account for 4% of the total expenditure made by the government. So
they earn much less than they spend. That makes them dependent
on those who give them grants.
Conclusion
This experience suggests that local governments continue to
be agencies implementing the welfare and development schemes
of the central and State government. Giving more power to local
government means that we should be prepared for real
decentralisation of power. Ultimately, democracy means that
power should be shared by the people; people in the villages
and urban localities must have the power to decide what policies
and programmes they want to adopt. As you have studied earlier,
democracy means decentralisation of power and giving more
and more power to the people. The laws about local governments
are an important step in the direction of democratisation. But
the true test of democracy is not merely in the legal provisions
but in the practice of those provisions.
192
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 207 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
Exercises
193
1. Constitution of India visualised village panchayats as units of self-
government. Think over the situation described in the following
statements and explain how do these situations strengthen or
weaken the panchayats in becoming units of self-government.
a. Government of a State has allowed a big company to establish
a huge steel plant. Many villages would be adversely affected
by the steel plant. Gram Sabha of one of the affected villages
passed a resolution that before establishing any big industries
in the region, village people must be consulted and their
grievances should be redressed.
b. The government has decided that 20 % of all its expenditure
would be done through the panchayats.
c. A village panchayat kept on demanding funds for a building for
village school, the government officials turned down their
proposal saying that funds are allocated for certain other
schemes and cannot be spent otherwise.
d. The government divided a village Dungarpur into two and made
a part of village Jamuna and Sohana. Now village Dungarpur
has ceased to exist in government’s books.
e. A village panchayat observed that water sources of their region
are depleting fast. They decided to mobilise village youth to do
some voluntary work and revive the old village ponds and wells.
2. Suppose you are entrusted to evolve a local government plan of a
State, what powers would you endow to the village panchayats to
function as units of self-government? Mention any five powers and
the justification in two lines for each of them for giving those powers.
3. What are the provisions for the reservations for the socially
disadvantaged groups as per the 73rd amendment? Explain how
these provisions have changed the profile of the leadership at the
village level.
4. What were the main differences between the local governments
before 73rd amendment and after that amendment?
5. Read the following conversation. Write in two hundred words your
opinion about the issues raised in this conversation.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 208 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Alok: Our Constitution guarantees equality between men and
women. Reservations in local bodies for women ensure their equal
share in power.
Neha: But it is not enough that women should be in positions of
power. It is necessary that the budget of local bodies should have
separate provision for women.
Jayesh: I don’t like this reservations business. A local body must
take care of all people in the village and that would automatically
take care of women and their interests.
6. Read the provisions of the 73rd Amendment. Which of the following
concerns does this amendment address?
a. Fear of replacement makes representatives accountable to the
people.
b. The dominant castes and feudal landlords dominate the local
bodies.
c. Rural illiteracy is very high. Illiterate people cannot take
decisions about the development of the village.
d. To be effective the village panchayats need resources and powers
to make plans for the village development.
7. The following are different justifications given in favour of local
government. Give them ranking and explain why you attach greater
significance to a particular rationale than the others. According to
you, on which of these rationales the decision of the Gram panchayat
of Vengaivasal village was based? How?
a. Government can complete the projects with lesser cost with the
involvement of the local community.
b. The development plans made by the local people will have greater
acceptability than those made by the government officers.
c. People know their area, needs problems and priorities. By
collective participation they should discuss and take decisions
about their life.
d. It is difficult for the common people to contact their
representatives of the State or the national legislature.
8. Which of the following according to you involve decentralisation?
194 Why are other options not sufficient for decentralisation?
a. To hold election of the Gram Panchayat.
b. Decision by the villagers themselves about what policies and
programmes are useful for the village.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 209 ---
Chapter 8: Local Governments
c. Power to call meeting of Gram Sabha.
d. A Gram Panchayat receiving the report from the Block 195
Development Officer about the progress of a project started by
the State government.
9. A student of Delhi University, Raghavendra Parpanna, wanted to
study the role of decentralisation in decision making about primary
education. He asked some questions to the villagers. These questions
are given below. If you were among those villagers, what answer
would you give to each of these questions?
A meeting of the Gram Sabha is to be called to discuss what
steps should be taken to ensure that every child of the village goes
to the school.
a. How would you decide the suitable day for the meeting? Think
who would be able to attend / not attend the meeting because
of your choice.
(i) A day specified by the BDO or the collector
(ii) Day of the village haat
(iii) Sunday
(iv) Naag panchami / sankranti
b. What is a suitable venue for the meeting? Why?
(i) Venue suggested by the circular of the district collector.
(ii) Religious place in the village.
(iii) Dalit Mohalla.
(iv) Upper caste Tola
(v) Village school
c. In the Gram Sabha meeting firstly a circular sent by the district
collector was read. It suggested what steps should be taken to
organise an education rally and what should be its route. The
meeting did not discuss about the children who never come to
school or about girls’ education, or the condition of the school
building and the timing of the school. No women teacher
attended the meeting as it was held on Sunday.
What do you think about these proceedings as an instance
of people’s participation?
d. Imagine your class as the Gram Sabha. Discuss the agenda of
the meeting and suggest some steps to realise the goal.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 210 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Nine
CONSTITUTION AS A
LIVING DOCUMENT
I
NTRODUCTION
In this chapter, you will see how the Constitution has worked in the last
69 years and how India has managed to be governed by the same Constitution.
After studying this chapter you will find out that:
± the Indian Constitution can be amended according to the needs of the time;
± though many such amendments have already taken place, the Constitution
has remained intact and its basic premises have not changed;
± the judiciary has played an important role in protecting the Constitution and
196 also in interpreting the Constitution; and
± the Constitution is a document that keeps evolving and responding to changing
situations.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 211 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
A C S ?
RE ONSTITUTIONS TATIC
France had numerous 197
It is not uncommon for nations to rewrite
constitutions in the last
their constitutions in response to changed
two centuries. After the
circumstances or change of ideas within
revolution and during the
the society or even due to political
Napoleonic period, France
upheavals. The Soviet Union had four
underwent continuous
constitutions in its life of 74 years (1918,
experimentation about a
1924, 1936 and 1977). In 1991, the rule constitution: The post-
of the Communist Party of Soviet Union revolution constitution of
came to an end and soon the Soviet 1793 is called the
federation disintegrated. After this political period of the first
upheaval, the newly formed Russian French republic. Then
federation adopted a new constitution in commenced the second
1993. French republic in 1848.
The third French republic
But look at India. The Constitution of
was formed with a new
India was adopted on 26 November 1949.
constitution in 1875. In
Its implementation formally started
1946, with a new
from 26 January 1950. More than
constitution, the fourth
69 years after that, the same constitution
French republic came into
continues to function as the framework
being. Finally, in 1958, the
within which the government of our
fifth French republic
country operates.
came into being with yet
Is it that our Constitution is so good another constitution.
that it needs no change? Was it that our
Constitution makers were so farsighted
and wise that they had foreseen all the
changes that would take place in the
future? In some sense both the answers
are correct. It is true that we have inherited
a very robust Constitution. The basic
framework of the Constitution is very
much suited to our country. It is also true
that the Constitution makers were very
farsighted and provided for many
solutions for future situations. But no
constitution can provide for all It seems to me that
eventualities. No document can be such constitutional changes are very
that it needs no change. closely linked to political
developments.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 212 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Then how does the same Constitution continue to
serve the country? One of the answers to such questions
is that our Constitution accepts the necessity of
modifications according to changing needs of the society.
Secondly, in the actual working of the Constitution, there
has been enough flexibility of interpretations. Both
political practice and judicial rulings have shown maturity
and flexibility in implementing the Constitution. These
factors have made our Constitution a living document
rather than a closed and static rulebook.
In any society, those responsible for drafting the
constitution at a particular time would face one common
challenge: the provisions of the constitution would
naturally reflect efforts to tackle the problems that the
society is facing at the time of making of the constitution.
At the same time, the constitution must be a document
that provides the framework of the government for the
future as well. Therefore, the constitution has to be able
to respond to the challenges that may arise in the future.
In this sense, the constitution will always have something
that is contemporary and something that has a more
durable importance.
At the same time, a constitution is not a frozen and
unalterable document. It is a document made by human
beings and may need revisions, changes and re-
examination. It is true that the constitution reflects the
dreams and aspirations of the concerned society. It must
also be kept in mind that the constitution is a framework
I know that the Constitution of
for the democratic governance of the society. In this sense,
the US came into existence more
than 200 years ago and so far it it is an instrument that societies create for themselves.
has been amended only 27 times! This dual role of the constitution always leads to
Isn’t that very interesting? difficult questions about the status of the constitution: is
it so sacred that nobody ever can change it? Alternatively,
is it so ordinary an instrument that it can be modified
198 just like any other ordinary law?
The makers of the Indian Constitution were aware of
this problem and sought to strike a balance. They placed
the Constitution above ordinary law and expected that
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 213 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
the future generations will respect this document. At the same time,
they recognised that in the future, this document may require 199
modifications. Even at the time of writing the Constitution, they were
aware that on many matters there were differences of opinion.
Whenever society would veer toward any particular opinion, a change
in the constitutional provisions would be required. Thus, the Indian
Constitution is a combination of both the approaches mentioned
above: that the constitution is a sacred document and that it is an
instrument that may require changes from time to time. In other
words, our Constitution is not a static document, it is not the final
word about everything; it is not unalterable.
Check your progress
After reading the section above, a number of
students in the class were confused. They made the
following statements. What would you say about
each of these statements?
± The Constitution is like any other law. It simply
tells us what are the rules and regulations
governing the government.
± The Constitution is the expression of the will of
the people, so there must be a provision to change
the Constitution after every ten or fifteen years.
± The Constitution is a statement of the philosophy
of the country. It can never be changed.
± The Constitution is a sacred document.
Therefore any talk of changing it is against
democracy.
H A C ?
OW TO MEND THE ONSTITUTION
Article 368:
…Parliament may in exercise of
its constituent power amend by
way of addition, variation or
repeal any provision of this
Constitution in accordance with
the procedure laid down in this
article.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 214 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
We have already seen that the makers of our
Constitution wanted to strike a balance. The Constitution
must be amended if so required. But it must be protected
from unnecessary and frequent changes. In other words,
they wanted the Constitution to be ‘flexible’ and at the
same time ‘rigid’. Flexible means open to changes and
rigid means resistant to changes. A constitution that can
be very easily changed or modified is often called flexible.
In the case of constitutions, which are very difficult
to amend, they are described as rigid. The Indian
Constitution combines both these characteristics.
The makers of the Constitution were aware of the fact
that there may be some faults or mistakes in the
Constitution; they knew that the Constitution could not
be totally free of errors. Whenever such mistakes would
come to light, they wanted the Constitution to be easily
amended and to be able to get rid of these mistakes. Then
there were some provisions in the Constitution that were
of temporary nature and it was decided that these could
be altered later on once the new Parliament was elected.
But at the same time, the Constitution was framing a
federal polity and therefore, the rights and powers of the
States could not be changed without the consent of the
I don’t understand how a States. Some other features were so central to the spirit of
constitution can be flexible or the Constitution that the Constitution makers were
rigid. Isn’t it the politics of that
anxious to protect these from change. These provisions
period which makes the
had to be made rigid. These considerations led to different
constitution rigid or flexible?
ways of amending the Constitution.
How to amend the
Constitution
200 Similar to ordinary Special majority in Special majority
law: simple majority +
Parliament in both
in Parliament: as Legislatures of half
Houses separately:
mentioned in some the states: article
as per article 368
articles 368
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 215 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
There are many articles in the Constitution, which
mention that these articles can be amended by a simple 201
law of the Parliament. No special procedure for amendment
is required in such cases and there is no difference at all
between an amendment and an ordinary law. These parts
of the Constitution are very flexible. Read carefully the
following text of some articles of the Constitution. In both
these articles, the wording ‘by law’ indicates that these
articles can be modified by the Parliament without
recourse to the procedure laid down in Article 368. Many
other articles of the Constitution can be modified by the
Parliament in this simple manner.
Article 2: Parliament
may by law admit into
the union …..new
states….
Article 3: Parliament
may by law… b) increase
the area of any state….
For amending the remaining parts of the Constitution,
provision has been made in Article 368 of the Constitution.
In this article, there are two methods of amending the
Constitution and they apply to two different sets of articles
of the Constitution. One method is that amendment can
be made by special majority of the two houses of the
Parliament. The other method is more difficult: it requires
special majority of the Parliament and consent of half of
the State legislatures. Note that all amendments to the
What happens if some States
Constitution are initiated only in the Parliament. Besides
want an amendment to
the special majority in the Parliament no outside agency—
the Constitution? Can’t they
—like a constitution commission or a separate body—is
propose an amendment? I think
required for amending the Constitution.
this is another example of
Similarly, after the passage in the Parliament and in
favouring the centre against the
some cases, in State legislatures, no referendum is
States!
required for ratification of the amendment. An amendment
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 216 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
bill, like all other bills, goes to the President for his assent, but in this
case, the President has no powers to send it back for reconsideration.
These details show how rigid and complicated the amending process
could have been. Our Constitution avoids these complications. This
makes the amendment procedure relatively simple. But more
importantly, this process underlines an important principle: only
elected representatives of the people are empowered to consider and
take final decisions on the question of amendments. Thus, sovereignty
of elected representatives (parliamentary sovereignty) is the basis of
the amendment procedure.
Special Majority
In the chapters on Election, Executive and Judiciary, we have come
across provisions that require ‘special majority’. Let us repeat again
what special majority means. Ordinarily, all business of the legislature
requires that a motion or resolution or bill should get the support of
a simple majority of the members voting at that time. Suppose that
at the time of voting on a bill, 247 members were present in the
house and all of them participated in the voting on the bill. Then, the
bill would be passed if at least 124 members voted in favour of the
bill. Not so in the case of an amendment bill. Amendment to the
Constitution requires two different kinds of special majorities: in the
first place, those voting in favour of the amendment bill should
constitute at least half of the total strength of that House. Secondly,
the supporters of the amendment bill must also constitute two-thirds
of those who actually take part in voting. Both Houses of the
Parliament must pass the amendment bill separately in this same
manner (there is no provision for a joint session). For every amendment
bill, this special majority is required.
Can you see the significance of this requirement? In the Lok Sabha
there are 545 members. Therefore, any amendment must be
supported by a minimum of 273 members. Even if only 300 members
are present at the time of voting, the amendment bill must get the
support of 273 out of them. But imagine that 400 members of Lok
202 Sabha have voted on an amendment bill. How many members should
support the bill to get the bill passed?
In addition to this, both the Houses must pass the amendment
bill (with special majorities) separately. This means that unless there
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 217 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
Two principles dominate the various procedures of
amending the constitutions in most modern 203
constitutions.
± One is the principle of special majority. For
instance, the constitutions of U.S., South Africa,
Russia, etc. have employed this principle: In the
case of constitution of US, it is two-thirds
majority, while in South Africa and Russia, for
some amendments, three-fourths majority is
required.
± The other principle that is popular among many
modern constitutions is that of people’s
participation in the process of amending the
constitution. In Switzerland, people can even
initiate an amendment. Other examples of
countries where people initiate or approve
amendment to the constitution are Russia and
Italy, among others.
is sufficient consensus over the proposed amendment, it I am fed up with this business of
cannot be passed. If the party in power enjoys very thin special majority. It forces you to
majority, it can pass legislation of its choice and can get make difficult calculations all the
budget approved even if the opposition does not agree. time. Is it politics or maths?
But it would need to take at least some opposition parties
into confidence, if it wanted to amend the Constitution.
So, the basic principle behind the amending procedure is
“If those who are dissatisfied with the
Constitution have only to obtain a 2/3 majority
and if they cannot obtain even (that)..., their
dissatisfaction with the Constitution cannot be
deemed to be shared by the general public.”
Note that Dr. Ambedkar is talking here not only
of parliamentary majority. He refers to ‘sharing
(of the views) by the general public’. This
indicates that behind the majority there is the
principle of public opinion that governs decision-
making.
Dr. Ambedkar, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 976, 25 November 1949
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 218 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
that it should be based on broad support among the political parties
and parliamentarians.
Ratification by States
For some articles of the Constitution, special majority is not
sufficient. When an amendment aims to modify an article related to
distribution of powers between the States and the central
government, or articles related to representation, it is necessary
that the States must be consulted and that they give their consent.
We have studied the federal nature of the Constitution. Federalism
means that powers of the States must not be at the mercy of the
central government. The Constitution has ensured this by providing
that legislatures of half the States have to pass the amendment bill
before the amendment comes into effect. We can say that for some
parts of the Constitution, greater or wider consensus in the polity
is expected. This provision also respects the States and gives them
participation in the process of amendment. At the same time, care
is taken to keep this procedure somewhat flexible even in its more
rigid format: consent of only half the States is required and simple
majority of the State legislature is sufficient. Thus, the amendment
process is not impracticable even after taking into consideration
this more stringent condition.
We may summarise that the Constitution of India can be amended
through large-scale consensus and limited participation of the States.
The founding fathers took care that Constitution would not be open
to easy tampering. And yet, future generations were given the right
to amend and modify according to the needs and requirements of
the time.
Check your progress
For making the following amendments to the
Constitution of India, what conditions need to
be fulfilled? Place a tick mark in the chart
204 wherever applicable.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 219 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
Subject of amendment Special Ratification
205
majority by States
Citizenship clause
Right to freedom
of religion
Changes in the
Union List
Changes in State
boundaries
Provision regarding
Election Commission
W H T B M A ?
HY AVE HERE EENSO ANY MENDMENTS
On 26 January 2019, the Constitution of India completed
69 years of its existence. In these years, it was amended
103 times (as on 12 January 2019). Given the relatively
difficult method of amending the Constitution, the number
of amendments appears quite high. Let us try to find out
how it is that so many amendments took place and what
it means.
Let us first look at the brief history of the amendments:
look carefully at the graphs below. The same information
is presented in two different ways. The first graph depicts
the number of constitution amendments made every ten
years; the bar indicates the number of amendments in
that period. The second graph depicts the time taken for
every ten amendments; the bar depicts the years taken
for ten amendments. You will notice that the two decades Why was our Constitution
from 1970 to 1990 saw a large number of amendments. amended so many times? Is there
On the other hand, the second graph tells one more story: something wrong with our society
ten amendments took place between a short span of three or with the Constitution?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 220 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
years between 1974 and 1976. And again, in just three years, from
2001 to 2003, ten amendments took place. In the political history of
our country, these two periods are remarkably different. The first
was a period of Congress domination. Congress party had a vast
majority in Parliament ( it had 352 seats in the Lok Sabha and a
majority in most State Assemblies). On the other hand,
the period between 2001 and 2003 was a period marked by
coalition politics. It was also a period when different parties
were in power in different States. The bitter rivalry between
the BJP and its opponents is another feature of this period. And
yet, this period saw as many as ten amendments in just three
years. So, the incidence of amendments is not dependent
merely on the nature of majority of the ruling party alone.
Graph 1
Amendments per
decade
206
Graph 2
Years taken for every ten
amendments
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 221 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
There is always a criticism about the number of
207
amendments. It is said that there have been far too many
amendments to the Constitution of India. On the face of
it, the fact that 103 amendments took place in 69 years
does seem to be somewhat odd. But the two graphs above
suggest that amendments are not only due to political
considerations. Barring the first decade after the
commencement of the Constitution, every decade has
witnessed a steady stream of amendments. This means
that irrespective of the nature of politics and the party in
power, amendments were required to be made from time
to time. Was this because of the inadequacies of the
original Constitution? Is the Constitution too flexible?
Contents of Amendments made so far
Amendments made so far may be classified in three
groups. In the first group there are amendments, which
are of a technical or administrative nature and were only
clarifications, explanations, and minor modifications etc.
of the original provisions. They are amendments only in
the legal sense, but in matter of fact, they made no
substantial difference to the provisions.
This is true of the amendment that increased the age
of retirement of High Court judges from 60 to 62 years
(15th amendment). Similarly, salaries of judges of High
Courts and the Supreme Court were increased by an
amendment (54th amendment).
We may also take the example of the provision
regarding reserved seats in the legislatures for scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes. The original provision said
that these reservations were for a period of ten years.
However, in order to ensure fair representation of these
sections, it was necessary to extend this period by ten
years. Thus, after every ten years an amendment is made Yes, I think we should be looking
to extend the period by another ten years. This has led to at the changes rather than the
six amendments so far. But these amendments have not number of amendments. That is
made any difference to the original provision. In this sense, what we should be doing as
it is only a technical amendment. students of politics.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 222 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Do you remember the discussion in chapter four about
the role of the President? In the original Constitution, it
was assumed that in our parliamentary government, the
President would normally abide by the advice of the
Council of Ministers. This was only reiterated by a later
amendment when Article 74 (1) was amended to clarify
that the advice of the Council of Ministers will be binding
on the President (President shall act in accordance with
the advice of the Council of Ministers). In reality, this
amendment did not make any difference because, that is
exactly what has been happening all through. The
amendment was only by way of explanation.
Differing Interpretations
A number of amendments are a product of different
interpretations of the Constitution given by the judiciary
and the government of the day. When these clashed, the
Parliament had to insert an amendment underlining one
particular interpretation as the authentic one. It is part of
the democratic politics that various institutions would
interpret the Constitution and particularly the scope of
their own powers in a different manner. Many times, the
Parliament did not agree with the judicial interpretation
and therefore, sought to amend the Constitution to
overcome the ruling of the judiciary. In the period between
1970 and 1975 this situation arose frequently.
In the chapter on the Judiciary, you have already
I am still confused. If there is studied the issues of difference between the Judiciary and
a written constitution, where the Parliament: one was the relationship between
is the scope for different fundamental rights and directive principles, the other was
interpretations? Or do people
the scope of right to private property and the third was
read in the constitution what
the scope of Parliament’s power to amend the Constitution.
they want to be there?
In the period 1970-1975, the Parliament repeatedly made
amendments to overcome the adverse interpretations by
208 the judiciary.
It may be kept in mind that during this period (1970-
75) many political events were unfolding and thus this
history of our constitutional development can be fully
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 223 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
understood only in the context of the politics of that period.
You will know more about these issues in the next year 209
when you study the political history of independent India.
Amendments through Political Consensus
Thirdly, there is another large group of amendments that
have been made as a result of the consensus among the
political parties. We may say that this consensus made it
necessary that some changes had to be made in order to
reflect the prevailing political philosophy and aspirations
of the society. In fact, many of the amendments of the
post-1984 period are instances of this trend. Remember
our question above about the peculiarity that even when
there were coalition governments, this period saw so many
amendments? The reason is because many of these
amendments were based on an evolving consensus on
certain issues. Starting with the anti-defection amendment
(52nd amendment), this period saw a series of amendments So, politicians do agree on
in spite of the political turbulence. some matters! And yet they
Apart from the anti-defection amendments (52nd and fight over the meaning of
what they agreed on!
91st), these amendments include the 61st amendment
bringing down the minimum age for voting from 21 to 18
years, the 73rd and the 74th amendments, etc. In this same
period, there were some amendments clarifying and
expanding the scope of reservations in jobs and
admissions. After 1992-93, an overall consensus emerged
in the country about these measures and therefore,
amendments regarding these measures were passed
without much difficulty (77th, 81st, and 82nd
amendments).
Controversial Amendments
Our discussion so far, should not create an impression
that there has never been any controversy over amending
the Constitution. In fact, amendments during the period
1970 to 1980 generated a lot of legal and political
controversy. The parties that were in opposition during
the period 1971-1976, saw many of these amendments
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 224 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
as attempts by the ruling party to subvert the
Constitution. In particular, the 38th, 39th and 42nd
amendments have been the most controversial
amendments so far. These three amendments were made
in the background of internal emergency declared in the
country from June 1975. They sought to make basic
changes in many crucial parts of the Constitution.
The 42nd amendment was particularly seen as a wide-
ranging amendment affecting large parts of the
Constitution. It was also an attempt to override the ruling
of the Supreme Court given in the Kesavananda case. Even
the duration of the Lok Sabha was extended from five to
So, it is all about politics!
six years. In the chapter on Rights, you have read about
Didn’t I say that this entire
Fundamental Duties. They were included in the
thing about constitutions and
Constitution by this amendment act. The 42nd amendment
amendments is linked to
also put restrictions on the review powers of the Judiciary.
politics rather than law?
It was said at that time that this amendment was
practically a rewriting of many parts of the original
Constitution. Do you know that this amendment made
changes to the Preamble, to the seventh schedule of the
Constitution and to 53 articles of the Constitution? Many
MPs belonging to the opposition parties were in jail when
this amendment was passed in Parliament. In this
backdrop, elections were held in 1977 and the ruling
party (Congress) was defeated. The new government
thought it necessary to reconsider these controversial
amendments and through the 43rd and 44th amendments,
cancelled most of the changes that were effected by the
38th, 39th and the 42nd amendments. The constitutional
balance was restored by these amendments.
Activity
Find out the amendments about the
210 right to education (RTE) and the
Goods and Services Tax (GST). What
do you think is the importance of
these amendments?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 225 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
B S E
ASIC TRUCTURE AND VOLUTION OF THE
211
C
ONSTITUTION
One thing that has had a long lasting effect on the
evolution of the Indian Constitution is the theory of the
basic structure of the Constitution. You know already that
the Judiciary advanced this theory in the famous case of
Kesavananda Bharati. This ruling has contributed to the
evolution of the Constitution in the following ways:
± It has set specific limits to Parliament’s power to amend
the Constitution. It says that no amendment can violate
the basic structure of the Constitution;
± It allows Parliament to amend any and all parts of the
Constitution (within this limitation); and
± It places the Judiciary as the final authority in deciding
if an amendment violates basic structure and what
constitutes the basic structure.
The Supreme Court gave the Kesavananda ruling in
1973. In the past four decades, this decision has governed
all interpretations of the Constitution and all institutions
in the country have accepted the theory of basic structure.
Ah! So it is the judiciary
In fact, the theory of basic structure is itself an example of
that has the final word! Is
a living constitution. There is no mention of this theory in
this also judicial activism?
the Constitution. It has emerged from judicial
interpretation. Thus, the Judiciary and its interpretation
have practically amended the Constitution without a
formal amendment.
All living documents evolve in this manner through
debates, arguments, competition and practical politics.
Since 1973, the Court has, in many cases, elaborated
upon this theory of basic structure and given instances
of what constitutes the basic structure of the Constitution
of India. In a sense, the basic structure doctrine has
further consolidated the balance between rigidity and
flexibility: by saying that certain parts cannot be amended,
it has underlined the rigid nature while by allowing
amendments to all others it has underlined the flexible
nature of the amending process.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 226 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Review of the Constitution
In the late nineties, efforts were made to
review the entire Constitution. In the year
2000 a commission to review the working of
the Constitution was appointed by the
Government of India under the chairmanship
of a retired Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court, Justice Venkatachaliah. Opposition
parties and many other organisations
boycotted the commission. While a lot of
political controversy surrounded this
commission, the commission stuck to the
theory of basic structure and did not suggest
any measures that would endanger the basic
structure of the Constitution. This shows the
significance of the basic structure doctrine
in our constitutional practice.
There are many other examples of how judicial
interpretation changed our understanding of the
Constitution. In many decisions the Supreme Court had
held that reservations in jobs and educational institutions
cannot exceed fifty per cent of the total seats. This has
now become an accepted principle. Similarly, in the case
involving reservations for other backward classes, the
Supreme Court introduced the idea of creamy layer and
It’s all wrong. First they say
ruled that persons belonging to this category were not
that an amendment requires
entitled to benefits under reservations. In the same
consensus and now we see
manner, the Judiciary has contributed to an informal
that Judges change the whole
amendment by interpreting various provisions concerning
meaning of the Constitution.
right to education, right to life and liberty and the right to
form and manage minority educational institutions. These
212 are instances of how rulings by the Court contribute to
the evolution of the Constitution.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 227 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
Check your progress
213
State whether the following statements are correct
or not:
± After the Basic Structure ruling, Parliament does
not have power to amend the Constitution.
± The Supreme Court has given a clear list of the
basic features of our Constitution, which cannot
be amended.
± Judiciary has the power to decide whether an
amendment violates basic structure or not.
± The Kesavananda Bharati ruling has set clear
limits on Parliament’s power to amend the
Constitution.
C L D
ONSTITUTION AS A IVING OCUMENT
We have described our Constitution as a living document. What does
that mean?
Almost like a living being, this document keeps responding to
the situations and circumstances arising from time to time. Like a
living being, the Constitution responds to experience. In fact that is
the answer to the riddle we mentioned at the beginning about the
durability of the Constitution. Even after so many changes in the
society, the Constitution continues to work effectively because of this
ability to be dynamic, to be open to interpretations and the ability to
respond to the changing situation. This is a hallmark of a democratic
constitution. In a democracy, practices and ideas keep evolving over
time and the society engages in experiments according to these. A
constitution, which protects democracy and yet allows for evolution
of new practices becomes not only durable but also the object of
respect from the citizens. The important point is: has the Constitution
been able to protect itself and protect democracy?
In the past six decades, some very critical situations arose in the
politics and constitutional development of the country. We have made
a brief reference to some of these in this chapter already. In terms of
constitutional-legal issues, the most serious question that came up
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 228 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
again and again from 1950 was about the supremacy of
the Parliament. In a parliamentary democracy, the
Parliament represents the people and therefore, it is
expected to have an upper hand over both Executive and
Judiciary. At the same time, there is the text of the
Constitution and it has given powers to other organs of
the government. Therefore, the supremacy of the
Parliament has to operate within this framework.
Democracy is not only about votes and people’s
representation. It is also about the principle of rule of law.
Democracy is also about developing institutions and
I get it! It’s like a see-saw. Or
working through these institutions. All the political
is it a game of tug of war?
institutions must be responsible to the people and
maintain a balance with each other.
Contribution of the Judiciary
During the controversy between the Judiciary and the
Parliament, the Parliament thought that it had the power
and responsibility to make laws (and amendments) for
furthering the interests of the poor, backward and the
needy. The Judiciary insisted that all this has to take place
within the framework provided by the Constitution and
pro-people measures should not bypass legal procedures,
because, once you bypass laws even with good intentions,
that can give an excuse to the power holders to use their
power arbitrarily. And democracy is as much about
checks on arbitrary use of power as it is about the
well-being of the people.
The success of the working of the Indian Constitution
lies in resolving these tensions. The Judiciary, in its
famous Kesavananda ruling found a way out of the
existing complications by turning to the spirit of the
Constitution rather than its letter. If you read the
Constitution, you will not find any mention of the ‘basic
214 structure’ of the Constitution. Nowhere does the
Constitution say that such and such are part of the basic
structure. In this sense, the ‘basic structure’ theory is the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 229 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
invention of the Judiciary. How did it invent such a non-
existent thing? And how is it that all other institutions 215
have accepted this during the past four decades?
Therein lies the distinction between letter and spirit.
The Court came to the conclusion that in reading a text
or document, we must respect the intent behind that
document. A mere text of the law is less important than
the social circumstances and aspirations that have
produced that law or document. The Court was looking
at the basic structure as something without which the
Constitution cannot be imagined at all. This is an instance
of trying to balance the letter and the spirit of the
Constitution.
Of course, if there are no
Maturity of the Political Leadership
rights and no elections, the
Our discussion of the role of Judiciary, in the paragraph
Constitution won’t make much
above, brings out one more fact. In the background of the sense. And if there is no well
fierce controversy that raged between 1967 and 1973, being, elections and rights
Parliament and the Executive also realised that a balanced won’t make sense. Is this how
and long term view was necessary. After the Supreme Court we understand the ‘spirit’ of
gave the ruling in the Kesavananda case some attempts our Constitution?
were made to ask the Court to reconsider its ruling. When
these failed, the 42nd amendment was made and
parliamentary supremacy was asserted. But the Court
again repeated its earlier stand in the Minerva Mills case
(1980). Therefore, even four decades after the ruling in
the Kesavananda case, this ruling has dominated our
interpretation of the Constitution. Political parties, political
leaders, the government, and Parliament, accepted the idea
of inviolable basic structure. Even when there was talk
about ‘review’ of the Constitution, that exercise could not
cross the limits set by the theory of the basic structure.
When the Constitution was made, leaders and people
of our country shared a common vision of India. In
Nehru’s famous speech at the time of independence, this Let us not ignore that there
vision was described as a tryst with destiny. In the are many instances of
political immaturity as well.
Constituent Assembly also, all the leaders mentioned this
Does one have to list these?
vision: dignity and freedom of the individual, social and
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 230 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Even within the Constituent Assembly, there were some
members who felt that this Constitution was not suited
to the Indian situation:
“The ideals on which this draft constitution is framed have
no manifest relation to the fundamental spirit of India.
…this Constitution …would not prove suitable and would
break down soon after being brought into operation.”
Lakshminarayan Sahu, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 613, 17 November 1949
economic equality, well-being of all people, unity based on national
integrity. This vision has not disappeared. People and leaders alike
hold to the vision and hope to realize it. Therefore, the Constitution,
based on this vision, has remained an object of respect and authority
even after half a century. The basic values governing our public
imagination remain intact.
Conclusion
There can still be debates about what constitutes basic structure.
There is nothing wrong in such debates. We must remember
that politics in a democracy is necessarily full of debates and
differences. That is a sign of diversity, liveliness and openness.
Democracy welcomes debates. At the same time, our political
parties and leadership have shown maturity in setting limits to
these debates. Because, politics is also about compromises and
give-and-take. Extreme positions may be theoretically very correct
and ideologically very attractive, but politics demands that
everyone is prepared to moderate their extreme views, sharp
positions and reach a common minimum ground. Only then
democratic politics becomes possible. Politicians and the people
of India have understood and practised these skills. That has
made the experience of working of the democratic Constitution
216
quite successful. Among the different organs of the government,
there will always be competition over which one is more important
than the others. They will also always fight over what constitutes
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 231 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
the welfare of the people. But in the last instance, the final
authority lies with the people. People, their freedoms and their 217
well-being constitute the purpose of democracy and also the
outcome of democratic politics.
Exercises
1. Choose the correct statement from the following.
A constitution needs to be amended from time to time because,
√ Circumstances change and require suitable changes in the
constitution.
√ A document written at one point of time becomes outdated after
some time.
√ Every generation should have a constitution of its own liking.
√ It must reflect the philosophy of the existing government.
2. Write True / False against the following statements.
a. The President cannot send back an amendment bill for
reconsideration of Parliament.
b. Elected representatives alone have the power to amend the
Constitution.
c. The Judiciary cannot initiate the process of constitutional
amendment but can effectively change the Constitution by
interpreting it differently.
d. Parliament can amend any section of the Constitution.
3. Which of the following are involved in the amendment of the Indian
Constitution? In what way are they involved?
a. Voters
b. President of India
c. State Legislatures
d. Parliament
e. Governors
f. Judiciary
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 232 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
4. You have read in this chapter that the 42nd amendment was one of
the most controversial amendments so far. Which of the following
were the reasons for this controversy?
a. It was made during national emergency, and the declaration of
that emergency was itself controversial.
b. It was made without the support of special majority.
c. It was made without ratification by State legislatures.
d. It contained provisions, which were controversial.
5. Which of the following is not a reasonable explanation of the conflict
between the legislature and the judiciary over different
amendments?
a. Different interpretations of the Constitution are possible.
b. In a democracy, debates and differences are natural.
c. Constitution has given higher importance to certain rules and
principles and also allowed for amendment by special majority.
d. Legislature cannot be entrusted to protect the rights of the
citizens.
e. Judiciary can only decide the constitutionality of a particular
law; cannot resolve political debates about its need.
6. Identify the correct statements about the theory of basic structure.
Correct the incorrect statements.
a. Constitution specifies the basic tenets.
b. Legislature can amend all parts of the Constitution except the
basic structure.
c. Judiciary has defined which aspects of the Constitution can be
termed as the basic structure and which cannot.
d. This theory found its first expression in the Kesavananda
Bharati case and has been discussed in subsequent judgments.
e. This theory has increased the powers of the judiciary and has
come to be accepted by different political parties and the
government.
7. From the information that many amendments were made during
2000-2003, which of the following conclusions would you draw?
a. Judiciary did not interfere in the amendments made during
this period.
218
b. One political party had a strong majority during this period.
c. There was strong pressure from the pubic in favour of certain
amendments.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 233 ---
Chapter 9: Constitution as a Living Document
d. There were no real differences among the parties during this
time. 219
e. The amendments were of a non-controversial nature and parties
had an agreement on the subject of amendments.
8. Explain the reason for requiring special majority for amending the
Constitution.
9. Many amendments to the Constitution of India have been made
due to different interpretations upheld by the Judiciary and
Parliament. Explain with examples.
10. If amending power is with the elected representatives, judiciary
should NOT have the power to decide the validity of amendments.
Do you agree? Give your reasons in 100 words.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 234 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Chapter Ten
THE PHILOSOPHY OF
THE CONSTITUTION
I
NTRODUCTION
In this book, so far we have studied some important provisions of our Constitution
and the way in which these have worked in the last 69 years. We also studied
the way in which the Constitution was made. But have you ever asked yourself
why leaders of the national movement felt the need to adopt a constitution after
achieving independence from British rule? Why did they choose to bind
themselves and the future generations to a constitution? In this book, you have
repeatedly visited the debates in the Constituent Assembly. But it should be
asked why the study of the constitution must be accompanied by a deep
examination of the debates in the Constituent Assembly? This question will be
addressed in this chapter. Secondly, it is important to ask what kind of a
constitution we have given ourselves. What objectives did we hope to achieve
by it? Do these objectives have a moral content? If so, what precisely is it? What
are the strengths and limitations of this vision and, by implication, the achievements
and weaknesses of the Constitution? In doing so, we try to understand what can
be called the philosophy of the Constitution.
After reading this chapter, you should be able to understand:
± why it is important to study the philosophy of the Constitution;
220
± what are the core features of the Indian Constitution;
± what are the criticisms of this Constitution; and
± what are the limitations of the Constitution?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 235 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
W M P
HAT IS EANT BY HILOSOPHY OF THE
221
C ?
ONSTITUTION
Some people believe that a constitution merely
consists of laws and that laws are one thing, values
and morality, quite another. Therefore, we can have
only a legalistic, not a political philosophy approach
to the Constitution. It is true that all laws do not
have a moral content, but many laws are closely
connected to our deeply held values. For example, a
law might prohibit discrimination of persons on
grounds of language or religion. Such a law is
connected to the idea of equality. Such a law exists
because we value equality. Therefore, there is a
connection between laws and moral values.
We must therefore, look upon the constitution as a
document that is based on a certain moral vision. We need
to adopt a political philosophy approach to the
constitution. What do we mean by a political philosophy
approach to the constitution? We have three things in
mind.
± First, we need to understand the conceptual structure
of the constitution. What does this mean? It means
that we must ask questions like what are the possible
meanings of terms used in the constitution such as
‘rights’, ‘citizenship’, ‘minority’ or ‘democracy’?
± Furthermore, we must attempt to work out a coherent
vision of society and polity conditional upon an
interpretation of the key concepts of the constitution.
We must have a better grasp of the set of ideals
embedded in the constitution.
± Our final point is that the Indian Constitution must
be read in conjunction with the Constituent Assembly
Debates in order to refine and raise to a higher
Does it mean that all
theoretical plane, the justification of values embedded
constitutions have a
in the Constitution. A philosophical treatment of a
philosophy? Or is it that only
value is incomplete if a detailed justification for it is
some constitutions have a
not provided. When the framers of the Constitution
philosophy?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 236 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
chose to guide Indian society
and polity by a set of values,
there must have been a
The Japanese Constitution
corresponding set of reasons.
of 1947 is popularly known
Many of them, though, may not
as the ‘peace constitution’.
have been fully explained.
The preamble states that
A political philosophy approach “We, the Japanese people
to the constitution is needed not desire peace for all time and
only to find out the moral content are deeply conscious of
expressed in it and to evaluate its the high ideals controlling
claims but possibly to use it to human relationship”. The
philosophy of the Japanese
arbitrate between varying
constitution is thus based
interpretations of the many core
on the ideal of peace.
values in our polity. It is obvious
Article 9 of the
that many of its ideals are
Japanese constitution
challenged, discussed, debated and
states —
contested in different political 1) Aspiring sincerely to an
arenas, in the legislatures, in party international peace based
forums, in the press, in schools and on justice and order, the
universities. These Japanese people forever
renounce war as a
ideals are variously
sovereign right of the nation
interpreted and
and the threat or use of
sometimes wilfully
force as means of settling
manipulated to suit
international disputes.
partisan short term
2) In order to accomplish
interests. We must, the aim of the preceding
therefore, examine paragraph, land, sea, and
Yes, of course, I do remember whether or not a air forces, as well as other
this issue of different serious disjunction war potential, will never be
interpretations of the exists between the maintained…
This shows how the
Constitution. We discussed it constitutional ideal
context of making the
in the last chapter, didn’t we? and its expression
constitution dominates the
in other arenas.
thinking of the constitution
Sometimes, the same
makers.
222 ideal is interpreted differently
by different institutions. We need
to compare these differing
interpretations. Since the expression
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 237 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
of the ideal in the constitution has considerable authority
it must be used to arbitrate in conflict of interpretation over 223
values or ideals. Our Constitution can perform this job of
arbitration.
Constitution as Means of Democratic Transformation
In the first chapter we have studied the meaning of the
term constitution and the need to have a constitution. It is
widely agreed that one reason for having constitutions is
the need to restrict the exercise of power. Modern states
are excessively powerful. They are believed to have a
monopoly over force and coercion. What if institutions of
such states fall into wrong hands who abuse this power?
Even if these institutions were created for our safety and
well-being, they can easily turn against us. Experience of
state power the world over shows that most states are prone
to harming the interests of at least some individuals and
groups. If so, we need to draw the rules of the game in
such a way that this tendency of states is continuously
checked. Constitutions provide these basic rules and
therefore, prevent states from turning tyrannical.
Constitutions also provide peaceful, democratic means
to bring about social transformation. Moreover, for a
hitherto colonised people, constitutions announce and
embody the first real exercise of political self-determination.
Nehru understood both these points well. The demand
for a Constituent Assembly, he claimed, represented a
collective demand for full self-determination because; only
a Constituent Assembly of elected representatives of the
Indian people had the right to frame India’s constitution
without external interference. Second, he argued, the So, can we say that members
Constituent Assembly is not just a body of people or a of the Constituent Assembly
gathering of able lawyers. Rather, it is a ‘nation on the move, were all eager to bring social
throwing away the shell of its past political and possibly transformation? But we also
social structure, and fashioning for itself a new garment of keep saying that all view points
its own making.’ The Indian Constitution was designed to were represented in the
break the shackles of traditional social hierarchies and to Assembly!
usher in a new era of freedom, equality and justice.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 238 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
This approach had the potential of changing the theory of
constitutional democracy altogether: according to this approach,
constitutions exist not only to limit people in power but to empower
those who traditionally have been deprived of it. Constitutions can
give vulnerable people the power to achieve collective good.
Why do we need to go back to the Constituent Assembly?
Why look backwards and bind ourselves to the past? That may be
the job of a legal historian — to go into the past and search for the
basis of legal and political ideas. But why should students of politics
be interested in studying the intentions and concerns of those who
framed the Constitution? Why not take account of changed
circumstances and define anew the normative function of the
constitution?
In the context of America — where the constitution was written
in the late 18th century— it is absurd to apply the values and
standards of that era to the 21st century. However, in India, the
world of the original framers and our present day world may not
have changed so drastically. In terms of our values, ideals and
conception, we have not separated ourselves from the world of the
Constituent Assembly. A history of our Constitution is still very
much a history of the present.
Activity
Read again the quotes from the Debates of
the Constituent Assembly (CAD) given in
the following chapters. Do you think that
the arguments in those quotations have
relevance for our present times? Why?
i. Quotes in Chapter two
ii. Quote in Chapter seven
Furthermore, we may have forgotten the real point underlying
several of our legal and political practices, simply because somewhere
224 down the road we began to take them for granted. These reasons
have now slipped into the background, screened off from our
consciousness even though they still provide the organizational
principle to current practices. When the going is good, this forgetting
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 239 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
is harmless. But when these practices are challenged or
threatened, neglect of the underlying principles can be 225
harmful. In short, to get a handle on current constitutional
practice, to grasp their value and meaning, we may have
no option but to go back in time to the Constituent
Assembly debates and perhaps even further back in time
to the colonial era. Therefore, we need to remember and
keep revisiting the political philosophy underlying our
Constitution.
W P P
HAT IS THE OLITICAL HILOSOPHY OF OUR
C ?
ONSTITUTION
This is tough. Why couldn’t they
It is hard to describe this philosophy in one word. It resists
plainly tell us what the
any single label because it is liberal, democratic,
philosophy of this Constitution
egalitarian, secular, and federal, open to community
is? How can ordinary citizens
values, sensitive to the needs of religious and linguistic understand the philosophy if it
minorities as well as historically disadvantaged groups, is hidden like this?
and committed to building a common national identity.
R
EAD A CARTOON
While all ideas unfold on this playfield, democracy is the ‘Umpire’.
.tsurT
kooB
s’nerdlihC
:thgirypoC
.raknahS
26 January 1950
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 240 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
In short, it is committed to freedom, equality, social justice, and some
form of national unity. But underneath all this, there is a clear
emphasis on peaceful and democratic measures for putting this
philosophy into practice.
Individual freedom
The first point to note about the Constitution is its commitment to
individual freedom. This commitment did not emerge miraculously
out of calm deliberations around a table. Rather, it was the product
of continuous intellectual and political activity of well over a century.
As early as the beginning of the nineteenth century, Rammohan Roy
protested against curtailment of the freedom of the press by the
British colonial state. Roy argued that a state responsive to the needs
of individuals must provide them the means by which their needs
are communicated. Therefore, the state must permit unlimited liberty
of publication. Likewise, Indians continued to demand a free press
throughout the British rule.
It is not surprising therefore that freedom of expression is an
integral part of the Indian Constitution. So is the freedom from
arbitrary arrest. After all, the infamous Rowlatt Act, which the national
movement opposed so vehemently, sought to deny this basic freedom.
These and other individual freedoms such as freedom of conscience
are part of the liberal ideology. On this basis, we can say that the
Indian Constitution has a pretty strong liberal character. In the
chapter on fundamental rights we have already seen how the
Constitution values individual freedom. It might be recalled that for
over forty years before the adoption of the Constitution, every single
resolution, scheme, bill and report of the Indian National Congress
mentioned individual rights, not just in passing but as a non-
negotiable value.
Social Justice
When we say that the Indian Constitution is liberal, we do not mean
that it is liberal only in the classical western sense. In the book on
226 Political Theory, you will learn more about the idea of liberalism.
Classical liberalism always privileges rights of the individuals over
demands of social justice and community values.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 241 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
227
Check your progress
State which of the following rights are part of
individual freedom:
± Freedom of expression
± Freedom of religion
± Cultural and educational rights of minorities
± Equal access to public places
The liberalism of the Indian Constitution differs from this version
in two ways. First, it was always linked to social justice. The best
example of this is the provision for reservations for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in the Constitution. The makers of the
Constitution believed that the mere granting of the right to equality
was not enough to overcome age-old injustices suffered by these
groups or to give real meaning to their right to vote. Special
constitutional measures were required to advance their interests.
Therefore the constitution makers provided a number of special
measures to protect the interests of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes such as the reservation of seats in legislatures. The Constitution
also made it possible for the government to reserve public sector
jobs for these groups.
Indian liberalism has two streams. The
first stream began with Rammohan Roy.
He emphasised individual rights,
particularly the rights of women. The
second stream included thinkers like K.C.
Sen, Justice Ranade and Swami
Vivekananda. They introduced the spirit
of social justice within orthodox Hinduism.
For Vivekananda, such a reordering of
Hindu society could not have been possible
without liberal principles. — K.M.
Panikkar, In Defence of Liberalism, And while talking of social
Bombay, Asia Publishing House, 1962. justice, let us not forget the
directive principles.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 242 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Respect for diversity and minority rights
The Indian Constitution encourages equal respect between
communities. This was not easy in our country, first
because communities do not always have a relationship
of equality; they tend to have hierarchical relationships
with one another (as in the case of caste). Second, when
these communities do see each other as equals, they also
tend to become rivals (as in the case of religious
communities). This was a huge challenge for the makers
of the Constitution: how to make communities liberal in
their approach and foster a sense of equal respect among
them under existing conditions of hierarchy or intense
rivalry?
It would have been very easy to resolve this problem
by not recognising communities at all, as most western
liberal constitutions do. But this would have been
unworkable and undesirable in our country. This is not
because Indians are attached to communities more than
others. Individuals everywhere also belong to cultural
communities and every such community has its own
values, traditions, customs and language shared by its
members. For example, individuals in France or Germany
belong to a linguistic community and are deeply attached
to it. What makes us different is that we have more openly
I have always wondered who I acknowledged the value of communities. More
am. I have so many ‘identities’ in importantly, India is a land of multiple cultural
my bag: I have my religious communities. Unlike Germany or France we have several
identity, I have my linguistic linguistic and religious communities. It was important to
identity, I have ties with my ensure that no one community systematically dominates
parental town, and of course, I others. This made it mandatory for our Constitution to
am a student also. recognise community based rights.
One such right is the right of religious communities
to establish and run their own educational institutions.
Such institutions may receive money from the
228 government. This provision shows that the Indian
Constitution does not see religion merely as a ‘private’
matter concerning the individual.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 243 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
Secularism
Secular states are widely seen as treating religion as only 229
a private matter. That is to say, they refuse to give religion
public or official recognition. Does this mean that the
Indian Constitution is not secular? This does not follow.
Though the term ‘secular’ was not initially mentioned, the
Indian Constitution has always been secular. The
mainstream, western conception, of secularism means
mutual exclusion of state and religion in order to protect
values such as individual freedom and citizenship rights
of individuals.
Again, this is something that you will learn more about
Have they started teaching
in Political Theory. The term ‘mutual exclusion’ means this:
us the Political Theory
both religion and state must stay away from the internal
course?
affairs of one another. The state must not intervene in the
domain of religion; religion likewise should not dictate state
policy or influence the conduct of the state. In other words,
mutual exclusion means that religion and state must be
strictly separated.
What is the purpose behind strict separation? It is to
safeguard the freedom of individuals. States which lend
support to organised religions make them more powerful
than they already are. When religious organisations begin
to control the religious lives of individuals, when they start
dictating how they should relate to God or how they should
pray, individuals may have the option of turning to the
modern state for protecting their religious freedom, but what
help would a state offer them if it has already joined hands
with these organisations? To protect religious freedom of
individuals, therefore, state must not help religious
organisations. But at the same time, state should not tell
religious organisations how to manage their affairs. That
too can thwart religious freedom. The state must, therefore,
not hinder religious organisations either. In short, states
should neither help nor hinder religions. Instead, they should
keep themselves at an arm’s length from them. This has been
the prevalent western conception of secularism.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 244 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Conditions in India were different and to respond to the
challenge they posed, the makers of the Constitution had
to work out an alternative conception of secularism. They
departed from the western model in two ways and for two
different reasons.
± Rights of Religious Groups
First, as mentioned already, they recognised that inter-
community equality was as necessary as equality
between individuals. This was because a person’s
freedom and sense of self-respect was directly
dependent upon the status of her community. If one
community was dominated by another, then its
members would also be significantly less free. If, on
the other hand, their relations were equal, marked by
an absence of domination, then its members would
also walk about with dignity, self-respect and freedom.
Thus, the Indian Constitution grants rights to all
religious communities such as the right to establish
and maintain their educational institutions. Freedom
of religion in India means the freedom of religion of
both individuals and communities.
± State’s Power of Intervention
Second, separation in India could not mean mutual
exclusion. Why is it so? Because, religiously
sanctioned customs such as untouchability deprived
individuals of the most basic dignity and self-respect.
Such customs were so deeply rooted and pervasive
I would like to know whether that without active state intervention, there was no
finally, the state can regulate hope of their dissolution. The state simply had to
matters related to religion or not. interfere in the affairs of religion. Such intervention
Otherwise, there can be no was not always negative. The state could also help
religious reform.
religious communities by giving aid to educational
institutions run by them. Thus, the state may help or
230 hinder religious communities depending on which
mode of action promotes values such as freedom and
equality. In India separation between religion and state
did not mean their mutual exclusion but rather
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 245 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
principled distance, a rather complex idea that allows the state
to be distant from all religions so that it can intervene or abstain 231
from interference, depending upon which of these two would better
promote liberty, equality and social justice.
We have hitherto mentioned three core features — these can also
be seen as the achievements — of our Constitution.
± First, our Constitution reinforces and reinvents forms of liberal
individualism. This is an important achievement because this is
done in the backdrop of a society where community values are
often indifferent or hostile to individual autonomy.
± Second, our Constitution upholds the principle of social justice
without compromising on individual liberties. The constitutional
commitment to caste-based affirmative action programme shows
how much ahead India was compared to other nations. Can one
forget that affirmative action programmes in the U.S. were begun
after the 1964 Civil Rights Act, almost two decades after they
were constitutionally entrenched in India?
± Third, against the background of inter-communal strife, the
Constitution upholds its commitment to group rights (the right
to the expression of cultural particularity). This indicates that
the framers of the Constitution were more than willing to face the
challenges of what more than four decades later has come to be
known as multiculturalism.
Universal franchise
Two other core features may also be regarded as achievements. First,
it is no mean achievement to commit oneself to universal franchise,
specially when there is widespread belief that traditional hierarchies
in India are congealed and more or less impossible to eliminate, and
when the right to vote has only recently been extended to women
and to the working class in stable, Western democracies.
Once the idea of a nation took root among the elite, the idea of
democratic self-government followed. Thus, Indian nationalism
always conceived of a political order based on the will of every single
member of society. The idea of universal franchise lay securely within
the heart of nationalism. As early as the Constitution of India Bill
(1895), the first non-official attempt at drafting a constitution for
India, the author declared that every citizen, i.e., anyone born in
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 246 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
“The Assembly has adopted the
principle of adult franchise with an
abundant faith in the common
man and the ultimate success of
democratic rule and in the full
belief that the introduction of
democratic government on the
basis of adult suffrage will…
promote the well-being...”
Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, CAD, Vol. XI, p. 835, 23 November 1949
India, had a right to take part in the affairs of the country
It’s certainly a matter of pride that and be admitted to public office. The Motilal Nehru Report
the principle of ‘one man one (1928) reaffirms this conception of citizenship, reiterating
vote’ was accepted almost
that every person of either sex who has attained the age of
uncontested. Isn’t it true that
twenty-one is entitled to vote for the House of
women had to struggle for their
Representatives or Parliament. Thus from very early on,
right to vote in many other
universal franchise was considered as the most important
countries?
and legitimate instrument by which the will of the nation
was to be properly expressed.
Federalism
Second, by introducing the article concerning North-East
(Art. 371), the Indian Constitution anticipates the very
important concept of asymmetric federalism. We have seen
in the chapter on federalism that the Constitution has
created a strong central government. But despite this
unitary bias of the Indian Constitution, there are
important constitutionally embedded differences between
the legal status and prerogatives of different sub-units
within the same federation. Unlike the constitutional
232
symmetry of American federalism, Indian federalism has
been constitutionally asymmetric. To meet the specific
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 247 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
needs and requirements of some sub-units, it was always
233
part of the original design to have a unique relationship
with them or to give them special status.
Under Article 371A, the privilege of special status was
also accorded to the North-Eastern State of Nagaland. This
Article not only confers validity on pre-existing laws within
Nagaland, but also protects local identity through
restrictions on immigration. Many other States too, are
beneficiaries of such special provisions. According to the
Indian Constitution, then, there is nothing bad about this
differential treatment.
Although the Constitution did not originally envisage
this, India is now a multi-lingual federation. Each major
linguistic group is politically recognised and all are treated I am really impressed! Who says
as equals. Thus, the democratic and linguistic federalism our Constitution is based on
of India has managed to combine claims to unity with imitation?. In every ‘borrowed’
claims to cultural recognition. A fairly robust political aspect, we have put our own
arena exists that allows for the play of multiple identities distinct imprint.
that complement one another.
National identity
Thus, the Constitution constantly reinforces a common
national identity. In the chapter on federalism, you have
studied how India strives to retain regional identities along
with the national identity. It is clear from what is
mentioned above that this common national identity was
not incompatible with distinct religious or linguistic
identities. The Indian Constitution tried to balance these
various identities. Yet, preference was given to common
identity under certain conditions. This is clarified in the
debate over separate electorates based on religious identity
which the Constitution rejects. Separate electorates were
rejected not because they fostered difference between
religious communities as such or because they
endangered a simple notion of national unity but because
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 248 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
they endangered a healthy national life. Rather than forced unity,
our Constitution sought to evolve true fraternity, a goal dear to the
heart of Dr. Ambedkar. As Sardar Patel put it, the main objective
was to evolve ‘one community’.
“But in the long run, it
would be in the interest of
all to forget that there is
anything like majority or
minority in this country
and that in India there is
only one community…”
Sardar Patel, CAD, Vol. VIII, p. 272, 25 May 1949
P A
ROCEDURAL CHIEVEMENTS
All these five core features are what might be called the substantive
achievements of the Constitution. However, there were also some
procedural achievements.
± First, the Indian Constitution reflects a faith in political
deliberation. We know that many groups and interests were not
adequately represented in the Constituent Assembly. But the
debates in the Assembly amply show that the makers of the
Constitution wanted to be as inclusive in their approach as
possible. This open-ended approach indicates the willingness of
people to modify their existing preferences, in short, to justify
outcomes by reference not to self-interest but to reasons. It also
shows a willingness to recognise creative value in difference and
disagreement.
234
± Second, it reflects a spirit of compromise and accommodation.
These words, compromise and accommodation, should not
always be seen with disapproval. Not all compromises are bad.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 249 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
If something of value is traded off for mere self-interest,
then we naturally have compromised in the bad sense. 235
However, if one value is partially traded off for another
value, especially in an open process of free deliberation
among equals, then the compromise arrived in this
manner can hardly be objected to. We may lament
that we could not have everything but to secure a bit
of all things important cannot be morally blame-
worthy. Besides, a commitment to the idea that
decisions on the most important issues must be arrived
at consensually rather than by majority vote is equally
morally commendable.
I understand compromises in the
C
RITICISMS design of institutions, but how can
The Indian Constitution can be subjected to many conflicting principles be
criticisms of which three may be briefly mentioned: first, accommodated?
that it is unwieldy; second, that it is unrepresentative and
third, that it is alien to our conditions.
The criticism that it is unwieldy is based on the
assumption that the entire constitution of a country must
be found in one compact document. But this is not true
even of countries such as the US which do have a compact
constitution. The fact is that a country’s constitution is
to be identified with a compact document and with other
written documents with constitutional status. Thus, it is
possible to find important constitutional statements and
practices outside one compact document. In the case of
India, many such details, practices and statements are
included in one single document and this has made that
document somewhat large in size. Many countries for
instance, do not have provisions for election commission
or the civil service commission in the document known as
constitution. But in India, many such matters are
attended to by the Constitutional document itself.
A second criticism of the Constitution is that it is
unrepresentative. Do you remember how the Constituent
Assembly was formed? At that time, adult franchise was
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 250 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
not yet granted and most members came from the
advanced sections of the society. Does this make our
Constitution unrepresentative?
Here we must distinguish two components of
representation, one that might be called voice and the other
opinion. The voice component of representation is
important. People must be recognised in their own
language or voice, not in the language of the masters. If
we look at the Indian Constitution from this dimension, it
is indeed unrepresentative because members of the
Constituent Assembly were chosen by a restricted
franchise, not by universal suffrage. However, if we
examine the other dimension, we may not find it altogether
lacking in representativeness. The claim that almost every
shade of opinion was represented in the Constituent
Assembly may be a trifle exaggerated but may have
something to it. If we read the debates that took place in
the Constituent Assembly, we find that a vast range of
issues and opinions were mentioned, members raised
matters not only based on their individual social concerns
but based on the perceived interests and concerns of
various social sections as well.
Is it a coincidence that the central square of every other
small town has a statue of Dr. Ambedkar with a copy of
Of course! Isn’t it what we learnt
the Indian Constitution? Far from being a mere symbolic
in the first chapter? That there
tribute to him, this expresses the feeling among Dalits
should be a valid reason for every
that the Constitution reflects many of their aspirations.
section of society to go along with
A final criticism alleges that the Indian Constitution is
the Constitution?
entirely an alien document, borrowed article by article
from western constitutions and sits uneasily with the
cultural ethos of the Indian people. This criticism is often
voiced by many. Even in the Constituent Assembly itself,
there were some voices that echo this concern.
How far is this charge true?
236 It is true that the Indian Constitution is modern and
partly western. Do you remember that in the first chapter
we have listed the various sources from which our
Constitution ‘borrowed’? But in this chapter you have also
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 251 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
“…we wanted the music of Veena or Sitar, but here we 237
have the music of an English band. That was because
our constitution makers were educated that way.
…That is exactly the kind of Constitution Mahatma
Gandhi did not want and did not envisage.”
K. Hanumanthaiya
CAD, Vol. XI, pp.616-617, 17 November 1949
seen that it was never a blind borrowing. It was innovative borrowing.
Besides, as we shall see, this does not make it entirely alien.
First, many Indians have not only adopted modern ways of
thinking, but have made these their own. For them westernisation
became a form of protest against the filth in their own tradition.
Rammohan Roy started this trend and it is continued to this day by
Dalits. Indeed, as early as 1841, it was noticed that the Dalit people
of northern India were not afraid to use the newly introduced legal
system and bring suits against their landlords. So, this new
instrument of modern law was effectively adopted by the people to
address questions of dignity and justice.
Second, when western modernity began to interact with local
cultural systems, something like a hybrid culture began to emerge,
possibly by creative adaptation, for which a parallel can be found
neither in western modernity nor in indigenous tradition. This cluster
of newly developed phenomenon forged out of western modern and
indigenous traditional cultural systems have the character of a
different, alternative modernity. In non-western societies, different
modernities emerged as non-western societies tried to break loose
not only from their own past practices but also from the shackles of
a particular version of western modernity imposed on them. Thus,
when we were drafting our Constitution, efforts were made to
amalgamate western and traditional Indian values. It was a process
of selective adaptation and not borrowing.
Limitations
All this is not to say that the Constitution of India is a perfect and
flawless document. Given the social conditions within which the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 252 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Constitution was made, it was only natural that there may
be many controversial matters, that there would be many
areas that needed careful revision. There are many
features of this Constitution that have emerged mainly
due to the exigencies of the time. Nonetheless, we must
admit that there are many limitations to this Constitution.
Let us briefly mention the limitations of the Constitution.
± First, the Indian Constitution has a centralised idea
of national unity.
± Second, it appears to have glossed over some
important issues of gender justice, particularly within
the family.
± Third, it is not clear why in a poor developing country,
certain basic socio-economic rights were relegated to
the section on Directive Principles rather than made
an integral feature of our fundamental rights.
It is possible to give answers to these limitations, to explain
why this happened, or even to overcome them. But that is
not our point. We are arguing that these limitations are
not serious enough to jeopardise the philosophy of the
Constitution.
Conclusion
In the previous chapter we described the
Constitution as a living document. It is these core
features of the Constitution that give it this stature
No document can be perfect and of a living document. Legal provisions and
no ideals can be fully achieved. institutional arrangements depend upon the needs
But does that mean we should of the society and the philosophy adopted by the
have no ideals? No vision? Am I society. The Constitution gives expression to this
right? philosophy. The institutional arrangements that we
studied throughout this book are based on a core
and commonly agreed vision. That vision has
historically emerged through our struggle for
238
independence. The Constituent Assembly was the
platform on which this vision was stated, refined
and articulated in legal-institutional form. Thus, the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 253 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
Constitution becomes the embodiment of this vision. Many
people have said that the best summary of this vision or the 239
philosophy of the Constitution is to be found in the preamble to
our Constitution.
Have you carefully read the preamble? Apart from the various
objectives mentioned in it, the preamble makes a very humble
claim: the Constitution is not ‘given’ by a body of great men, it
is prepared and adopted by ‘We, the people of India…’. Thus,
the people are themselves the makers of their own destinies,
and democracy is the instrument that people have used for
shaping their present and their future. More than five decades
since the Constitution was drafted, we have fought over many
matters, we have seen that the courts and the governments
have disagreed on many interpretations, the centre and the
States have many differences of opinion, and political parties
have fought bitterly. As you will study next year, our politics
has been full of problems and shortcomings. And yet, if you
asked the politician or the common citizen, you will find that
every one continues to share in that famous vision embodied in
the Constitution: we want to live together and prosper together
on the basis of the principles of equality, liberty and fraternity.
This sharing in the vision or the philosophy of the Constitution
is the valuable outcome of the working of the Constitution. In
1950, making of this Constitution was a great achievement.
Today, keeping alive the philosophical vision of that Constitution
may be our important achievement.
Exercises
1. The following are certain laws. Are they connected with any value?
If yes, then what is the underlying value? Give reasons.
a. Both daughters and sons will have share in the family property.
b. There will be different slabs of sales tax on different consumer
items.
c. Religious instructions will not be given in any government
school.
d. There shall be no begar or forced labour.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 254 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
2. Which of the options given below cannot be used to complete the
following statement?
Democratic countries need a constitution to
i. Check the power of the government.
ii. Protect minorities from majority.
iii. Bring independence from colonial rule.
iv. Ensure that a long-term vision is not lost by momentary
passions.
v. Bring social change in peaceful manner.
3. The following are different positions about reading and
understanding Constituent Assembly debates.
i. Which of these statements argues that Constituent Assembly
debates are relevant even today? Which statement says that
they are not relevant?
ii. With which of these positions do you agree and why?
a. Common people are too busy in earning livelihood and
meeting different pressures of life. They can’t understand
the legal language of these debates.
b. The conditions and challenges today are different from the
time when the Constitution was made. To read the ideas of
Constitution makers and use them for our new times is
trying to bring past in the present
c. Our ways of understanding the world and the present
challenges have not changed totally. Constituent Assembly
debates can provide us reasons why certain practises are
important. In a period when constitutional practises are
being challenged, not knowing the reasons can destroy them.
4. Explain the difference between the Indian Constitution and western
ideas in the light of
a. Understanding of secularism.
b. Articles 370 and 371.
c. Affirmative action.
d. Universal adult franchise.
5. Which of the following principles of secularism are adopted in the
Constitution of India?
240
a. that state will have nothing to do with religion
b. that state will have close relation with religion
c. that state can discriminate among religions
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 255 ---
Chapter 10: The Philosophy of the Constitution
d. that state will recognise rights of religious groups
e. that state will have limited powers to intervene in affairs of 241
religions
6. Match the following.
a. Freedom to criticise i. Substantive
treatment of widows achievement
b. Taking decisions in the ii. Procedural achievement
constituent assembly on
the basis of reason,
not self interest
c. Accepting importance of iii. Neglect of gender justice
community in an individual’s
life
d. Article 370 and 371 iv. Liberal individualism
e. Unequal rights to women v. Attention to requirements of
regarding family property and a particular region
children
7. This discussion was taking place in a class. Read the various
arguments and state which of these do you agree with and why.
Jayesh: I still think that our Constitution is only a borrowed
document.
Saba: Do you mean to say that there is nothing Indian in it? But is
there such a thing as Indian and western in the case of values and
ideas? Take equality between men and women. What is western
about it? And even if it is, should we reject it only because it is
western?
Jayesh: What I mean is that after fighting for independence from
the British, did we not adopt their system of parliamentary
government?
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 256 ---
Indian Constitution at Work
Neha: You forget that when we fought the British, we were not
against the British as such, we were against the principle of
colonialism. That has nothing to do with adopting a system of
government that we wanted, wherever it came from.
8. Why is it said that the making of the Indian Constitution was
unrepresentative? Does that make the Constitution
unrepresentative? Give reasons for your answer.
9. One of the limitations of the Constitution of India is that it does not
adequately attend to gender justice. What evidence can you give to
substantiate this charge? If you were writing the Constitution today,
what provisions would you recommend for remedying this limitation?
10. Do you agree with the statement that “it is not clear why in a poor
developing country, certain basic socio-economic rights were
relegated to the section on Directive Principles rather than made
an integral feature of our Fundamental Rights”? Give reasons for
your answer. What do you think are the possible reasons for putting
socio-economic rights in the section on Directive Principles?
11. How did your school celebrate the Constitution Day on November
26th?
REQUEST FOR FEEDBACK
How did you like this textbook? What was your experience in reading or using this?
What were the difficulties you faced? What changes would you like to see in the next
version of this book?
Write to us on all these and any other matter related to this textbook. You could be a
teacher, a parent, a student or just a general reader. We value any and every feedback.
Please write to:
Coordinator (Political Science)
Department of Education in Social Sciences (DESS)
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016.
242
Rationalised 2023-24