--- PAGE 031 ---
Coins

Although a large number of coins and inscriptions have been found on the
surface, many of them have been unearthed by digging. The study of coins is
called numismatics. Ancient Indian currency was not issued in the form of paper,
as is the case nowadays, but as metal coins. Ancient coins were made of metal—
copper, silver, gold, and lead. Coin moulds made of burnt clay have been
discovered in large numbers. Most of them relate to the Kushan period, that is,
the first three Christian centuries. The use of such moulds in the post-Gupta
period virtually disappeared.

As there was nothing like the modern banking system in ancient times,
people stored money in earthenware and also in brass vessels, and maintained
them as precious hoards on which they could fall back in time of need. Many of
these hoards, containing not only Indian coins but also those minted abroad, such
as in the Roman empire, have been discovered in different parts of India. They
are preserved mostly in museums in Kolkata, Patna, Lucknow, Delhi, Jaipur,
Mumbai, and Chennai. There are many Indian coins in the museums of Nepal,
Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan. As Britain ruled over India for a long
time, British officials succeeded in transferring many of the Indian coins to
private and public collections in Britain. Coins of the major dynasties have been
catalogued and published. We have catalogues of the coins in the Indian
Museum at Kolkata, of Indian coins in the British Museum in London, and so
on. None the less, there are a large number of coins that have yet to be
catalogued and published.

Our earliest coins contain a few symbols, but the later coins depict the figures
of kings, and divinities, and also mention their names and dates. The areas where
they are found indicate the region of their circulation. This has enabled us to
reconstruct the history of several ruling dynasties, especially of the Indo-Greeks
who came to India from north Afghanistan and ruled here in the second and first
centuries BC.

As coins were used for various purposes such as donations, a mode of
payment, and a medium of exchange, they throw considerable light on economic
history. Some coins were issued by guilds of merchants and goldsmiths with the
permission of the rulers. This shows that crafts and commerce had become
important. Coins helped transactions on a large scale and contributed to trade.
The largest number of Indian coins date to the post-Maurya period. These were
made of lead, potin, copper, bronze, silver, and gold. The Guptas issued the
largest number of gold coins. All this indicates that trade and commerce


--- PAGE 032 ---
flourished, especially in post-Maurya and a good part of the Gupta period.
However, only a few coins belonging to the post-Gupta period have been found,
which indicates a decline of trade and commerce in that period.

Coins also portray kings and gods, and contain religious symbols and
legends, all of which throw light on the art and religion of the time.

Cowries were also used as coins, though their purchasing power was low.
They appear in substantial numbers in post-Gupta times, but may have been used
earlier.

Inscriptions

Far more important than coins are inscriptions. Their study is called epigraphy,
and the study of the old writing used in inscriptions and other old records is
called palaeography. Inscriptions were carved on seals, stone pillars, rocks,
copperplates, temple walls, wooden tablets, and bricks or images.

In India as a whole, the earliest inscriptions were recorded on stone.
However, in the early centuries of the Christian era, copperplate began to be
used for this purpose. Even then the practice of engraving inscriptions on stone
continued on a large scale in south India. We have also in that region a large
number of inscriptions recorded on the walls of temples to serve as permanent
records.

Like coins, inscriptions are preserved in various museums of the country, but
the largest number may be found in the office of the chief epigraphist at Mysore.
The earliest inscriptions were written in Prakrit in the third century Bc. Sanskrit
was adopted as an epigraphic medium in the second century AD and its use
became widespread in the fourth and fifth centuries, but even then Prakrit
continued to be used. Inscriptions began to be composed in regional languages in
the ninth and tenth centuries. Most inscriptions bearing on the history of the
Maurya, post-Maurya, and Gupta periods have been published in a series of
collections called Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, but not many inscriptions of
the post-Gupta period figure in such systematic compilations. In the case of
south India, topographical lists of inscriptions have been published. Still, over
50,000 inscriptions, mostly of south India, await publication.

The Harappan inscriptions, which await decipherment, seem to have been
written in a pictographic script in which ideas and objects were expressed in the
form of pictures. Most Ashokan inscriptions were engraved in the Brahmi script,
which was written from left to right, but some were also incised in the


--- PAGE 033 ---
Kharoshthi script which was written from right to left. However, the Brahmi
script prevailed virtually all over India except for the north-western part. Greek
and Aramaic scripts were employed in writing Ashokan inscriptions in Pakistan
and Afghanistan, but Brahmi continues to be the main script till the end of Gupta
times. An epigraphist can decipher most Indian inscriptions up to about the
seventh century if he has mastered Brahmi and its variations, but subsequently
we notice strong regional variations in this script.

Inscriptions found on the seals of Harappa belonging to about 2500 Bc are
considered symbolic by some scholars. For Indian history, the earliest
deciphered inscriptions are Iranian. They belong to the sixth—fifth centuries Bc
and are found in Iran. They appear in Old-Indo-Iranian and also in Semitic
languages in the cuneiform script. They speak of the Iranian conquest of the
Hindu or Sindhu area. Of course, in India the earliest deciphered are Ashokan
inscriptions. They are generally written in Brahmi script and Prakrit language in
the third century Bc. They throw light on Maurya history and Ashoka’s
achievements. In the fourteenth century AD two Ashokan pillar inscriptions were
found by Firoz Shah Tughlaq, one in Meerut and another at a place called Topra
in Haryana. He brought them to Delhi and asked the pandits of his empire to
decipher the inscriptions, but they failed to do so. The same difficulty was faced
by the British when in the last quarter of the eighteenth century they discovered
Ashokan inscriptions. These epigraphs were first deciphered in 1837 by James
Prinsep, a civil servant in the employ of the East India Company in Bengal.

We have various types of inscriptions. Some convey royal orders and
decisions regarding social, religious, and administrative matters to officials and
the people in general. Ashokan inscriptions belong to this category. Others are
votive records of the followers of Buddhism, Jainism, Vaishnavism, Shaivism,
and the like. They appear on pillars, tablets, temples, or images as marks of
devotion. Yet other types eulogize the attributes and achievements of kings and
conquerors, and ignore their defeats or weaknesses. To this category belongs the
Allahabad Pillar inscription of Samudragupta. Finally, we have many donative
records which refer especially to gifts of money, cattle, land, etc., mainly for
religious purposes, made not only by kings and princes but also by artisans and
merchants.

Inscriptions recording land grants, made mainly by chiefs and princes, are
very important for the study of the land system and administration in ancient
India. These were mostly engraved on copperplates. They record grants of lands,
revenues, and villages made to monks, priests, temples, monasteries, vassals, and
officials. They were written in all languages, including Prakrit, Sanskrit, Tamil,


--- PAGE 034 ---
and Telugu.

Literary Sources

Although the ancient Indians knew how to write as early as 2500 Bc, our most
ancient manuscripts are not older than the aD fourth century and are found in
Central Asia. In India, they were written on birch bark and palm leaves, but in
Central Asia, where the Prakrit language had spread from India, manuscripts
were also written on sheep leather and wooden tablets. These writings are called
inscriptions, but they are as good as manuscripts. When printing was not known,
manuscripts were very highly valued. Although old Sanskrit manuscripts are
found all over India, they mostly relate to south India, Kashmir, and Nepal.
Currently, inscriptions are largely preserved in museums, and manuscripts in
libraries.

Most ancient books contain religious themes. Hindu religious literature
includes the Vedas, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, the Puranas, and the
like. They throw considerable light on the social and cultural conditions of
ancient times, but it is difficult to use them in the context of time and place. The
Rig Veda may be assigned to c. 1500-1000 Bc, though such collections as the
Atharva Veda, Yajur Veda, the Brahmanas, Aranyakas, and the Upanishads date
roughly to 1000-500 Bc. Almost every Vedic text contains interpolations, which
generally appear at the beginning or the end and seldom in the middle. The Rig
Veda mainly comprises prayers, whereas the later Vedic texts comprise prayers
as well as rituals, magic, and mythological stories. However, the Upanishads
contain philosophical speculations.

In order to understand the Vedic texts it was necessary to study the Vedangas
or the limbs of the Veda. These supplements of the Veda comprised phonetics
(shiksha), ritual (kalpa), grammar (vyakarana), etymology (nirukta), metrics
(chhanda), and astronomy (jyotisha), and much literature grew around each of
these subjects. They were written in the form of precepts in prose. A precept was
called a sutra because of its brevity. The most famous example of this writing is
the grammar of Panini written around 450 Bc. While illustrating the rules of
grammar, Panini casts invaluable light on the society, economy, and culture of
his times.

The two epics and the major Puranas seem to have been finally compiled by
c. AD 400. Of the epics, the Mahabharata attributed to Vyasa is older and
possibly reflects the state of affairs from the tenth century Bc to AD fourth


--- PAGE 035 ---
century. Originally, it consisted of 8800 verses and was called Jaya or a
collection dealing with victory. These were increased to 24,000 and came to be
known as Bharata because it contains the stories of the descendants of one of the
earliest Vedic tribes called Bharata. The final compilation increased the verses to
100,000 which came to be known as the Mahabharata or the Shatasahasri
Samhita. It contains narrative, descriptive, and didactic material. The main
narrative which relates to the Kaurava—Pandava conflict may relate to the later
Vedic period, the descriptive portion might be of the post-Vedic period, and the
didactic portion generally relates to the post-Maurya and Gupta periods.
Similarly, the Ramayana of Valmiki originally consisted of 6000 verses which
were raised to 12,000, and eventually to 24,000. Although this epic appears to be
more unified than the Mahabharata, it too has its didactic parts which were
subsequently added. The Ramayana composition started in the fifth century BC.
After that, it passed through as many as five stages, and the fifth stage seems to
have been as late as the twelfth century AD. As a whole, the text seems to have
been composed later than the Mahabharata.

In the post-Vedic period we have a large corpus of ritual literature. Grand
public sacrifices to be made by princes and men of substance belonging to the
three higher varnas are set out in the Shrautasutras, which provide for several
ostentatious royal coronation ceremonies. Similarly, domestic rituals connected
with birth, naming, sacred thread investiture, marriage, funerals, etc. are
prescribed in the Grihyasutras. Both the Shrautasutras and the Grihyasutras
relate to c. 600-300 Bc. Mention may also be made of the Sulvasutras, which
prescribe various kinds of measurements for the construction of sacrificial altars.
They mark the beginnings of the study of geometry and mathematics.

The religious books of the Jainas and the Buddhists refer to historical persons
and incidents. The earliest Buddhist texts were written in Pali, which was spoken
in Magadha or south Bihar, and was basically a form of Prakrit. They were
finally compiled in the first century Bc in Sri Lanka, but the canonical portions
reflect the state of affairs in India in the age of the Buddha. They tell us not only
about the life of the Buddha but also about some of his royal contemporaries
who ruled over Magadha, north Bihar, and eastern UP. The most important and
interesting portion of the non-canonical literature is provided by the stories of
the previous births of Gautama Buddha. It was believed that before he was
actually born as Gautama, the Buddha passed through over 550 births, in many
cases in the form of animals. Each birth story is called a Jataka, which is a folk
tale. The Jatakas throw invaluable light on the social and economic conditions of
the period between the fifth and second century Bc. They also make incidental


--- PAGE 036 ---
references to political events in the age of the Buddha.

The Jaina texts were written in Prakrit and were eventually compiled in aD
sixth century in Valabhi in Gujarat. They, however, contain many passages that
help us to reconstruct the political history of eastern UP and Bihar in the age of
Mahavira. The Jaina texts refer repeatedly to trade and traders.

We also have a large body of secular literature. To this class belong the law-
books, called the Dharmasutras and Smritis, which, together with their
commentaries, are called Dharmashastras. The Dharmasutras were compiled in
500-200 Bc and the principal Smritis were codified in the first six centuries of
the Christian era. They prescribe the duties to be performed by the different
varnas as well as by kings and their officials. They set out the rules for marriage
together with the laws according to which property is to be held, sold, and
inherited. They also prescribe punishments for persons guilty of theft, assault,
murder, adultery, and the like.

An important law-book is the Arthashastra of Kautilya. The text is divided
into fifteen books, of which Books II and III may be regarded as being of an
earlier date, and seem to have been the work of different hands. This text was put
in its final form in the beginning of the Christian era, but its earliest portions
reflect the state of society and economy in the age of the Mauryas. It provides
rich material for the study of ancient Indian polity and economy.

Of the non-religious texts, the grammatical works are very important for
historical construction. They begin with the Astadhyayi of Panini. Panini lived in
the north-western part of the subcontinent. He is not mentioned in the Pali texts
which principally represent Bihar and UP. Panini is dated to around 450 Bc by
V.S. Agrawala, who has written about Panini’s India in both Hindi and English.
In his view, no other text provides as much information about the janapadas or
territorial states of pre-Mauryan times as Panini’s does. Patanjali’s commentary
on Panini, dated 150 Bc, supplies valuable information about post-Maurya times.

We also have the works of Bhasa, Sudraka, Kalidasa, and Banabhatta. Apart
from their literary value, they mirror the conditions of the times to which the
writers belonged. The works of Kalidasa comprise kavyas and dramas, the most
famous of which is Abhijnanashakuntalam. Besides being great creative
compositions, they provide us with glimpses of the social and cultural life of the
Guptas.

In addition to Sanskrit sources, we have some of the earliest Tamil texts in
the corpus of Sangam literature. This literature was produced over a period of
three to four centuries by poets who assembled in colleges patronized by chiefs
and kings. Such colleges were called Sangam, and the literature produced in


--- PAGE 037 ---
these assemblies was known as Sangam literature. The compilation of the corpus
is attributed to the first four Christian centuries, although they were really
completed by the sixth century.

The Sangam literature comprises about 30,000 lines of poetry arranged in
eight anthologies called Ettuttokai. The poems are collected in groups of
hundreds such as Purananuru (The Four Hundred of the Exterior). There are two
main goups Patinenkil Kannakku (The Eighteen Lower Collections) and
Pattuppattu (The Ten Songs). The former is generally assumed to be older than
the latter, and hence is considered to be of great historical importance. The
Sangam texts have several layers, but at present these cannot be established on
the basis of style and content, but, as shown later, they can be detected on the
basis of stages in social evolution.

The Sangam texts are different from the Vedic texts, particularly the Rig
Veda. They do not constitute religious literature. The short and long poems were
composed by numerous poets in praise of various heroes and heroines and are
thus secular in nature. They are not primitive songs, but literature of high quality.
Many poems mention a warrior or a chief or a king by name and describe in
detail his military exploits. The gifts made by him to bards and warriors are
celebrated. These poems may have been recited in the courts. They are compared
with the heroic poetry of the Homeric age, for they represent a heroic age of
warriors and battles. It is difficult to use these texts for historical purposes.
Perhaps the proper names, titles, dynasties, territories, wars, and the like
mentioned in the poems are partly real. Some of the Chera kings mentioned in
the Sangam texts also appear as donors in inscriptions of the first and second
centuries.

The Sangam texts refer to many settlements, including Kaveripattanam
whose flourishing existence has now been archaeologically corroborated. They
also speak of the Yavanas coming in their own vessels, purchasing pepper with
gold, and supplying wine and women slaves to the natives. This trade is known
not only from Latin and Greek writings but also from the archaeological record.
The Sangam literature is a major source of our information for the social,
economic, and political life of the people living in deltaic Tamil Nadu in the
early Christian centuries. What it says about trade and commerce is confirmed
by foreign accounts and archaeological finds.

Foreign Accounts


--- PAGE 038 ---
Indigenous literature can be supplemented by foreign accounts. To India came
Greek, Roman, and Chinese visitors, either as travellers or religious converts,
and they left behind accounts of the things that they saw. It is remarkable that
Alexander’s invasion finds no mention in Indian sources, and it is entirely on the
basis of the Greek sources that we have to reconstruct the history of his Indian
exploits.

The Greek writers mention Sandrokottas, a contemporary of Alexander the
Great, who invaded India in 326 Bc. Prince Sandrokottas is identified with
Chandragupta Maurya, whose date of accession is fixed at 322 Bc. This
identification has served as the sheet anchor in ancient Indian chronology. The
Indika of Megasthenes, who came to the court of Chandragupta Maurya, has
been preserved only in fragments quoted by subsequent classical writers. These
fragments, when read together, furnish valuable information not only about the
system of Maurya administration but also about social classes and economic
activities in the Maurya period. The Indika is not free from credulity and
exaggerations, which is true of many other ancient accounts.

Greek and Roman accounts of the first and second centuries mention many
Indian ports and enumerate items of trade between India and the Roman empire.
The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea and Ptolemy’s Geography, both written in
Greek, provide valuable data for the study of ancient geography and commerce.
The date ascribed to the first ranges between AD 80 and 115, whereas the second
is attributed to about AD 150. The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea, which was
written by an anonymous author, describes the Roman trade in the Red Sea,
Persian Gulf, and the Indian Ocean. Pliny’s Naturalis Historia, which relates to
the first century, was written in Latin, and tells us about trade between India and
Italy.

The last Graeco-Roman scholar who wrote on India was called Kosmos
Indikopleustes. He hailed from Alexandria, a centre of Hellenistic culture in
Egypt. Around 550 he wrote the Christian Topography which mentions
Christians in India and Sri Lanka and also refers to horse trade.

Of the Chinese travellers, mention may be made of Fa-hsien and Hsuan
Tsang. Both of them were Buddhists, and came to this country to visit the
Buddhist shrines and to study Buddhism. The first came in the beginning of the
fifth century and the second in the second quarter of the seventh century. Fa-
hsien describes the social, religious, and economic conditions in India in the age
of the Guptas, and Hsuan Tsang presents a similar account of India in the age of
Harsha.


--- PAGE 039 ---
Village Study

Relics of communal sharing in feasts, festivals, and pujas throw light on the
egalitarian character of ancient tribal society. Loyalty to the clan and caste
persists to this day. Survivals of rituals give us an idea of ancient sects and also
of the institutions of marriage and family. High caste people do not milk the cow
and never take to the plough. Their contempt for manual labour promotes
untouchability. Strong traces of inequality are not confined to castes alone but
also colour the relationship between man and woman. Till the 1930s even the
sati system prevailed in rural parts of Bihar. Thus social inequalities, which
prevail despite universal suffrage, indicate the nature of ancient Indian society.
Rural rituals and caste prejudices illustrate many of the Dharmashastra rules
governing our ancient polity and society.

Natural Sciences

The use of the findings of social sciences started about thirty years ago for the
historical construction of ancient India. Recently the use of natural sciences has
begun. Evidence from chemistry, geology, and biology has become relevant to
the study of ancient India.

Historical Sense

Ancient Indians are charged with a lack of sense of history. It is evident that they
did not write history in the manner it is done today, nor did they write it in the
way the Greeks did. We have a sort of history in the Puranas, which are eighteen
in number (eighteen was a conventional term). Though encyclopaedic in content,
the Puranas provide dynastic history up to the beginning of Gupta rule. They
mention the places where the events took place and sometimes discuss their
causes and effects. Statements about events are made in the future tense,
although they were recorded much after the events had occurred. The authors of
the Puranas were not unaware of the idea of change, which is the essence of
history. The Puranas speak of four ages called krita, treta, dvapara, and kali.
Each succeeding age is depicted as worse than the preceding one, and as one age
slides into the other, moral values and social institutions degenerate. The
importance of time and place, vital elements in history, is indicated. It is said that
dharma becomes adharma and vice versa in accordance with changes in time


--- PAGE 040 ---
and place. Several eras, according to which events were recorded, were started in
ancient India. Vikrama Samvat began in 57-8 Bc, Shaka Samvat in AD 78, and
the Gupta era in AD 319. Inscriptions record events in the context of time and
place. During the third century Bc Ashokan inscriptions demonstrate
considerable historical sense. Ashoka ruled for thirty-seven years. His
inscriptions record events that happened from the eighth to the twenty-seventh
regnal year. To date, events relating to only nine regnal years figure in the
inscriptions that have been discovered. Future discoveries may throw light on
events relating to the remaining years of his reign. Similarly, in the first century
Bc Kharavela of Kalinga records a large number of events in his life year by year
in the Hathigumpha inscription.

Indians display a considerable historical sense in biographical writings, a
good example of which is the composition of the Harshacharita by Banabhatta
in the seventh century. It is a semi-biographical work written in an ornate style
which became the despair of later imitators. It describes the early career of
Harshavardhana. Although highly exaggerated, it gives an excellent idea of court
life under Harsha and the social and religious life in his age. Later, several other
charitas or biographies were written. Sandhyakara Nandi’s Ramacharita (twelfth
century) narrates the story of the conflict between the Kaivarta peasants and the
Pala prince Ramapala, resulting in the latter’s victory. Bilhana’s
Vikramankadevacharita recounts the achievements of his patron, Vikramaditya
VI (1076-1127), the Chalukya king of Kalyan. Even the biographies (charita) of
some merchants of Gujarat were written in AD twelfth—thirteenth centuries.
Similar historical works may have been written in south India, but thus far only
one such account has been discovered. This is called Mushika Vamsha and was
written by Atula in the eleventh century. It is an account of the dynasty of the
Mushikas which ruled in northern Kerala. However, the best example of the
earliest historical writing is provided by the Rajatarangini or The Stream of
Kings written by Kalhana in the twelfth century. It is a string of biographies of
the kings of Kashmir, and can be considered to be the first work to possess
several characteristics of historical writing as it is understood today.

Constructing History

So far numerous sites, prehistoric, proto-historic, and historical, have been
excavated and explored, but the results do not find a place in the mainstream of
ancient Indian history. The stages of social evolution in India cannot be properly
comprehended without taking into account the results of prehistoric and proto-


--- PAGE 041 ---
historic archaeology, not to speak of historical archaeology. Although nearly 200
sites relating to the ancient historical period have been excavated, yet their
relevance to the study of the social, economic, and cultural trends in ancient
times has not been adequately discussed in survey studies. This needs to be done
both in the context of the rural and urban aspects of ancient India. So far the
significance of largely Buddhist and some brahmanical sites has been
highlighted, but religious history needs to be seen in relation to social and
economic developments.

Ancient history has so far been constructed principally on the basis of literary
sources, foreign and indigenous. Coins and inscriptions play some part, but the
texts receive greater weightage. Now new methods must be adopted. Historical
knowledge keeps growing. We have to be more critical about the dates and
contents of the texts. This may be done if we examine the texts in the context of
archaeological evidence. Initially, archaeologists were inspired by written texts,
and several sites mentioned in the brahmanical and Buddhist texts were
excavated. This immensely enriched historical information, though the digging
results did not always confirm the contents of the texts. Though full-length
reports of many excavated sites are yet to be published, it is advisable to
examine the texts in the context of archaeological findings. For the study of the
age of the Rig Veda we have to take into account of the Gandhara grave culture
in which the horse was used and the dead were cremated in the second
millennium Bc. We have to establish a co-relation between the later Vedic age,
on the one hand, and the Painted Grey Ware and other types of archaeological
finds, on the other. Similarly, early Pali texts have to be related to the Northern
Black Polished Ware (NBPW) archaeology. Besides, the information derived
from the Sangam texts needs to be co-related with that inferred from inscriptions
and early Megalithic archaeology in peninsular India.

Archaeological evidence should be considered far more important than the
long family trees found in the Puranas. The Puranic tradition could be used to
date Rama of Ayodhya to around 2000 Bc, but diggings and extensive
explorations in Ayodhya do not show any settlement around that date. Similarly,
although Krishna plays an important role in the Mahabharata, the earliest
inscriptions and sculptural pieces from Mathura between 200 Bc and AD 300 do
not attest to his presence. Given such difficulties, the ideas of an epic age based
on the Ramayana and the Mahabharata must be discarded, although in the past
it formed a chapter in most survey volumes on ancient India. Of course, several
stages of social evolution in both the Ramayana and the Mahabharata can be
detected. This is so because the epics do not belong to a single phase of social


--- PAGE 042 ---
evolution; we may recall that they have undergone several editions. Further, on
the basis of literary traditions and epigraphic material, Vardhamana Mahavira
and Gautama Buddha are generally dated to the sixth century Bc, but the cities
they visited are archaeologically not older than 400 Bc and therefore the
tradition-based dates of these great personalities need to be reconsidered.

On chronological and rational grounds, archaeology, inscriptions, and coins
are more important than texts. However, the grammatical works of Panini and
Patanjali have almost fixed dates, and they are comparatively free from myths
and legends and are therefore as important as coins, inscriptions, and the results
of excavations.

Many inscriptions have to date been dismissed on the ground that they are of
little historical value. ‘Historical value’ is taken to mean information necessary
to reconstruct political history. However, a royal inscription contains
exaggerations. The term hundreds of thousands seems to be a cliché in Ashokan
inscriptions. It is applied to people and animals, and raises doubts about the
number of the people killed in the Kalinga war and those brought to Pataliputra.
There are exaggerations too in the inscriptions of Samudragupta and King
Chandra. Despite these exaggerations, in comparison to Puranic traditions,
inscriptions are certainly more reliable. Thus, though the Puranas are used to
push back the origin of the Satavahanas, the inscriptions place it in the first
century BC. Inscriptions may indicate the regnal period of a king, his conquest,
and its extent, but they also reveal trends in the development of polity, society,
economy, and religion. This study, therefore, does not use inscriptions merely for
political or religious history. Epigraphic land grants are valued not for the family
trees and lists of conquest, but more importantly for the rise of new states and
changes in the social and agrarian structure, particularly in post-Gupta times.
Similarly, coins need to be used not only for the reconstruction of the history of
the Indo-Greeks, Shakas, Satavahanas, and Kushans, but also for the history of
trade and urban life.

In sum, a careful collection of the material derived from texts, coins,
inscriptions, archaeology, etc., is essential for historical reconstruction. We have
seen that this raises the problem of the relative importance of the sources. Thus,
coins, inscriptions, and archaeology are considered more important than
mythologies found in the epics and Puranas. Mythologies may support dominant
norms, validate social mores, and justify the privileges and disabilities of people
organized in castes and other social groups, but the events described in them
cannot be taken to be true. Past practices can also be explained with the help of
some ancient survivals in our own times. Familiarity with village life and the


--- PAGE 043 ---
insights derived from the study of primitive people are valuable assets in the
construction of ancient history. A sound historical reconstruction cannot ignore
developments in other ancient societies. A comparative view may remove the
obsession with the idea of the ‘rare’ or ‘unique’ in ancient India and may bring
out those trends that ancient India shares with the past societies of the other
countries. We may also use the results of human genetic research to learn about
Indian connection with peoples in other parts of the world. A scientific study of
heredity and generationwise inherited traits indicate ethnic mixture, dispersal of
population, and dissemination of culture.

Chronology

(BC)

3M Writing enters the Indus culture.

1500-1000 Rig Veda.

1000—500 Yajur Veda, Atharva Veda, the Brahmanas, Aranyakas,
and the Upanishads.

600-300 Shrautasutras and Grihyasutras.

6C Mahavira and the Buddha as per literature.

500-200 Dharmasutras.

450 Grammar of Panini.

5C Mahavira and the Buddha in the context of
archaeology.

326 Alexander’s invasion.

322 Accession of Chandragupta Maurya.

3C Decipherable writing in India.

57-8 Vikrama Samvat.

1C Hathigumpha inscription of Kharavela of Kalinga.

1C The earliest Pali Buddhist texts compiled in Sri Lanka.

(AD)

1C The Arthashastra of Kautilya finally compiled.

78 Start of Shaka Samvat.

80-115 The Periplus of the Erythrean Sea.

150 Ptolemy’s Geography.

319 Start of the Gupta era.


--- PAGE 044 ---
400

4C
oC
6C
7C
11C
11-12 C
12C

1837

Mahabharata, Ramayana, and major Puranas finally
compiled.

Earliest Indian manuscript found in Central Asia.
Fa-hsien comes to India.

The Prakrit Jaina texts finally compiled in Valabhi.
Hsuan Tsang’s visit. Harshacharita by Banabhatta.
Mushika Vamsha by Atula.
Vikramankadevacharita by Bilhana.

Ramacharita by Sandhyakara Nandi.
Rajatarangini by Kalhana.

Ashokan inscriptions first deciphered by James
Prinsep.


--- PAGE 045 ---
4

Geographical Setting

Emergence of India

The Indian subcontinent emerged as a separate geographical unit some 40
million years ago. Originally peninsular India, together with Antarctica, Africa,
Arabia, and South America, is considered to have been a part of the southern
super-continent called Gondwanaland. Earlier, Gondwanaland, together with the
northern super-continent Laurisia, comprising North America, Greenland,
Europe, and most of Asia north of the Himalayas, formed a single land mass
called Pangaea. Then Gondwanaland and Laurisia became separate units. Due to
tectonic movements different parts began to break away from Gondwanaland,
giving rise to separate geographical units including peninsular India. This
process began around 225 million years ago, and 40 million years ago India
became a separate unit. India moved north to join the Eurasian continent
sometime between 58 and 37 million years ago. In comparison to earlier dates,
India’s Himalayan boundary is very young. The uplift of the Himalayas took
place in four phases. The last and the final uplift took place in the Pleistocene
epoch, that is, in c. 2 million—12000 Bc. The Himalayas played an important part
in forming the Indo-Gangetic plains through its rivers which brought down
alluvial deposits in the Pleistocene epoch. The Indian subcontinent is as large in
area as Europe without Russia, with a total area of 4,202,500 sq. km. The
subcontinent is divided into five countries: India, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan,
and Pakistan. India has nearly 1000,000,000 people. It comprises twenty-eight
States and seven union territories, including the National Capital Territory of
Delhi. Some of its states are larger than many European countries.


--- PAGE 046 ---
The Role of the Monsoon

The Indian subcontinent is a well-defined geographical unit and is largely
situated in the tropical zone. The monsoon has played an important role in
India’s history. The south-west monsoon lasts between June and October and
brings rain in varying degrees to major parts of the country. In ancient times,
irrigation was not an important factor and rains played a crucial role in
agriculture. What is known today as the kharif crop in north India depended
primarily in ancient times on the south-west monsoon. In winter, the western
disturbances bring rains to northern India where wheat, barley, and the like
constitute the main crop. A part of the peninsular India, particularly the coastal
areas of Tamil Nadu, gets its major rainfall from the north-east monsoon from
mid-October to mid-December. Once the direction of the monsoon was
discovered some time around AD first century, traders sailed with the south-west
monsoon from western Asia and the Mediterranean area, and came to India and
Southeast Asia. They returned westward with the arrival of the north-east
monsoon. The discovery of the monsoon enabled India to carry on trade and
establish cultural contacts with western Asia and the Mediterranean area as well
as with Southeast Asia.

The Northern Boundaries

India is bounded by the Himalayas on the north and seas on the other three sides.
The Himalayas protect the country against the cold arctic winds blowing from
Siberia through Central Asia. This keeps the climate of northern India fairly
warm throughout the year. As the cold is not very severe in the plains, people do
not need heavy clothing and can live in the open for longer periods. Secondly,
the Himalayas are sufficiently high to shield India against invasions from the
north. This was specially true in pre-industrial times when communications were
very difficult. However, on the north-west, the Sulaiman mountain ranges, which
are a southward continuation of the Himalayas, could be crossed through the
Khyber, Bolan, and Gomal passes. The Sulaiman ranges are joined southward in
Baluchistan by the Kiarthar ranges which could be crossed through the Bolan
pass. Through these passes, two-way traffic between India and Central Asia has
continued from prehistoric times onwards. Various peoples from _ Iran,
Afghanistan, and Central Asia came to India as invaders and immigrants, and
vice versa. Even the Hindu Kush, the westward extension of the Himalayan
system, did not form an insuperable barrier between the Indus and the Oxus


--- PAGE 047 ---
systems. The passes facilitated trade and cultural contacts between India, on the
one hand, and Central Asia and West Asia, on the other.

Nestled in the Himalayas are the valleys of Kashmir and Nepal. Surrounded
on all sides by high mountains, the valley of Kashmir developed its own way of
life, but could be reached through several passes. Its winter compelled some of
its people to go to the plains and its summer attracted the shepherds from the
plains. Economic and cultural interaction between the plains and the valley was
continuing. The Pamir plateau did not prevent it from becoming a transmission
centre of Buddhism to the adjacent areas of Central Asia. The valley of Nepal,
smaller in size, is accessible to the people of the Gangetic plains through a
number of passes. Like Kashmir, it too became a centre for the cultivation of
Sanskrit; both these valleys became repositories of the largest number of
Sanskrit manuscripts.

The foothills of the Himalayas lent themselves to easier clearance than the
jungles on the alluvial soil of the plains. It was easy to cross rivers in these areas
because of their narrower width, and hence the earliest routes skirted along the
foothills of the Himalayas from the west to the east and vice versa. It was
therefore natural that the earliest agricultural settlements were founded in the
foothills and uplands, and trade routes followed the terai route.

Rivers

The heart of historical India is formed by its important rivers which are swollen
by the tropical monsoon rains. These consist of the plains of the Indus system,
the Indo-Gangetic divide, the Gangetic basin, and the Brahmaputra basin.
Proceeding from west to east we find the annual rainfall gradually increasing
from 25 cm to over 250 cm. The Indus vegetation based on 25 to 37 cm rainfall
and possibly the western Gangetic vegetation based on 37 to 60 cm rainfall
could be cleared with stone and copper implements and made fit for cultivation,
but this was not possible in the case of the mid-Gangetic vegetation based on 60
to 125 cm rainfall, and certainly not in the case of the lower Gangetic and
Brahmaputra vegetation based on 125 to 250 cm rainfall. The thickly forested
areas, which also had hard soil, could be cleared only with the aid of iron
implements which became available at a much later stage. Therefore, the natural
resources of the less rainy western area were utilized first, and large-scale human
settlements generally spread from west to east.

Once brought under cultivation, the Indus—Gangetic plains produced rich


--- PAGE 048 ---
crops and supported successive cultures. The Indus and the western Gangetic
plains principally produced wheat and barley, while the middle and lower
Gangetic plains largely produced rice, which also became the staple diet in
Gujarat and south of the Vindhyas. The Harappan culture originated and
flourished in the Indus Valley; the Vedic culture originated in the North-West
Frontier Province and the Punjab, and flourished in the western Gangetic basin;
the post-Vedic culture, mainly based on the use of iron, throve in the mid-
Gangetic basin. The lower Gangetic valley and north Bengal really came into
focus in the age of the Guptas; and finally, the Brahmaputra valley covering
Assam gained importance in early medieval times. Powerful rulers fought for the
possession of these plains and valleys, and the Ganga—Yamuna doab in particular
proved to be the most coveted and contested area.

The rivers served as arteries of commerce and communications. In ancient
times it was difficult to build roads, and so men and material were moved by
boat. The river routes, therefore, well-served military and commercial transport.
Evidently the stone pillars built by Ashoka were transported to different parts of
the country by boat. The importance of rivers for communications continued till
the days of the East India Company. Besides, the rivers inundated the
neighbouring areas and made them fertile; they also supplied water to the canals
cut from them. However, they caused heavy floods which periodically inundated
and destroyed towns and villages in the northern plains, and therefore many
ancient buildings were totally washed away and destroyed. Nevertheless,
important towns and capitals, such as Hastinapur, Prayag, Varanasi, and
Pataliputra were situated on the banks of the rivers. In modern times, urban sites
are located at railway and road junctions or in industrial or mining zones, but in
pre-industrial times towns were mostly situated on river banks and junctions.

Above all, it was the rivers that demarcated political and cultural boundaries,
which were also formed by mountains. Thus, in the eastern part of the Indian
peninsula, the area known as Kalinga, covering the coastal belt of Orissa, was
situated between the Mahanadi to the north and the Godavari to the south.
Similarly, Andhra Pradesh largely lay between the Godavari to the north and the
Krishna to the south. The deltaic plains formed by these two rivers at their
mouths shot into prominence by the beginning of the Christian era when they
became studded with towns and ports under the Satavahanas and _ their
successors. Finally, a major part of Tamil Nadu was situated between the
Krishna to the north and the Kaveri to the south. The Kaveri valley extended in
the south roughly to the Vaigai river, and in the north to the south Pennar river. It
formed a distinct geographical zone and became the seat of the Chola power a


--- PAGE 049 ---
little before the beginning of the Christian era. This area was different from
north Tamil Nadu, which consisted of uplands and came into prominence under
the Pallavas in the fourth-sixth centuries. The eastern part of the peninsula is
bounded by the Coromandel coast. Although the coastline is flanked by the
Eastern Ghats or steps, the ghats are not very high and have several openings
caused by the eastward flow of the rivers into the Bay of Bengal. Thus
communication between the eastern coast, on the one hand, and other parts of
Andhra and Tamil Nadu, on the other, was not difficult in ancient times. The port
cities of Arikamedu (modern name), Mahabalipuram, and Kaveripattanam were
situated on the Coromandel coast.

The western part of the peninsula does not have such distinct regional units.
We can, however, locate Maharashtra between the Tapi (or Damanganga) to the
north and the Bhima to the south. The area covered by Karnataka seems to have
been situated between the Bhima and the upper regions of the Krishna to the
north and the Tungabhadra to the south. For a long time, the Tungabhadra
provided a natural frontier between the warring powers to its north and south.
Just as the Chalukyas of Badami and the Rashtrakutas found it difficult to extend
their sway to the south of the Tungabhadra, so also the Pallavas and Cholas
found it difficult to extend their authority to its north. The coastal area in the
extreme south-west of the peninsula was covered by the modern state of Kerala.
The sea coast along the western part of the peninsula is called the Malabar coast.
Although the coast came to have several ports and small kingdoms,
communications between the coast and the adjoining areas of Maharashtra,
Karnataka, and Kerala were rendered difficult by the Western Ghats with
difficult passes to cross.

In between the Indus and the Gangetic systems to the north and the Vindhya
mountains to the south lies a vast stretch of land which is divided into two units
by the Aravalli mountains. The area west of the Aravallis is covered by the Thar
desert, although a part of Rajasthan also lies in this region. The vast expanse of
the desert made human settlements impossible in ancient times. However, a few
fertile oases scattered in the desert were settled, and from early times it has been
possible to cross the desert on camels. The south-eastern portion of Rajasthan
has been a comparatively fertile area since ancient times, and because of the
existence of the Khetri copper mines in this region, it came to be settled in the
Chalcolithic period.

Rajasthan shades off into the fertile plains of Gujarat, which are irrigated by
the waters of the Narmada, Tapi, Mahi, and Sabarmati. Situated at the end of the
north-western portion of the Deccan plateau, Gujarat includes the less rainy


--- PAGE 050 ---
Kathiawar peninsula. The coastal area of this state is fairly indented, and
therefore suitable for the establishment of several harbours. Therefore, since
ancient times, Gujarat has been famous for its coastal and foreign trade, and its
people have proved to be enterprising traders.

South of the Ganga—Yamuna doab, and bounded by the Chambal river to the
west, the Son river on the east, and the Vindhya mountains and the Narmada
river to the south, lies the state of Madhya Pradesh. Its northern part consists of
fertile plains. At present, MP is the largest state in the country, and can be
broadly divided into two parts, eastern and western. The eastern part, mostly
covered by the Vindhyas, became historically important in Gupta times in the
fourth and fifth centuries. However, western MP includes Malwa, which has
been the scene of historical activities from the sixth century BC onwards. Malwa
served as an important hinterland for the Gujarat ports, and many wars were
fought between the Deccan and the northern powers for the possession of Malwa
and Gujarat. The Shakas and the Satavahanas fought for the possession of this
key area in the first and second centuries, and the Marathas and the Rajputs in
the eighteenth century.

Natural Frontiers and Cultural Contacts

Each of the areas bounded by rivers, in some cases by mountains, and sometimes
with deltas and plateaus, constituted a political and administrative unit in which
different ruling dynasties rose and fell. On account of difficult communications
in a vast country and the defensibility of the natural frontiers, it was not easy for
the ruling class of one region to establish its control over all the other regions.
Gradually every region grew into a distinct cultural unit with its own style of life
and language. However, in northern and western India, most languages were
derived from the same Indo-Aryan stock, and hence had many elements in
common. What is also important is that virtually throughout India Sanskrit came
to be cultivated and understood.

The Vindhya mountains cut right across India from west to east and formed a
boundary between north and south India. The speakers of the Dravidian
languages lived south of the Vindhyas, and of the Indo-Aryan languages north of
them. In between lived tribal peoples in the Vindhya regions where they are still
found. The coastal areas along the Eastern and Western Ghats attracted settlers
and traders, and the south was engaged in flourishing foreign trade. The
Vindhyas do not constitute insurmountable barriers. In ancient times, despite the


--- PAGE 051 ---
difficulties of communications, people moved from north to south, and vice
versa. This led to a give and take in culture and language. Repeatedly, the
northern powers moved down to the south and the southern rulers moved up to
the north. So too did traders, missionaries, and cultural leaders, particularly the
brahmanas. This two-way traffic was continuing and helped the development of
a composite culture.

Although most regions had well-defined natural frontiers, not every region
possessed the resources necessary to sustain livelihoods in isolation. Therefore,
from prehistoric times onwards, the common need for metals and other resources
produced a network of interconnection between the different regions of the
country.

Minerals and Other Resources

The exploitation of the natural resources of India has an important bearing on its
history. Until human settlements developed on a large scale, given the heavy
rainfall, substantial areas of the Indian plains abounded in thickly forested areas
which provided game and supplied forage, fuel, and timber. In early times, when
bumt bricks were not much in use, timber houses and palisades were
constructed. They have been found in Pataliputra, India’s first important capital.
For construction and tool-making, all kinds of stones, including sandstone, are
available in India. The earliest human settlements are naturally found in the hilly
areas and in those river valleys that are situated between the hills. In historical
times, more temples and pieces of sculpture were made of stone in the Deccan
and south India than in the plains of northern India.

Copper is widely distributed in India. The richest copper mines are located in
the Chhotanagpur plateau, particularly in Singhbhum district. The copper belt is
about 130 km long and shows many signs of ancient workings. The earliest
people who used copper implements in Bihar exploited the copper mines of
Singhbhum and Hazaribagh, and many copper tools have been discovered in
south Bihar and parts of MP. Rich copper deposits are also to be found in the
Khetri mines in Rajasthan. These were tapped by both pre-Vedic and Vedic
people, who lived in areas now covered by Pakistan, Rajasthan, Gujarat, and the
Ganga—Yamuna doab. Numerous copper belts have been found in the Khetri
zone, and they seem to belong to a period anterior to c. 1000 Bc. As copper was
the first metal to be used, it is invested by Hindus with great purity, and utensils
made of it are used in religious rituals.


--- PAGE 052 ---
India today produces virtually no tin and this was scarce even in ancient
times. There is reason to believe that it was found in Rajasthan, south MP, and
Bihar, but the deposits have been virtually exhausted. As bronze is made by
mixing tin with copper, we do not find many bronze objects in prehistoric times.
The Harappans possibly procured some tin from Rajasthan but their main supply
came from Afghanistan, and even this was limited. Hence, although the Harappa
people used bronze tools, their number in comparison to those found in western
Asia, Egypt, and Crete is very small, and their tools contain a smaller percentage
of tin. Therefore, the major part of India had no proper Bronze Age, that is, an
age in which tools and implements were largely made of bronze. Starting with
the early centuries of the Christian era, India developed intimate connections
with Myanmar and the Malay peninsula which had an abundance of tin. This
made possible the use of bronze on a large scale, especially for statues of the
gods in south India. Tin for the Bihar bronzes of Pala times was possibly
obtained from Gaya, Hazaribagh, and Ranchi, for in Hazaribagh tin ores were
smelted till the middle of the last century.

India has been rich in iron ores, which are found particularly in south Bihar,
eastern MP, and Karnataka. Once the art of smelting using bellows (making
steel) was learnt, iron could be used for war, and more usefully to clear jungles
and for deep and regular cultivation. The formation of the first empire in
Magadha in the sixth to fourth centuries Bc owed much to the availability of iron
just south of this region. The large scale use of iron made Avanti, with its capital
at Ujjain, an important kingdom in the sixth and fifth centuries Bc. The
Satavahanas and the other dynasties that arose south of the Vindhyas may have
exploited the iron ores of Andhra and Karnataka.

Andhra possesses large lead resources, which explains the large numbers of
lead coins in the kingdom of the Satavahanas, who ruled over Andhra and
Maharashtra in the first two centuries of the Christian era. Lead may have also
been obtained from towns in Rajasthan.

The earliest coins, called punch-marked coins, were made largely of silver,
although this metal is rarely found in India. However, silver mines existed in
early times in the Kharagpur hills in Monghyr district, and they are mentioned as
late as the reign of Akbar. This accounts for the use of the white metal in the
earliest punch-marked coins found in Bihar.

Large quantities of gold dust, which were carried by river streams from the
Himalayas, were collected from the deposits of river channels in the plains.
These deposits are called placers. Gold is found in the Kolar goldfields of
Karnataka. A very early trace of gold has been found at a new Stone Age site of


--- PAGE 053 ---
around 1800 Bc in Karnataka. We have no indication of its exploitation till the
beginning of the second century AD. Kolar is considered to be the earliest capital
of the Gangas of south Karnataka. Much of the gold used in early times was
obtained from Central Asia and the Roman empire. Gold coins, therefore, came
into regular use during the first five centuries of the Christian era. As the local
resources were insufficient to maintain the gold currency over a long spell of
time, once the supply from outside stopped, gold coins became rare.

In ancient times, India also produced a variety of precious stones, including
pearls, especially in central India, Orissa, and south India. Precious stones
formed an important item of trade in articles which were eagerly sought for by
the Romans in the early centuries of the Christian era.

Chronology

(BP)

40 m years Emergence of the Indian subcontinent.

2 m—1200 The last phase of the uplift of the Himalayas.
(BC)

1800 Early trace of gold in Karnataka.

1000 Earliest date of the Khetri copper belts.

(AD)

1C Discovery of the direction of the monsoon.


--- PAGE 054 ---
s)

Ecology and Environment

In contemporary times, growing industrialization with explosive population
growth in several countries has highlighted the problem of protecting the natural
environs such as plants, animals, water resources, soils, and metals on a world
scale. The interaction between natural environments and the human population is
considered an important issue, and is described as the problem of ecology and
environment.

Ecology

Ecology as a term was coined in 1869, and is a relatively new science. Till recent
times it was treated as a branch of biology but is now considered an independent
subject. However, it is closely connected with biology. This subject deals with
interaction between various living organisms such as plants, animals, and human
beings. With the emergence of humans, the need for food, shelter, and transport
came to the forefront. In ancient times, humans lived on wild produce and
hunting birds and animals. However, in the industrial age, the relation of humans
with plants and animals has undergone a fundamental change, and now many
living organisms are preserved through human efforts.

Environment and Human Advance

Environment means surroundings, both natural and man-made. Natural elements
comprise soil, air, and water on which animals, plants, and people live. A man-
made environment signifies food, shelter, and transport facilities such as roads,


--- PAGE 055 ---
bridges, dams, and various types of structures used as dwellings. This
environment also includes rural, urban, socio-economic, cultural, and political
conditions.

The environment has a direct bearing on human efforts. But it would be
wrong to think of environmental determinism, for human efforts substantially
affect the natural surroundings. Thus, deforestation followed by the production
of cereals led to large settlements. On the other hand, changes in climate and
river courses led to the desertion of some settlements and migration of
populations. Though there have been no major climatic changes since 9000 Bc
on a world scale, there have been some important regional variations. Thus,
many scholars of ancient climate hold that extreme aridity and freezing
temperature prevailed in Central Asia in the third and the second millennia Bc.
Towards the turn of the second millennium Bc it was bitterly cold. This
compelled many people of south Central Asia to move towards the Indian
subcontinent in search of a less cold area. This migration is attributed to the
speakers of the Indo-Aryan language and the Rig Vedic people.

We cannot think of human advance in ancient times without the exploitation
of natural resources. The earliest settlements in India were generally founded
near lakes or rivers in hilly, plateau, or wooded areas where people could make
stone and bone tools to earn a livelihood. These tools were used for hunting
birds and animals, tilling the soil to grow plants and cereals, and also to prepare
the sites for setting up dwellings.

Surroundings and Settlements

It was almost impossible to found large agricultural settlements in the Gangetic
plains without deforestation and cultivation of the hard alluvial soil. This could
be effectively done only with the use of the iron axe and iron ploughshare from
about 500 Bc. For this, iron mines had to be discovered and the technology for
the extraction and the manufacture of iron artefacts had to be developed in
various parts of the country. The hard alluvial soil of the mid-Gangetic plains,
the red soil of the Vindhyan zone, and the black cotton soil of the Deccan and
western India needed iron shares for effective ploughing. Today, safeguarding
the natural environment is emphasized. However, despite deforestation, the doab
forests continued until the sixteenth to seventeenth centuries when wild animals
were hunted in this area. This ecological change was completed only in modern
times. In any case, human society progressed at the cost of plants and animals.
