--- PAGE 190 ---
BIOLOGY
(ii) organic agriculture; and
(iii) genetically engineered crop-based agriculture.
The Green Revolution succeeded in tripling the food supply but yet
it was not enough to feed the growing human population. Increased yields
have partly been due to the use of improved crop varieties, but mainly
due to the use of better management practices and use of agrochemicals
(fertilisers and pesticides). However, for farmers in the developing world,
agrochemicals are often too expensive, and further increases in yield with
existing varieties are not possible using conventional breeding.
As traditional breeding techniques failed to keep pace with demand and
to provide sufficiently fast and efficient systems for crop improvement,
another technology called tissue culture got developed. What does
tissue culture mean? It was learnt by scientists, during 1950s, that
whole plants could be regenerated from explants, i.e., any part of a
plant taken out and grown in a test tube, under sterile conditions in
special nutrient media. This capacity to generate a whole plant from
any cell/explant is called totipotency. You will learn how to accomplish
this in higher classes. It is important to stress here that the nutrient
medium must provide a carbon source such as sucrose and also
inorganic salts, vitamins, amino acids and growth regulators like auxins,
cytokinins etc. By application of these methods it is possible to achieve
propagation of a large number of plants in very short durations. This
method of producing thousands of plants through tissue culture is
called micro-propagation. Each of these plants will be genetically
identical to the original plant from which they were grown, i.e., they are
somaclones. Many important food plants like tomato, banana, apple,
etc., have been produced on commercial scale using this method. Try to
visit a tissue culture laboratory with your teacher to better understand
and appreciate the process.
Another important application of the method is the recovery of
healthy plants from diseased plants. Even if the plant is infected with a
virus, the meristem (apical and axillary) is free of virus. Hence, one
can remove the meristem and grow it in vitro to obtain virus-free plants.
Scientists have succeeded in culturing meristems of banana, sugarcane,
potato, etc.
178
Scientists have even isolated single cells from plants and after
digesting their cell walls have been able to isolate naked protoplasts
(surrounded by plasma membranes). Isolated protoplasts from two
different varieties of plants – each having a desirable character – can be
fused to get hybrid protoplasts, which can be further grown to form a
new plant. These hybrids are called somatic hybrids while the process
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 191 ---
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
is called somatic hybridisation. Imagine a situation when a protoplast
of tomato is fused with that of potato, and then they are grown – to form
new hybrid plants combining tomato and potato characteristics. Well,
this has been achieved – resulting in formation of pomato; unfortunately
this plant did not have all the desired combination of characteristics for
its commercial utilisation.
Is there any alternative path that our understanding of genetics can
show so that farmers may obtain maximum yield from their fields? Is
there a way to minimise the use of fertilisers and chemicals so that their
harmful effects on the environment are reduced? Use of genetically
modified crops is a possible solution.
Plants, bacteria, fungi and animals whose genes have been altered by
manipulation are called Genetically Modified Organisms (GMO). GM
plants have been useful in many ways. Genetic modification has:
(i) made crops more tolerant to abiotic stresses (cold, drought, salt, heat).
(ii) reduced reliance on chemical pesticides (pest-resistant crops).
(iii) helped to reduce post harvest losses.
(iv) increased efficiency of mineral usage by plants (this prevents early
exhaustion of fertility of soil).
(v) enhanced nutritional value of food, e.g., golden rice, i.e., Vitamin ‘A’
enriched rice.
In addition to these uses, GM has been used to create tailor-made
plants to supply alternative resources to industries, in the form of starches,
fuels and pharmaceuticals.
Some of the applications of biotechnology in agriculture that you will
study in detail are the production of pest resistant plants, which could
decrease the amount of pesticide used. Bt toxin is produced by a
bacterium called Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt for short). Bt toxin gene has
been cloned from the bacteria and been expressed in plants to provide
resistance to insects without the need for insecticides; in effect created a
bio-pesticide. Examples are Bt cotton, Bt corn, rice, tomato, potato and
soyabean etc.
Bt Cotton: Some strains of Bacillus thuringiensis produce proteins that
kill certain insects such as lepidopterans (tobacco budworm, armyworm),
coleopterans (beetles) and dipterans (flies, mosquitoes). B. thuringiensis
forms protein crystals during a particular phase of their growth. These
crystals contain a toxic insecticidal protein. Why does this toxin not kill
179
the Bacillus? Actually, the Bt toxin protein exist as inactive protoxins but
once an insect ingest the inactive toxin, it is converted into an active form
of toxin due to the alkaline pH of the gut which solubilise the crystals.
The activated toxin binds to the surface of midgut epithelial cells and
create pores that cause cell swelling and lysis and eventually cause death
of the insect.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 192 ---
BIOLOGY
Specific Bt toxin genes were isolated from Bacillus thuringiensis and
incorporated into the several crop plants such as cotton (Figure 10.1).
The choice of genes depends upon the crop and the targeted pest, as
most Bt toxins are insect-group specific. The toxin is coded by a gene
cryIAc named cry. There are a number of them, for example, the proteins
encoded by the genes cryIAc and cryIIAb control the cotton bollworms,
that of cryIAb controls corn borer.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.1 Cotton boll: (a) destroyed by bollworms; (b) a fully mature
cotton boll
Pest Resistant Plants: Several nematodes parasitise a wide variety of
plants and animals including human beings. A nematode Meloidegyne
incognitia infects the roots of tobacco plants and causes a great reduction
in yield. A novel strategy was adopted to prevent this infestation which
was based on the process of RNA interference (RNAi). RNAi takes place
in all eukaryotic organisms as a method of cellular defense. This method
involves silencing of a specific mRNA due to a complementary dsRNA
molecule that binds to and prevents translation of the mRNA (silencing).
The source of this complementary RNA could be from an infection by
viruses having RNA genomes or mobile genetic elements (transposons)
that replicate via an RNA intermediate.
Using Agrobacterium vectors, nematode-specific genes were
introduced into the host plant (Figure 10.2). The introduction of DNA
180
was such that it produced both sense and anti-sense RNA in the host
cells. These two RNA’s being complementary to each other formed a double
stranded (dsRNA) that initiated RNAi and thus, silenced the specific mRNA
of the nematode. The consequence was that the parasite could not survive
in a transgenic host expressing specific interfering RNA. The transgenic
plant therefore got itself protected from the parasite (Figure 10.2).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 193 ---
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
(a) (b)
Figure 10.2 Host plant-generated dsRNA triggers protection against nematode infestation:
(a) Roots of a typical control plants; (b) transgenic plant roots 5 days after deliberate
infection of nematode but protected through novel mechanism.
10.2 B A M
IOTECHNOLOGICAL PPLICATIONS IN EDICINE
The recombinant DNA technological processes have made immense impact
in the area of healthcare by enabling mass production of safe and more
effective therapeutic drugs. Further, the recombinant therapeutics do not
induce unwanted immunological responses as is common in case of
similar products isolated from non-human sources. At present, about
30 recombinant therapeutics have been approved for human-use the
world over. In India, 12 of these are presently being marketed.
10.2.1 Genetically Engineered Insulin
Management of adult-onset diabetes is possible by taking insulin at
regular time intervals. What would a diabetic patient do if enough human-
insulin was not available? If you discuss this, you would soon realise
that one would have to isolate and use insulin from other animals. Would
the insulin isolated from other animals be just as effective as that
secreted by the human body itself and would it not elicit an immune
response in the human body? Now, imagine if bacterium were available
that could make human insulin. Suddenly the whole process becomes
so simple. You can easily grow a large quantity of the bacteria and make
as much insulin as you need.
Think about whether insulin can be orally administered to diabetic
181
people or not. Why?
Insulin used for diabetes was earlier extracted from pancreas of
slaughtered cattle and pigs. Insulin from an animal source, though caused
some patients to develop allergy or other types of reactions to the foreign
protein. Insulin consists of two short polypeptide chains: chain A
and chain B, that are linked together by disulphide bridges (Figure 10.3).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 194 ---
BIOLOGY
In mammals, including humans, insulin is synthesised
as a pro-hormone (like a pro-enzyme, the pro-hormone
also needs to be processed before it becomes a fully mature
and functional hormone) which contains an extra stretch
called the C peptide. This C peptide is not present in the
mature insulin and is removed during maturation into
insulin.The main challenge for production of insulin using
rDNA techniques was getting insulin assembled into a
mature form. In 1983, Eli Lilly an American company
prepared two DNA sequences corresponding to A and B,
chains of human insulin and introduced them in plasmids
of E. coli to produce insulin chains. Chains A and B were
Figure 10.3Maturation of
produced separately, extracted and combined by creating
pro-insulin into insulin
disulfide bonds to form human insulin.
(simplified)
10.2.2 Gene Therapy
If a person is born with a hereditary disease, can a corrective therapy
be taken for such a disease? Gene therapy is an attempt to do this.
Gene therapy is a collection of methods that allows correction of a
gene defect that has been diagnosed in a child/embryo. Here genes
are inserted into a person’s cells and tissues to treat a disease.
Correction of a genetic defect involves delivery of a normal gene into
the individual or embryo to take over the function of and compensate
for the non-functional gene.
The first clinical gene therapy was given in 1990 to a 4-year old girl
with adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency. This enzyme is crucial for
the immune system to function. The disorder is caused due to the deletion
of the gene for adenosine deaminase. In some children ADA deficiency
can be cured by bone marrow transplantation; in others it can be treated
by enzyme replacement therapy, in which functional ADA is given to the
patient by injection. But the problem with both of these approaches that
they are not completely curative. As a first step towards gene therapy,
lymphocytes from the blood of the patient are grown in a culture outside
the body. A functional ADA cDNA (using a retroviral vector) is then
introduced into these lymphocytes, which are subsequently returned to
the patient. However, as these cells are not immortal, the patient requires
periodic infusion of such genetically engineered lymphocytes. However, if
the gene isolate from marrow cells producing ADA is introduced into cells
182 at early embryonic stages, it could be a permanent cure.
10.2.3 Molecular Diagnosis
You know that for effective treatment of a disease, early diagnosis and
understanding its pathophysiology is very important. Using conventional
methods of diagnosis (serum and urine analysis, etc.) early detection is
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 195 ---
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
not possible. Recombinant DNA technology, Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR) and Enzyme Linked Immuno-sorbent Assay (ELISA) are some of
the techniques that serve the purpose of early diagnosis.
Presence of a pathogen (bacteria, viruses, etc.) is normally suspected
only when the pathogen has produced a disease symptom. By this time
the concentration of pathogen is already very high in the body. However,
very low concentration of a bacteria or virus (at a time when the symptoms
of the disease are not yet visible) can be detected by amplification of their
nucleic acid by PCR. Can you explain how PCR can detect very low
amounts of DNA? PCR is now routinely used to detect HIV in suspected
AIDS patients. It is being used to detect mutations in genes in suspected
cancer patients too. It is a powerful techqnique to identify many other
genetic disorders.
A single stranded DNA or RNA, tagged with a radioactive molecule
(probe) is allowed to hybridise to its complementary DNA in a clone of
cells followed by detection using autoradiography. The clone having the
mutated gene will hence not appear on the photographic film, because
the probe will not have complementarity with the mutated gene.
ELISA is based on the principle of antigen-antibody interaction.
Infection by pathogen can be detected by the presence of antigens
(proteins, glycoproteins, etc.) or by detecting the antibodies synthesised
against the pathogen.
10.3 T A
RANSGENIC NIMALS
Animals that have had their DNA manipulated to possess and express an
extra (foreign) gene are known as transgenic animals. Transgenic rats,
rabbits, pigs, sheep, cows and fish have been produced, although over
95 per cent of all existing transgenic animals are mice. Why are these
animals being produced? How can man benefit from such modifications?
Let us try and explore some of the common reasons:
(i) Normal physiology and development: Transgenic animals can
be specifically designed to allow the study of how genes are
regulated, and how they affect the normal functions of the body
and its development, e.g., study of complex factors involved in growth
such as insulin-like growth factor. By introducing genes from other
species that alter the formation of this factor and studying the
biological effects that result, information is obtained about the
biological role of the factor in the body.
(ii) Study of disease: Many transgenic animals are designed to increase 183
our understanding of how genes contribute to the development of
disease. These are specially made to serve as models for human
diseases so that investigation of new treatments for diseases is made
possible. Today transgenic models exist for many human diseases
such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer’s.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 196 ---
BIOLOGY
(iii) Biological products: Medicines required to treat certain human
diseases can contain biological products, but such products are
often expensive to make. Transgenic animals that produce useful
biological products can be created by the introduction of the portion
of DNA (or genes) which codes for a particular product such as
human protein (α-1-antitrypsin) used to treat emphysema. Similar
attempts are being made for treatment of phenylketonuria (PKU)
and cystic fibrosis. In 1997, the first transgenic cow, Rosie, produced
human protein-enriched milk (2.4 grams per litre). The milk
contained the human alpha-lactalbumin and was nutritionally a
more balanced product for human babies than natural cow-milk.
(iv) Vaccine safety: Transgenic mice are being developed for use in
testing the safety of vaccines before they are used on humans.
Transgenic mice are being used to test the safety of the polio vaccine.
If successful and found to be reliable, they could replace the use of
monkeys to test the safety of batches of the vaccine.
(v) Chemical safety testing: This is known as toxicity/safety testing.
The procedure is the same as that used for testing toxicity of drugs.
Transgenic animals are made that carry genes which make them more
sensitive to toxic substances than non-transgenic animals. They are
then exposed to the toxic substances and the effects studied. Toxicity
testing in such animals will allow us to obtain results in less time.
10.4 ETHICAL ISSUES
The manipulation of living organisms by the human race cannot go on
any further, without regulation. Some ethical standards are required to
evaluate the morality of all human activities that might help or harm living
organisms.
Going beyond the morality of such issues, the biological significance
of such things is also important. Genetic modification of organisms can
have unpredicatable results when such organisms are introduced into
the ecosystem.
Therefore, the Indian Government has set up organisations such as
GEAC (Genetic Engineering Approval Committee), which will make
decisions regarding the validity of GM research and the safety of
introducing GM-organisms for public services.
The modification/usage of living organisms for public services (as food
and medicine sources, for example) has also created problems with patents
184
granted for the same.
There is growing public anger that certain companies are being
granted patents for products and technologies that make use of the
genetic materials, plants and other biological resources that have long
been identified, developed and used by farmers and indigenous people
of a specific region/country.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 197 ---
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
Rice is an important food grain, the presence of which goes back
thousands of years in Asia’s agricultural history. There are an estimated
200,000 varieties of rice in India alone. The diversity of rice in India is
one of the richest in the world. Basmati rice is distinct for its unique
aroma and flavour and 27 documented varieties of Basmati are grown
in India. There is reference to Basmati in ancient texts, folklore and
poetry, as it has been grown for centuries. In 1997, an American
company got patent rights on Basmati rice through the US Patent and
Trademark Office. This allowed the company to sell a ‘new’ variety of
Basmati, in the US and abroad. This ‘new’ variety of Basmati had
actually been derived from Indian farmer’s varieties. Indian Basmati
was crossed with semi-dwarf varieties and claimed as an invention or
a novelty. The patent extends to functional equivalents, implying that
other people selling Basmati rice could be restricted by the patent.
Several attempts have also been made to patent uses, products and
processes based on Indian traditional herbal medicines, e.g., turmeric
neem. If we are not vigilant and we do not immediately counter these
patent applications, other countries/individuals may encash on our
rich legacy and we may not be able to do anything about it.
Biopiracy is the term used to refer to the use of bio-resources by
multinational companies and other organisations without proper
authorisation from the countries and people concerned without
compensatory payment.
Most of the industrialised nations are rich financially but poor in
biodiversity and traditional knowledge. In contrast the developing and
the underdeveloped world is rich in biodiversity and traditional
knowledge related to bio-resources. Traditional knowledge related to
bio-resources can be exploited to develop modern applications and
can also be used to save time, effort and expenditure during their
commercialisation.
There has been growing realisation of the injustice, inadequate
compensation and benefit sharing between developed and developing
countries. Therefore, some nations are developing laws to prevent such
unauthorised exploitation of their bio-resources and traditional
knowledge.
The Indian Parliament has recently cleared the second amendment
of the Indian Patents Bill, that takes such issues into consideration,
including patent terms emergency provisions and research and
development initiative. 185
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 198 ---
BIOLOGY
SUMMARY
Biotechnology has given to humans several useful products by using
microbes, plant, animals and their metabolic machinery. Techniques
of tissue culture and somatic hybridisation offer vast potential for
manipulation of plants in vitro to produce new varieties. Recombinant
DNA technology has made it possible to engineer microbes, plants
and animals such that they have novel capabilities. Genetically
Modified Organisms have been created by using methods other than
natural methods to transfer one or more genes from one organism to
another, generally using techniques such as recombinant DNA
technology.
GM plants have been useful in increasing crop yields, reduce post-
harvest losses and make crops more tolerant of stresses. There are
several GM crop plants with improved nutritional value of foods and
reduced the reliance on chemical pesticides (pest-resistant crops).
Recombinant DNA technological processes have made immense
impact in the area of healthcare by enabling mass production of safe
and more effective therapeutics. Since the recombinant therapeutics
are identical to human proteins, they do not induce unwanted
immunological responses and are free from risk of infection as was
observed in case of similar products isolated from non-human sources.
Human insulin is made in bacteria yet its structure is absolutely
identical to that of the natural molecule.
Transgenic animals are also used to understand how genes
contribute to the development of a disease by serving as models for
human diseases, such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis
and Alzheimer’s.
Gene therapy is the insertion of genes into an individual’s cells
and tissues to treat diseases especially hereditary diseases. It does
so by replacing a defective mutant allele with a functional one or
gene targeting which involves gene amplification. Viruses that attack
their hosts and introduce their genetic material into the host cell as
part of their replication cycle are used as vectors to transfer healthy
genes or more recently portions of genes.
The current interest in the manipulation of microbes, plants, and
animals has raised serious ethical questions.
EXERCISES
1. Which part of the plant is best suited for making virus-free plants and
why?
186
2. What is the major advantage of producing plants by micropropagation?
3. Find out what the various components of the medium used for
propagation of an explant in vitro are?
4. Crystals of Bt toxin produced by some bacteria do not kill the bacteria
themselves because –
(a) bacteria are resistant to the toxin
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 199 ---
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS APPLICATIONS
(b) toxin is immature;
(c) toxin is inactive;
(d) bacteria encloses toxin in a special sac.
5. What are transgenic bacteria? Illustrate using any one example.
6. Compare and contrast the advantages and disadvantages of production
of genetically modified crops.
7. What are Cry proteins? Name an organism that produce it. How has
man exploited this protein to his benefit?
8. What is gene therapy? Illustrate using the example of adenosine
deaminase (ADA) deficiency.
9. Digrammatically represent the experimental steps in cloning and
expressing an human gene (say the gene for growth hormone) into a
bacterium like E. coli?
10. Can you suggest a method to remove oil (hydrocarbon) from seeds based
on your understanding of rDNA technology and chemistry of oil?
11. Find out from internet what is golden rice.
12. Does our blood have proteases and nucleases?
13. Consult internet and find out how to make orally active protein
pharmaceutical. What is the major problem to be encountered?
187
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 200 ---
Diversity is not only a characteristic of living organisms but
Chapter 11
also of content in biology textbooks. Biology is presented either
Organisms and Populations
as botany, zoology and microbiology or as classical and
modern. The latter is a euphemism for molecular aspects of
Chapter 12
biology. Luckily we have many threads which weave the
Ecosystem
different areas of biological information into a unifying
principle. Ecology is one such thread which gives us a holistic
Chapter 13
perspective to biology. The essence of biological understanding
Biodiversity and Conservation
is to know how organisms, while remaining an individual,
interact with other organisms and physical habitats as a group
and hence behave like organised wholes, i.e., population,
community, ecosystem or even as the whole biosphere.
Ecology explains to us all this. A particular aspect of this is the
study of anthropogenic environmental degradation and the
socio-political issues it has raised. This unit describes as well as
takes a critical view of the above aspects.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 201 ---
Ramdeo Misra is revered as the Father of Ecology in India. Born on 26 August
1908, Ramdeo Misra obtained Ph.D in Ecology (1937) under Prof. W. H. Pearsall,
FRS, from Leeds University in UK. He established teaching and research in
ecology at the Department of Botany of the Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi. His research laid the foundations for understanding of tropical
communities and their succession, environmental responses of plant
populations and productivity and nutrient cycling in tropical forest and
grassland ecosystems. Misra formulated the first postgraduate course in
ecology in India. Over 50 scholars obtained Ph. D degree under his supervision
and moved on to other universities and research institutes to initiate ecology
teaching and research across the country.
He was honoured with the Fellowships of the Indian National Science
RAMDEO MISRA
Academy and World Academy of Arts and Science, and the prestigious Sanjay
(1908-1998)
Gandhi Award in Environment and Ecology. Due to his efforts, the
Government of India established the National Committee for Environmental
Planning and Coordination (1972) which, in later years, paved the way
for the establishment of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (1984).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 202 ---
CHAPTER 11
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
11.1 Populations
Our living world is fascinatingly diverse and amazingly
complex. We can try to understand its complexity by
investigating processes at various levels of biological
organisation–macromolecules, cells, tissues, organs,
individual organisms, population, communities,
ecosystems and biomes. At any level of biological
organisation we can ask two types of questions – for
example, when we hear the bulbul singing early morning
in the garden, we may ask – ‘How does the bird sing?’
Or, ‘Why does the bird sing ?’ The ‘how-type’ questions
seek the mechanism behind the process while the ‘why-
type’ questions seek the significance of the process. For
the first question in our example, the answer might be in
terms of the operation of the voice box and the vibrating
bone in the bird, whereas for the second question the
answer may lie in the bird’s need to communicate with its
mate during breeding season. When you observe nature
around you with a scientific frame of mind you will
certainly come up with many interesting questions of both
types - Why are night-blooming flowers generally white?
How does the bee know which flower has nectar? Why
does cactus have so many thorns? How does the chick
spures recognise her own mother?, and so on.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 203 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
You have already learnt in previous classes that Ecology is a subject
which studies the interactions among organisms and between the
organism and its physical (abiotic) environment.
Ecology is basically concerned with four levels of biological
organisation – organisms, populations, communities and biomes. In this
chapter we explore ecology at population levels.
11.1 P
OPULATIONS
11.1.1 Population Attributes
In nature, we rarely find isolated, single individuals of any species; majority
of them live in groups in a well defined geographical area, share or compete
for similar resources, potentially interbreed and thus constitute a
population. Although the term interbreeding implies sexual reproduction,
a group of individuals resulting from even asexual reproduction is also
generally considered a population for the purpose of ecological studies.
All the cormorants in a wetland, rats in an abandoned dwelling, teakwood
trees in a forest tract, bacteria in a culture plate and lotus plants in a
pond, are some examples of a population. In earlier chapters you have
learnt that although an individual organism is the one that has to cope
with a changed environment, it is at the population level that natural
selection operates to evolve the desired traits. Population ecology is,
therefore, an important area because it links ecology to population genetics
and evolution.
A population has certain attributes whereas, an individual organism
does not. An individual may have births and deaths, but a population has
birth rates and death rates. In a population these rates refer to per capita
births and deaths. The rates, hence, expressed are change in numbers
(increase or decrease) with respect to members of the population. Here is an
example. If in a pond there were 20 lotus plants last year and through
reproduction 8 new plants are added, taking the current population to 28,
we calculate the birth rate as 8/20 = 0.4 offspring per lotus per year. If 4
individuals in a laboratory population of 40 fruitflies died during a specified
time interval, say a week, the death rate in the population during that period
is 4/40 = 0.1 individuals per fruitfly per week.
Another attribute characteristic of a population is sex ratio. An
individual is either a male or a female but a population has a sex ratio
(e.g., 60 per cent of the population are females and 40 per cent males).
A population at any given time is composed of individuals of
191
different ages. If the age distribution (per cent individuals of a given
age or age group) is plotted for the population, the resulting structure
is called an age pyramid (Figure 11.1). For human population, the
age pyramids generally show age distribution of males and females in
a diagram. The shape of the pyramids reflects the growth status of
the population - (a) whether it is growing, (b) stable or (c) declining.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 204 ---
BIOLOGY
Figure 11.1 Representation of age pyramids for human population
The size of the population tells us a lot about its status in the habitat.
Whatever ecological processes we wish to investigate in a population, be
it the outcome of competition with another species, the impact of a
predator or the effect of a pesticide application, we always evaluate them
in terms of any change in the population size. The size, in nature, could
be as low as <10 (Siberian cranes at Bharatpur wetlands in any year) or
go into millions (Chlamydomonas in a pond). Population size, technically
called population density (designated as N), need not necessarily be
measured in numbers only. Although total number is generally the most
appropriate measure of population density, it is in some cases either
meaningless or difficult to determine. In an area, if there are 200 carrot
grass (Parthenium hysterophorus) plants but only a single huge banyan
tree with a large canopy, stating that the population density of banyan is
low relative to that of carrot grass amounts to underestimating the
enormous role of the Banyan in that community. In such cases, the per
cent cover or biomass is a more meaningful measure of the population
size. Total number is again not an easily adoptable measure if the
population is huge and counting is impossible or very time-consuming.
If you have a dense laboratory culture of bacteria in a petri dish what is
the best measure to report its density? Sometimes, for certain ecological
investigations, there is no need to know the absolute population densities;
relative densities serve the purpose equally well. For instance, the number
of fish caught per trap is good enough measure of its total population
density in the lake. We are mostly obliged to estimate population sizes
indirectly, without actually counting them or seeing them. The tiger census
in our national parks and tiger reserves is often based on pug marks and
fecal pellets.
11.1.2 Population Growth
The size of a population for any species is not a static parameter. It keeps
192
changing with time, depending on various factors including food
availability, predation pressure and adverse weather. In fact, it is these
changes in population density that give us some idea of what is happening
to the population – whether it is flourishing or declining. Whatever might
be the ultimate reasons, the density of a population in a given habitat
during a given period, fluctuates due to changes in four basic processes,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 205 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
two of which (natality and immigration) contribute to an increase in
population density and two (mortality and emigration) to a decrease.
(i) Natality refers to the number of births during a given period in the
population that are added to the initial density.
(ii) Mortality is the number of deaths in the population during a given
period.
(iii) Immigration is the number of individuals of the same species that
have come into the habitat from elsewhere during the time period
under consideration.
(iv) Emigration is the number of individuals of the population who
left the habitat and gone elsewhere during the time period under
consideration.
Figure 11.2
So, if N is the population density at time t, then its density at time t +1 is
N = N + [(B + I) – (D + E)]
t+1 t
You can see from the above equation (Fig. 11.2) that population
density will increase if the number of births plus the number of immigrants 193
(B + I) is more than the number of deaths plus the number of emigrants
(D + E). Under normal conditions, births and deaths are the most
important factors influencing population density, the other two factors
assuming importance only under special conditions. For instance, if a
new habitat is just being colonised, immigration may contribute more
significantly to population growth than birth rates.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 206 ---
BIOLOGY
Growth Models : Does the growth of a population with time show any
specific and predictable pattern? We have been concerned about unbridled
human population growth and problems created by it in our country
and it is therefore natural for us to be curious if different animal
populations in nature behave the same way or show some restraints on
growth. Perhaps we can learn a lesson or two from nature on how to
control population growth.
(i) Exponential growth: Resource (food and space) availability is
obviously essential for the unimpeded growth of a population.
Ideally, when resources in the habitat are unlimited, each species
has the ability to realise fully its innate potential to grow in number,
as Darwin observed while developing his theory of natural selection.
Then the population grows in an exponential or geometric fashion.
If in a population of size N, the birth rates (not total number but per
capita births) are represented as b and death rates (again, per capita
death rates) as d, then the increase or decrease in N during a unit
time period t (dN/dt) will be
dN/dt = (b – d) × N
Let (b–d) = r, then
dN/dt = rN
The r in this equation is called the ‘intrinsic rate of
natural increase’ and is a very important parameter
chosen for assessing impacts of any biotic or abiotic
factor on population growth.
To give you some idea about the magnitude of r
values, for the Norway rat the r is 0.015, and for
the flour beetle it is 0.12. In 1981, the r value for
human population in India was 0.0205. Find out
what the current r value is. For calculating it, you
need to know the birth rates and death rates.
The above equation describes the exponential or
geometric growth pattern of a population (Figure
Figure 11.3 Population growth curve
11.3) and results in a J-shaped curve when we plot
a when responses are not
N in relation to time. If you are familiar with basic
limiting the growth, plot is
exponential, calculus, you can derive the integral form of the
b when responses are limiting exponential growth equation as
the growth, plot is logistic,
N = N ert
K is carrying capacity t 0
where
194 N = Population density after time t
t
N = Population density at time zero
0
r = intrinsic rate of natural increase
e = the base of natural logarithms (2.71828)
Any species growing exponentially under unlimited resource
conditions can reach enormous population densities in a short time.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 207 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
Darwin showed how even a slow growing animal like elephant could
reach enormous numbers in the absence of checks. The following is
an anecdote popularly narrated to demonstrate dramatically how
fast a huge population could build up when growing exponentially.
The king and the minister sat for a chess game. The king, confident
of winning the game, was ready to accept any bet proposed by the
minister. The minister humbly said that if he won, he wanted only
some wheat grains, the quantity of which is to be calculated by
placing on the chess board one grain in Square 1, then two in Square
2, then four in Square 3, and eight in Square 4, and so on, doubling
each time the previous quantity of wheat on the next square until all the
64 squares were filled. The king accepted the seemingly silly bet and
started the game, but unluckily for him, the minister won. The king felt that
fulfilling the minister’s bet was so easy. He started with a single
grain on the first square and proceeded to fill the other squares
following minister’s suggested procedure, but by the time he covered
half the chess board, the king realised to his dismay that all the
wheat produced in his entire kingdom pooled together would still be
inadequate to cover all the 64 squares. Now think of a tiny
Paramecium starting with just one individual and through binary
fission, doubling in numbers every day, and imagine what a mind-
boggling population size it would reach in 64 days. (provided food
and space remain unlimited)
(ii) Logistic growth: No population of any species in nature has at its
disposal unlimited resources to permit exponential growth. This
leads to competition between individuals for limited resources.
Eventually, the ‘fittest’ individual will survive and reproduce. The
governments of many countries have also realised this fact and
introduced various restraints with a view to limit human population
growth. In nature, a given habitat has enough resources to support
a maximum possible number, beyond which no further growth is
possible. Let us call this limit as nature’s carrying capacity (K) for
that species in that habitat.
A population growing in a habitat with limited resources show
initially a lag phase, followed by phases of acceleration and
deceleration and finally an asymptote, when the population density
reaches the carrying capacity. A plot of N in relation to time (t)
results in a sigmoid curve. This type of population growth is called 195
Verhulst-Pearl Logistic Growth (Figure 11.3) and is described by
the following equation:
K −N
dN/dt = rN 
 K 
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 208 ---
BIOLOGY
Where N = Population density at time t
r = Intrinsic rate of natural increase
K = Carrying capacity
Since resources for growth for most animal populations are finite
and become limiting sooner or later, the logistic growth model is
considered a more realistic one.
Gather from Government Census data the population figures
for India for the last 100 years, plot them and check which growth
pattern is evident.
11.1.3 Life History Variation
Populations evolve to maximise their reproductive fitness, also called
Darwinian fitness (high r value), in the habitat in which they live. Under
a particular set of selection pressures, organisms evolve towards the most
efficient reproductive strategy. Some organisms breed only once in their
lifetime (Pacific salmon fish, bamboo) while others breed many times
during their lifetime (most birds and mammals). Some produce a large
number of small-sized offspring (Oysters, pelagic fishes) while others
produce a small number of large-sized offspring (birds, mammals). So,
which is desirable for maximising fitness? Ecologists suggest that life
history traits of organisms have evolved in relation to the constraints
imposed by the abiotic and biotic components of the habitat in which
they live. Evolution of life history traits in different species is currently an
important area of research being conducted by ecologists.
11.1.4 Population Interactions
Can you think of any natural habitat on earth that is inhabited just by a
single species? There is no such habitat and such a situation is even
inconceivable. For any species, the minimal requirement is one more
species on which it can feed. Even a plant species, which makes its own
food, cannot survive alone; it needs soil microbes to break down the organic
matter in soil and return the inorganic nutrients for absorption. And then,
how will the plant manage pollination without an animal agent? It is
obvious that in nature, animals, plants and microbes do not and cannot
live in isolation but interact in various ways to form a biological
community. Even in minimal communities, many interactive linkages
exist, although all may not be readily apparent.
196
Interspecific interactions arise from the interaction of populations of
two different species. They could be beneficial, detrimental or neutral
(neither harm nor benefit) to one of the species or both. Assigning a ‘+’
sign for beneficial interaction, ‘-’ sign for detrimental and 0 for neutral
interaction, let us look at all the possible outcomes of interspecific
interactions (Table11.1).
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 209 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
Table 11.1 : Population Interactions
Species A Species B Name of Interaction
+ + Mutualism
– – Competition
+ – Predation
+ – Parasitism
+ 0 Commensalism
– 0 Amensalism
Both the species benefit in mutualism and both lose in competition in
their interactions with each other. In both parasitism and predation only
one species benefits (parasite and predator, respectively) and the interaction
is detrimental to the other species (host and prey, respectively).
The interaction where one species is benefitted and the other is neither
benefitted nor harmed is called commensalism. In amensalism on
the other hand one species is harmed whereas the other is
unaffected. Predation, parasitism and commensalism share a common
characteristic– the interacting species live closely together.
(i) Predation: What would happen to all the energy fixed by
autotrophic organisms if the community has no animals to eat the
plants? You can think of predation as nature’s way of transferring
to higher trophic levels the energy fixed by plants. When we think
of predator and prey, most probably it is the tiger and the deer that
readily come to our mind, but a sparrow eating any seed is no less
a predator. Although animals eating plants are categorised
separately as herbivores, they are, in a broad ecological context,
not very different from predators.
Besides acting as ‘conduits’ for energy transfer across trophic
levels, predators play other important roles. They keep prey
populations under control. But for predators, prey species could
achieve very high population densities and cause ecosystem
instability. When certain exotic species are introduced into a
geographical area, they become invasive and start spreading fast
because the invaded land does not have its natural predators. The
197
prickly pear cactus introduced into Australia in the early 1920’s
caused havoc by spreading rapidly into millions of hectares of
rangeland. Finally, the invasive cactus was brought under control
only after a cactus-feeding predator (a moth) from its natural habitat
was introduced into the country. Biological control methods adopted
in agricultural pest control are based on the ability of the predator
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 210 ---
BIOLOGY
to regulate prey population. Predators also help in maintaining
species diversity in a community, by reducing the intensity of
competition among competing prey species. In the rocky intertidal
communities of the American Pacific Coast the starfish Pisaster is
an important predator. In a field experiment, when all the starfish
were removed from an enclosed intertidal area, more than 10 species
of invertebrates became extinct within a year, because of inter-
specific competition.
If a predator is too efficient and overexploits its prey, then the
prey might become extinct and following it, the predator will also
become extinct for lack of food. This is the reason why predators in
nature are ‘prudent’. Prey species have evolved various defenses to
lessen the impact of predation. Some species of insects and frogs
are cryptically-coloured (camouflaged) to avoid being detected easily
by the predator. Some are poisonous and therefore avoided by the
predators. The Monarch butterfly is highly distasteful to its predator
(bird) because of a special chemical present in its body.
Interestingly, the butterfly acquires this chemical during its
caterpillar stage by feeding on a poisonous weed.
For plants, herbivores are the predators. Nearly 25 per cent of
all insects are known to be phytophagous (feeding on plant sap
and other parts of plants). The problem is particularly severe for
plants because, unlike animals, they cannot run away from their
predators. Plants therefore have evolved an astonishing variety of
morphological and chemical defences against herbivores. Thorns
(Acacia, Cactus) are the most common morphological means of
defence. Many plants produce and store chemicals that make the
herbivore sick when they are eaten, inhibit feeding or digestion,
disrupt its reproduction or even kill it. You must have seen the
weed Calotropis growing in abandoned fields. The plant produces
highly poisonous cardiac glycosides and that is why you never see
any cattle or goats browsing on this plant. A wide variety of chemical
substances that we extract from plants on a commercial scale
(nicotine, caffeine, quinine, strychnine, opium, etc.,) are produced
by them actually as defences against grazers and browsers.
(ii) Competition: When Darwin spoke of the struggle for existence and
survival of the fittest in nature, he was convinced that interspecific
competition is a potent force in organic evolution. It is generally
198
believed that competition occurs when closely related species
compete for the same resources that are limiting, but this is not
entirely true. Firstly, totally unrelated species could also compete
for the same resource. For instance, in some shallow South
American lakes, visiting flamingoes and resident fishes compete for
their common food, the zooplankton in the lake. Secondly,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 211 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
resources need not be limiting for competition to occur; in
interference competition, the feeding efficiency of one species might
be reduced due to the interfering and inhibitory presence of the
other species, even if resources (food and space) are abundant.
Therefore, competition is best defined as a process in which the
fitness of one species (measured in terms of its ‘r’ the intrinsic rate
of increase) is significantly lower in the presence of another species.
It is relatively easy to demonstrate in laboratory experiments, as
Gause and other experimental ecologists did, when resources are
limited the competitively superior species will eventually eliminate
the other species, but evidence for such competitive exclusion
occurring in nature is not always conclusive. Strong and persuasive
circumstantial evidence does exist however in some cases. The
Abingdon tortoise in Galapagos Islands became extinct within a
decade after goats were introduced on the island, apparently due
to the greater browsing efficiency of the goats. Another evidence for
the occurrence of competition in nature comes from what is called
‘competitive release’. A species whose distribution is restricted to a
small geographical area because of the presence of a competitively
superior species, is found to expand its distributional range
dramatically when the competing species is experimentally removed.
Connell’s elegant field experiments showed that on the rocky sea
coasts of Scotland, the larger and competitively superior barnacle
Balanus dominates the intertidal area, and excludes the smaller
barnacle Chathamalus from that zone. In general, herbivores and
plants appear to be more adversely affected by competition than
carnivores.
Gause’s ‘Competitive Exclusion Principle’ states that two closely
related species competing for the same resources cannot co-exist
indefinitely and the competitively inferior one will be eliminated
eventually. This may be true if resources are limiting, but not
otherwise. More recent studies do not support such gross
generalisations about competition. While they do not rule out the
occurrence of interspecific competition in nature, they point out
that species facing competition might evolve mechanisms that
promote co-existence rather than exclusion. One such mechanism
is ‘resource partitioning’. If two species compete for the same
resource, they could avoid competition by choosing, for instance,
199
different times for feeding or different foraging patterns. MacArthur
showed that five closely related species of warblers living on the
same tree were able to avoid competition and co-exist due to
behavioural differences in their foraging activities.
(iii) Parasitism: Considering that the parasitic mode of life ensures
free lodging and meals, it is not surprising that parasitism has
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 212 ---
BIOLOGY
evolved in so many taxonomic groups from plants to higher
vertebrates. Many parasites have evolved to be host-specific (they
can parasitise only a single species of host) in such a way that
both host and the parasite tend to co-evolve; that is, if the host
evolves special mechanisms for rejecting or resisting the parasite,
the parasite has to evolve mechanisms to counteract and neutralise
them, in order to be successful with the same host species. In
accordance with their life styles, parasites evolved special
adaptations such as the loss of unnecessary sense organs, presence
of adhesive organs or suckers to cling on to the host, loss of
digestive system and high reproductive capacity. The life cycles of
parasites are often complex, involving one or two intermediate hosts
or vectors to facilitate parasitisation of its primary host. The human
liver fluke (a trematode parasite) depends on two intermediate
hosts (a snail and a fish) to complete its life cycle. The malarial
parasite needs a vector (mosquito) to spread to other hosts.
Majority of the parasites harm the host; they may reduce the
survival, growth and reproduction of the host and reduce its
population density. They might render the host more vulnerable
to predation by making it physically weak. Do you believe that
an ideal parasite should be able to thrive within the host without
harming it? Then why didn’t natural selection lead to the
evolution of such totally harmless parasites?
Parasites that feed on the external surface of the host organism
are called ectoparasites. The most familiar examples of this group
are the lice on humans and ticks on dogs. Many marine fish are
infested with ectoparasitic copepods. Cuscuta, a parasitic plant
that is commonly found growing on hedge plants, has lost its
chlorophyll and leaves in the course of evolution. It derives its
nutrition from the host plant which it parasitises. The female
mosquito is not considered a parasite, although it needs our blood
for reproduction. Can you explain why?
In contrast, endoparasites are those that live inside the host
body at different sites (liver, kidney, lungs, red blood cells, etc.).
The life cycles of endoparasites are more complex because of their
extreme specialisation. Their morphological and anatomical
features are greatly simplified while emphasising their reproductive
200
potential.
Brood parasitism in birds is a fascinating example of
parasitism in which the parasitic bird lays its eggs in the nest of
its host and lets the host incubate them. During the course of
evolution, the eggs of the parasitic bird have evolved to resemble
the host’s egg in size and colour to reduce the chances of the host
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 213 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
bird detecting the foreign eggs and ejecting them from the nest. Try
to follow the movements of the cuckoo (koel) and the crow in your
neighborhood park during the breeding season (spring to summer)
and watch brood parasitism in action.
(iv) Commensalism: This is the interaction in which one species benefits
and the other is neither harmed nor benefited. An orchid growing
as an epiphyte on a mango branch, and barnacles growing on the
back of a whale benefit while neither the mango tree nor the whale
derives any apparent benefit. The cattle egret and grazing cattle in
close association, a sight you are most likely to catch if you live in
farmed rural areas, is a classic example of commensalism. The
egrets always forage close to where the cattle are grazing because
the cattle, as they move, stir up and flush out insects from the
vegetation that otherwise might be difficult for the egrets to find
and catch. Another example of commensalism is the interaction
between sea anemone that has stinging tentacles and the clown
fish that lives among them. The fish gets protection from predators
which stay away from the stinging tentacles. The anemone does not
appear to derive any benefit by hosting the clown fish.
(a) (b)
Figure 11.4 Mutual relationship between fig tree and wasp: (a) Fig flower is pollinated
by wasp; (b) Wasp laying eggs in a fig fruit
(v) Mutualism: This interaction confers benefits on both the interacting
201
species. Lichens represent an intimate mutualistic relationship
between a fungus and photosynthesising algae or cyanobacteria.
Similarly, the mycorrhizae are associations between fungi and the
roots of higher plants. The fungi help the plant in the absorption of
essential nutrients from the soil while the plant in turn provides the
fungi with energy-yielding carbohydrates.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 214 ---
BIOLOGY
The most spectacular and evolutionarily fascinating examples
of mutualism are found in plant-animal relationships. Plants need
the help of animals for pollinating their flowers and dispersing their
seeds. Animals obviously have to be paid ‘fees’ for the services that
plants expect from them. Plants offer rewards or fees in the form of
pollen and nectar for pollinators and juicy and nutritious fruits for
seed dispersers. But the mutually beneficial system should also
be safeguarded against ‘cheaters’, for example, animals that try to
steal nectar without aiding in pollination. Now you can see why
plant-animal interactions often involve co-evolution of the
mutualists, that is, the evolutions of the flower and its pollinator
species are tightly linked with one another. In many species of fig
trees, there is a tight one-to-one relationship with the pollinator
species of wasp (Figure 11.4). It means that a given fig species can
be pollinated only by its ‘partner’ wasp species and no other species.
The female wasp uses the fruit not only as an oviposition (egg-laying)
site but uses the developing seeds within the fruit for nourishing
its larvae. The wasp pollinates the fig inflorescence while
searching for suitable egg-laying sites. In return for the
favour of pollination the fig offers the wasp some of its
developing seeds, as food for the developing wasp larvae.
Orchids show a bewildering diversity of floral
patterns many of which have evolved to attract the right
pollinator insect (bees and bumblebees) and ensure
guaranteed pollination by it (Figure 11.5). Not all
orchids offer rewards. The Mediterranean orchid Ophrys
employs ‘sexual deceit’ to get pollination done by a
species of bee. One petal of its flower bears an uncanny
resemblance to the female of the bee in size, colour and
markings. The male bee is attracted to what it perceives
as a female, ‘pseudocopulates’ with the flower, and
during that process is dusted with pollen from the
flower. When this same bee ‘pseudocopulates’ with
Figure 11.5 Showing bee-a pollinator
another flower, it transfers pollen to it and thus,
on orchid flower
pollinates the flower. Here you can see how co-evolution
operates. If the female bee’s colour patterns change even slightly for any
reason during evolution, pollination success will be reduced unless the
orchid flower co-evolves to maintain the resemblance of its petal to the
202
female bee.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 215 ---
ORGANISMS AND POPULATIONS
SUMMARY
As a branch of biology, Ecology is the study of the relationships of
living organisms with the abiotic (physico-chemical factors) and biotic
components (other species) of their environment. It is concerned
with four levels of biological organisation-organisms, populations,
communities and biomes.
Evolutionary changes through natural selection take place at
the population level and hence, population ecology is an important
area of ecology. A population is a group of individuals of a given
species sharing or competing for similar resources in a defined
geographical area. Populations have attributes that individual
organisms do not- birth rates and death rates, sex ratio and age
distribution. The proportion of different age groups of males and
females in a population is often presented graphically as age
pyramid; its shape indicates whether a population is stationary,
growing or declining.
Ecological effects of any factors on a population are generally
reflected in its size (population density), which may be expressed in
different ways (numbers, biomass, per cent cover, etc.,) depending
on the species.
Populations grow through births and immigration and decline
through deaths and emigration. When resources are unlimited,
the growth is usually exponential but when resources become
progressively limiting, the growth pattern turns logistic. In either
case, growth is ultimately limited by the carrying capacity of the
environment. The intrinsic rate of natural increase (r) is a measure
of the inherent potential of a population to grow.
In nature populations of different species in a habitat do not live
in isolation but interact in many ways. Depending on the outcome,
these interactions between two species are classified as competition
(both species suffer), predation and parasitism (one benefits and
the other suffers), commensalism (one benefits and the other is
unaffected), amensalism (one is harmed, other unaffected) and
mutualism (both species benefit). Predation is a very important
process through which trophic energy transfer is facilitated and
some predators help in controlling their prey populations. Plants
have evolved diverse morphological and chemical defenses against
herbivory. In competition, it is presumed that the superior
competitor eliminates the inferior one (the Competitive Exclusion
Principle), but many closely related species have evolved various
mechanisms which facilitate their co-existence. Some of the most 203
fascinating cases of mutualism in nature are seen in plant-pollinator
interactions.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 216 ---
BIOLOGY
EXERCISES
1. List the attributes that populations possess but not individuals.
2. If a population growing exponentially double in size in 3 years, what is
the intrinsic rate of increase (r) of the population?
3. Name important defence mechanisms in plants against herbivory.
4. An orchid plant is growing on the branch of mango tree. How do you
describe this interaction between the orchid and the mango tree?
5. What is the ecological principle behind the biological control method of
managing with pest insects?
6. Define population and community.
7. Define the following terms and give one example for each:
(a) Commensalism
(b) Parasitism
(c) Camouflage
(d) Mutualism
(e) Interspecific competition
8. With the help of suitable diagram describe the logistic population
growth curve.
9. Select the statement which explains best parasitism.
(a) One organism is benefited.
(b) Both the organisms are benefited.
(c) One organism is benefited, other is not affected.
(d) One organism is benefited, other is affected.
10. List any three important characteristics of a population and explain.
204
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 217 ---
CHAPTER 12
ECOSYSTEM
12.1 Ecosystem–Structure
and Function
An ecosystem can be visualised as a functional unit of
12.2.Productivity nature, where living organisms interact among themselves
and also with the surrounding physical environment.
12.3 Decomposition Ecosystem varies greatly in size from a small pond to a
large forest or a sea. Many ecologists regard the entire
12.4 Energy Flow
biosphere as a global ecosystem, as a composite of all
local ecosystems on Earth. Since this system is too much
12.5 Ecological Pyramids
big and complex to be studied at one time, it is convenient
to divide it into two basic categories, namely the
terrestrial and the aquatic. Forest, grassland and desert
are some examples of terrestrial ecosystems; pond, lake,
wetland, river and estuary are some examples of aquatic
ecosystems. Crop fields and an aquarium may also be
considered as man-made ecosystems.
We will first look at the structure of the ecosystem, in
order to appreciate the input (productivity), transfer of
energy (food chain/web, nutrient cycling) and the output
(degradation and energy loss). We will also look at the
relationships – cycles, chains, webs – that are created as
a result of these energy flows within the system and their
inter- relationship.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 218 ---
BIOLOGY
12.1 E – S F
COSYSTEM TRUCTURE AND UNCTION
In earlier classes, you have looked at the various components of the
environment- abiotic and biotic. You studied how the individual biotic
and abiotic factors affected each other and their surrounding. Let us look
at these components in a more integrated manner and see how the flow of
energy takes place within these components of the ecosystem.
Interaction of biotic and abiotic components result in a physical
structure that is characteristic for each type of ecosystem. Identification
and enumeration of plant and animal species of an ecosystem gives its
species composition. Vertical distribution of different species occupying
different levels is called stratification. For example, trees occupy top
vertical strata or layer of a forest, shrubs the second and herbs and grasses
occupy the bottom layers.
The components of the ecosystem are seen to function as a unit when
you consider the following aspects:
(i) Productivity;
(ii) Decomposition;
(iii) Energy flow; and
(iv) Nutrient cycling.
To understand the ethos of an aquatic ecosystem let us take a small
pond as an example. This is fairly a self-sustainable unit and rather simple
example that explain even the complex interactions that exist in an aquatic
ecosystem. A pond is a shallow water body in which all the above
mentioned four basic components of an ecosystem are well exhibited.
The abiotic component is the water with all the dissolved inorganic and
organic substances and the rich soil deposit at the bottom of the pond.
The solar input, the cycle of temperature, day-length and other climatic
conditions regulate the rate of function of the entire pond. The autotrophic
components include the phytoplankton, some algae and the floating,
submerged and marginal plants found at the edges. The consumers are
represented by the zooplankton, the free swimming and bottom dwelling
forms. The decomposers are the fungi, bacteria and flagellates especially
abundant in the bottom of the pond. This system performs all the functions
of any ecosystem and of the biosphere as a whole, i.e., conversion of
inorganic into organic material with the help of the radiant energy of the
sun by the autotrophs; consumption of the autotrophs by heterotrophs;
decomposition and mineralisation of the dead matter to release them back
for reuse by the autotrophs, these event are repeated over and over again.
206
There is unidirectional movement of energy towards the higher trophic
levels and its dissipation and loss as heat to the environment.
12.2 P
RODUCTIVITY
A constant input of solar energy is the basic requirement for any ecosystem
to function and sustain. Primary production is defined as the amount of
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 219 ---
ECOSYSTEM
biomass or organic matter produced per unit area over a time period by
plants during photosynthesis. It is expressed in terms of weight (gm–2) or
energy (kcal m–2). The rate of biomass production is called productivity.
It is expressed in terms of gm–2 yr–1 or (kcal m–2) yr–1 to compare the
productivity of different ecosystems. It can be divided into gross primary
productivity (GPP) and net primary productivity (NPP). Gross primary
productivity of an ecosystem is the rate of production of organic matter
during photosynthesis. A considerable amount of GPP is utilised by plants
in respiration. Gross primary productivity minus respiration losses (R),
is the net primary productivity (NPP).
GPP – R = NPP
Net primary productivity is the available biomass for the consumption
to heterotrophs (herbiviores and decomposers). Secondary productivity
is defined as the rate of formation of new organic matter by
consumers.
Primary productivity depends on the plant species inhabiting a
particular area. It also depends on a variety of environmental factors,
availability of nutrients and photosynthetic capacity of plants. Therefore,
it varies in different types of ecosystems. The annual net primary
productivity of the whole biosphere is approximately 170 billion tons
(dry weight) of organic matter. Of this, despite occupying about 70 per
cent of the surface, the productivity of the oceans are only 55 billion tons.
Rest of course, is on land. Discuss the main reason for the low
productivity of ocean with your teacher.
12.3 D
ECOMPOSITION
You may have heard of the earthworm being referred to as the farmer’s
‘friend’. This is so because they help in the breakdown of complex organic
matter as well as in loosening of the soil. Similarly, decomposers break
down complex organic matter into inorganic substances like carbon
dioxide, water and nutrients and the process is called decomposition.
Dead plant remains such as leaves, bark, flowers and dead remains of
animals, including fecal matter, constitute detritus, which is the raw
material for decomposition. The important steps in the process of
decomposition are fragmentation, leaching, catabolism, humification and
mineralisation.
Detritivores (e.g., earthworm) break down detritus into smaller particles.
This process is called fragmentation. By the process of leaching, water-
207
soluble inorganic nutrients go down into the soil horizon and get precipitated
as unavailable salts. Bacterial and fungal enzymes degrade detritus into
simpler inorganic substances. This process is called as catabolism.
It is important to note that all the above steps in decomposition operate
simultaneously on the detritus (Figure 12.1). Humification and
mineralisation occur during decomposition in the soil. Humification leads
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 220 ---
BIOLOGY
Figure 12.1 Diagrammatic representation of decomposition cycle in a terrestrial ecosystem
to accumulation of a dark coloured amorphous substance called humus
that is highly resistant to microbial action and undergoes decomposition
at an extremely slow rate. Being colloidal in nature it serves as a reservoir
of nutrients. The humus is further degraded by some microbes and release
of inorganic nutrients occur by the process known as mineralisation.
Decomposition is largely an oxygen-requiring process. The rate of
decomposition is controlled by chemical composition of detritus and
climatic factors. In a particular climatic condition, decomposition rate
is slower if detritus is rich in lignin and chitin, and quicker, if detritus is
208
rich in nitrogen and water-soluble substances like sugars. Temperature
and soil moisture are the most important climatic factors that regulate
decomposition through their effects on the activities of soil microbes.
Warm and moist environment favour decomposition whereas low
temperature and anaerobiosis inhibit decomposition resulting in build
up of organic materials.
Rationalised 2023-24