--- PAGE 1 ---
SCIENCE
T C IX
EXTBOOK FOR LASS
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 2 ---
0964 – SCIENCE
ISBN 81-7450-492-3
Textbook for Class IX
First Edition
February 2006 Phalguna 1927
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Reprinted q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
November 2006, November 2007, transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
January 2009, December 2009,
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent, re-
November 2010, December 2011, sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
October 2012, October 2013, of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
December 2014, December 2015,
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
February 2017, December 2017, and should be unacceptable.
December 2018, October 2019,
January 2021 and November 2021
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Revised Edition Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
October 2022 Ashwina 1944
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
PD 570T BS Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
© National Council of Educational
Navjivan Trust Building
Research and Training, 2006, 2022 P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
` 150.00 Head, Publication : Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Production : Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business : Vipin Dewan
Manager
Chief Editor (In charge): Bijnan Sutar
Production Assistant : Prakash Veer Singh
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division Cover
by the Secretary, National Council of Nidhi Wadhwa
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 Layout and Illustrations
and printed at Laxmi Offset Printers, Plot Digital Expressions
No-1, Saiyad Nagar, chawad ka madh, Nai
ki thadi, Jaipur - 302 027
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 3 ---
F
OREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends that children’s
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle
marks a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape
our system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The
syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to
implement this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and
the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope
these measures will take us significantly further in the direction of a child-
centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given
space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with
the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook
as the sole basis of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources
and sites of learning are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible
if we perceive and treat children as participants in learning, not as receivers
of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of
functioning. Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in
implementing the annual calendar so that the required number of teaching
days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching and
evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making
children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or
boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of curricular
burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching.
The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 4 ---
space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small
groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
appreciates the hard work done by the textbook development team responsible
for this book. We wish to thank the Chairman of the advisory group in science
and mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book,
Professor Rupamanjari Ghosh, School of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi, for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to them and
their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions
and organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their
resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members
of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the
Chairmanship of Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their
valuable time and contribution. As an organisation committed to systemic
reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its products, NCERT
welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 December 2005 Research and Training
(iv)
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 5 ---
R C T
ATIONALISATION OF ONTENT IN THE EXTBOOK
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on
students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the
content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset. In this backdrop, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise
the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the
NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the
same class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or
peer-learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 7 ---
T D C
EXTBOOK EVELOPMENT OMMITTEE
CHAIRMAN, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman, Advisory Committee Inter Uni-
versity Centre for Astronomy & Astrophysics (IUCCA), Ganeshbhind,
Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
Rupamanjari Ghosh, Professor, School of Physical Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru
University, New Delhi
MEMBERS
Anjni Koul, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics
(DESM), NCERT, New Delhi
Anupam Pachauri, 1317, Sector 37, Faridabad, Haryana
Anuradha Gulati, TGT, CRPF Public School, Rohini, Delhi
Asfa M. Yasin, Reader, Pandit Sunderlal Sharma Central Institute of Vocational
Education, NCERT, Bhopal
Charu Maini, PGT, DAV School, Sector 14, Gurgaon, Haryana
Dinesh Kumar, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.L. Satheesh, TGT , DM School, Regional Institute of Education, Mysore
Madhuri Mahapatra, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneswar,
Orissa
Puran Chand, Joint Director, Central Institute of Educational Technology,
NCERT, New Delhi
S.C. Jain, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Sujatha G.D., Assistant Mistress, V.V.S. Sardar Patel High School, Rajaji Nagar,
Bangalore
S.K. Dash, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Seshu Lavania, Reader, Department of Botany, University of Lucknow, Lucknow
Satyajit Rath, Scientist, National Institute of Immunology, JNU Campus, New
Delhi
Sukhvir Singh, Reader, DESM, Regional Institute of Education, Ajmer, Rajasthan
Uma Sudhir, Eklavya, Indore
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
Brahm Parkash, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 8 ---
A
CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training is grateful to the
members of the Textbook Development Team, whose names are given separately,
for their contribution in the development of the Science textbook for Class IX.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of the participating
members of the Review Workshop in the finalisation of the book: P.K.
Bhattacharya, Professor, DESM, NCERT; Anita Julka, Reader, DEGSN, NCERT;
Tausif Ahmad, PGT, New Era Sr. Sec. School, New Delhi; Samarketu, PGT in
Physics, JNV, MESRA, Ranchi; Meenakshi Sharma, PGT in Biology, SVEM,
Ankleshwar, Gujarat; Raji Kamlasanan, PGT in Biology, DTEA SNSU School,
R.K. Puram, New Delhi; Meenambika Menon, TGT in Science, Cambridge School,
Noida; Lalit Gupta, TGT in Science, Govt. Boys Sr. Sec. School No. 2, Uttam
Nagar, New Delhi; Manoj Kumar Gupta, Lecturer in Chemistry, Mukherji
Memorial Sr. Sec. School, Shahdara, Delhi; Vijay Kumar, Vice-Principal, Govt.
Sarvodaya, Co. Edu. Sr. Sec. School, Anand Vihar, Delhi; Kanhaya Lal, Principal
(Retd.), Deptt. of Education, GNCT of Delhi, Delhi; K.B. Gupta, Professor (Retd.),
NCERT, New Delhi; Kuldeep Singh, TGT in Science, JNV, Meerut; R.A. Goel,
Principal (Retd.), Delhi; Sumit Kumar Bhatnagar, Department of Education,
GNCT of Delhi, Delhi.
Acknowledgements are due to M. Chandra, Professor and Head,
Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi for
providing all academic and administrative support.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the support provided by the APC
Office of DESM, administrative staff of DESM; Deepak Kapoor, Incharge
Computer Centre, DESM; Saima, DTP Operator; Mohd. Qamar Tabrez,
Copy Editor; Mathew John and Randhir Thakur, Proofreaders. The efforts of
the Publication Department, NCERT are also highly appreciated.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 9 ---
C
ONTENTS
FOREWORD iii
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOK V
Chapter 1 MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS 1
Chapter 2 IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 14
Chapter 3 ATOMS AND MOLECULES 26
Chapter 4 STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 38
Chapter 5 THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 49
Chapter 6 TISSUES 60
Chapter 7 MOTION 72
Chapter 8 FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 87
Chapter 9 GRAVITATION 100
Chapter 10 WORK AND ENERGY 113
Chapter 11 SOUND 127
Chapter 12 IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 140
ANSWERS 152–154
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 10 ---
THE CONSTITUTION OF
INDIA
PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having
solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
1[SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and to secure
toallitscitizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and
political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief,
faithandworship;
EQUALITYofstatusandofopportunity;
andtopromoteamongthemall
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of
the individual and the 2[unity and
integrityoftheNation];
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
thistwenty-sixthdayofNovember,1949do
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO
OURSELVESTHISCONSTITUTION.
1. Subs.bytheConstitution(Forty-secondAmendment)Act,1976,Sec.2,
for"SovereignDemocraticRepublic"(w.e.f.3.1.1977)
2. Subs.bytheConstitution(Forty-secondAmendment)Act,1976,Sec.2,
for"UnityoftheNation"(w.e.f.3.1.1977)
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 11 ---
1
C
hapter
MMMMM OOOOO SSSSS
AAAAATTTTTTTTTTEEEEERRRRR IIIIINNNNN UUUUURRRRR UUUUURRRRRRRRRROOOOOUUUUUNNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGGSSSSS
As we look at our surroundings, we see a large Activity ______________1.1
variety of things with different shapes, sizes
• Take a 100 mL beaker.
and textures. Everything in this universe is
• Fill half the beaker with water and
made up of material which scientists have
mark the level of water.
named “matter”. The air we breathe, the food
• Dissolve some salt/ sugar with the help
we eat, stones, clouds, stars, plants and
of a glass rod.
animals, even a small drop of water or a
• Observe any change in water level.
particle of sand — every thing is matter. We
• What do you think has happened to
can also see as we look around that all the
the salt?
things mentioned above occupy space and • Where does it disappear?
have mass. In other words, they have both • Does the level of water change?
mass* and volume**.
In order to answer these questions we
Since early times, human beings have
need to use the idea that matter is made up
been trying to understand their surroundings.
of particles. What was there in the spoon, salt
Early Indian philosophers classified matter in
or sugar, has now spread throughout water.
the form of five basic elements — the “Panch
This is illustrated in Fig. 1.1.
Tatva” — air, earth, fire, sky and water.
According to them everything, living or non-
living, was made up of these five basic
elements. Ancient Greek philosophers had
arrived at a similar classification of matter.
Modern day scientists have evolved two
types of classification of matter based on their
physical properties and chemical nature.
In this chapter we shall learn about
matter based on its physical properties.
Chemical aspects of matter will be taken up
in subsequent chapters. Fig. 1.1:When we dissolve salt in water, the particles
of salt get into the spaces between particles
1.1 Physical Nature of Matter
of water.
1.1.1 M
ATTER IS MADE UP OF PARTICLES
1.1.2 H
OW SMALL ARE THESE PARTICLES
For a long time, two schools of thought prevailed
?
OF MATTER
regarding the nature of matter. One school
believed matter to be continuous like a block Activity ______________1.2
of wood, whereas, the other thought that matter
was made up of particles like sand. Let us
• Take 2–3 crystals of potassium
perform an activity to decide about the nature permanganate and dissolve them in
of matter — is it continuous or particulate? 100 mL of water.
* The SI unit of mass is kilogram (kg).
** The SI unit of volume is cubic metre (m3). The common unit of measuring volume is
litre (L) such that 1L = 1 dm3, 1L = 1000 mL, 1 mL = 1 cm3.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 12 ---
• Take out approximately 10 mL of this 1.2.2 P
ARTICLES OF MATTER ARE
solution and put it into 90 mL of clear
water. CONTINUOUSLYMOVING
• Take out 10 mL of this solution and
put it into another 90 mL of clear water. Activity ______________1.3
• Keep diluting the solution like this 5 to
8 times.
• Is the water still coloured ? • Put an unlit incense stick in a corner
of your class. How close do you have to
go near it so as to get its smell?
• Now light the incense stick. What
happens? Do you get the smell sitting
at a distance?
• Record your observations.
Activity ______________1.4
• Take two glasses/beakers filled with
Fig. 1.2: Estimating how small are the particles of water.
matter. With every dilution, though the colour
• Put a drop of blue or red ink slowly
becomes light, it is still visible.
and carefully along the sides of the first
beaker and honey in the same way in
This experiment shows that just a few the second beaker.
crystals of potassium permanganate can • Leave them undisturbed in your house
colour a large volume of water (about or in a corner of the class.
1000 L). So we conclude that there must be • Record your observations.
millions of tiny particles in just one crystal • What do you observe immediately after
of potassium permanganate, which keep adding the ink drop?
on dividing themselves into smaller and • What do you observe immediately after
smaller particles. adding a drop of honey?
The same activity can be done using 2 ml • How many hours or days does it take
of Dettol instead of potassium permanganate. for the colour of ink to spread evenly
The smell can be detected even on throughout the water?
repeated dilution.
Activity ______________1.5
The particles of matter are very small –
they are small beyond our imagination!!!!
• Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or
1.2 Characteristics of Particles of potassium permanganate into a glass
of hot water and another containing
Matter
cold water. Do not stir the solution.
Allow the crystals to settle at the
1.2.1 P
ARTICLES OF MATTER HAVE SPACE bottom.
BETWEEN THEM • What do you observe just above the
solid crystal in the glass?
In activities 1.1 and 1.2 we saw that particles
• What happens as time passes?
of sugar, salt, Dettol, or potassium
• What does this suggest about the
permanganate got evenly distributed in water. particles of solid and liquid?
Similarly, when we make tea, coffee or • Does the rate of mixing change with
lemonade (nimbu paani ), particles of one type temperature? Why and how?
of matter get into the spaces between particles
From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and
of the other. This shows that there is enough
1.5), we can conclude the following:
space between particles of matter.
2 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 13 ---
Particles of matter are continuously • If we consider each student as a
moving, that is, they possess what we call particle of matter, then in which group
the particles held each other with the
the kinetic energy. As the temperature rises,
maximum force?
particles move faster. So, we can say that with
increase in temperature the kinetic energy of
Activity ______________1.7
the particles also increases.
In the above three activities we observe
• Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and
that particles of matter intermix on their own
a rubber band.
with each other. They do so by getting into
• Try breaking them by hammering,
the spaces between the particles. This
cutting or stretching.
intermixing of particles of two different types • In which of the above three
of matter on their own is called diffusion. We substances do you think the particles
also observe that on heating, diffusion are held together with greater force?
becomes faster. Why does this happen?
Activity ______________1.8
1.2.3 P
ARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT
• Take some water in a container, try
EACHOTHER
cutting the surface of water with your
fingers.
Activity ______________1.6 • Were you able to cut the surface of
water?
• Play this game in the field— make four • What could be the reason behind the
groups and form human chains as surface of water remaining together?
suggested:
The above three activities (1.6, 1.7 and 1.8)
• The first group should hold each
suggest that particles of matter have force
other from the back and lock arms
like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). acting between them. This force keeps the
particles together. The strength of this force of
attraction varies from one kind of matter to
another.
Q
uestions
1. Which of the following are
matter?
Chair, air, love, smell, hate,
almonds, thought, cold, lemon
water, smell of perfume.
2. Give reasons for the following
Fig. 1.3
observation:
The smell of hot sizzling food
• The second group should hold hands
reaches you several metres
to form a human chain.
• The third group should form a chain away, but to get the smell from
by touching each other with only their cold food you have to go close.
finger tips. 3. A diver is able to cut through
• Now, the fourth group of students water in a swimming pool. Which
should run around and try to break the
property of matter does this
three human chains one by one into
observation show?
as many small groups as possible.
4. What are the characteristics of
• Which group was the easiest to break?
the particles of matter?
Why?
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS 3
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 14 ---
1.3 States of Matter the force is removed. If excessive force is
applied, it breaks.
Observe different types of matter around you. • The shape of each individual sugar or
What are its different states? We can see that salt crystal remains fixed, whether we
matter around us exists in three different take it in our hand, put it in a plate or in
states– solid, liquid and gas. These states of a jar.
matter arise due to the variation in the • A sponge has minute holes, in which
characteristics of the particles of matter. air is trapped, when we press it, the air
Now, let us study about the properties of is expelled out and we are able to
these three states of matter in detail. compress it.
1.3.1 T HE SOLID STATE 1.3.2 T HE LIQUID STATE
Activity _____________ 1.9 Activity _____________1.10
• Collect the following articles — a pen, • Collect the following:
a book, a needle and a piece of wooden (a) water, cooking oil, milk, juice, a
stick. cold drink.
• Sketch the shape of the above articles (b) containers of different shapes. Put
in your notebook by moving a pencil a 50 mL mark on these containers
around them. using a measuring cylinder from
• Do all these have a definite shape, the laboratory.
distinct boundaries and a fixed volume? • What will happen if these liquids are
spilt on the floor?
• What happens if they are hammered,
• Measure 50 mL of any one liquid and
pulled or dropped?
transfer it into different containers one
• Are these capable of diffusing into each
by one. Does the volume remain the
other?
same?
• Try compressing them by applying
• Does the shape of the liquid remain the
force. Are you able to compress them?
same ?
All the above are examples of solids. We • When you pour the liquid from one
can observe that all these have a definite container into another, does it flow
easily?
shape, distinct boundaries and fixed volumes,
that is, have negligible compressibility. Solids We observe that liquids have no fixed
have a tendency to maintain their shape when shape but have a fixed volume. They take up
subjected to outside force. Solids may break the shape of the container in which they are
under force but it is difficult to change their kept. Liquids flow and change shape, so they
shape, so they are rigid. are not rigid but can be called fluid.
Refer to activities 1.4 and 1.5 where we
Consider the following:
saw that solids and liquids can diffuse into
(a) What about a rubber band, can it liquids. The gases from the atmosphere
change its shape on stretching? Is it diffuse and dissolve in water. These gases,
a solid? especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, are
(b) What about sugar and salt? When essential for the survival of aquatic animals
kept in different jars these take the and plants.
shape of the jar. Are they solid? All living creatures need to breathe for
(c) What about a sponge? It is a solid survival. The aquatic animals can breathe
yet we are able to compress it. Why? under water due to the presence of dissolved
All the above are solids as: oxygen in water. Thus, we may conclude that
• A rubber band changes shape under solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into
force and regains the same shape when liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is
4 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 15 ---
higher than that of solids. This is due to the We have observed that gases are highly
fact that in the liquid state, particles move compressible as compared to solids and
freely and have greater space between each liquids. The liquefied petroleum gas (LPG)
other as compared to particles in the solid cylinder that we get in our home for cooking
state. or the oxygen supplied to hospitals in
cylinders is compressed gas. Compressed
1.3.3 T natural gas (CNG) is used as fuel these days
HE GASEOUSSTATE
in vehicles. Due to its high compressibility,
Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling large volumes of a gas can be compressed
a large number of balloons from a single into a small cylinder and transported easily.
cylinder of gas? Enquire from him how many We come to know of what is being cooked
balloons is he able to fill from one cylinder. in the kitchen without even entering there,
.
Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder by the smell that reaches our nostrils. How
does this smell reach us? The particles of the
Activity _____________1.11
aroma of food mix with the particles of air
spread from the kitchen, reach us and even
• Take three 100 mL syringes and close
farther away. The smell of hot cooked food
their nozzles by rubber corks, as
reaches us in seconds; compare this with the
shown in Fig.1.4.
rate of diffusion of solids and liquids. Due to
• Remove the pistons from all the
high speed of particles and large space
syringes.
• Leaving one syringe untouched, fill between them, gases show the property of
water in the second and pieces of chalk diffusing very fast into other gases.
in the third. In the gaseous state, the particles move
• Insert the pistons back into the about randomly at high speed. Due to this
syringes. You may apply some vaseline random movement, the particles hit each
on the pistons before inserting them other and also the walls of the container. The
into the syringes for their smooth
pressure exerted by the gas is because of this
movement.
force exerted by gas particles per unit area
• Now, try to compress the content by
on the walls of the container.
pushing the piston in each syringe.
Fig. 1.4
• What do you observe? In which case Fig.1.5: a, b and c show the magnified schematic
was the piston easily pushed in? pictures of the three states of matter. The
• What do you infer from your motion of the particles can be seen and
observations? compared in the three states of matter.
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS 5
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 16 ---
Q
uestions 1.4.1 E
FFECTOFCHANGEOFTEMPERATURE
1. The mass per unit volume of a Activity _____________1.12
substance is called density.
(density = mass/volume). • Take about 150 g of ice in a beaker and
Arrange the following in order of suspend a laboratory thermometer so
that its bulb is in contact with the ice,
increasing density – air, exhaust
as in Fig. 1.6.
from chimneys, honey, water,
chalk, cotton and iron.
2. (a) Tabulate the differences in
the characterisitcs of states
of matter.
(b) Comment upon the following:
rigidity, compressibility,
fluidity, filling a gas
container, shape, kinetic
energy and density.
3. Give reasons
(a) A gas fills completely the
vessel in which it is kept.
(b) A gas exerts pressure on the
walls of the container.
(c) A wooden table should be
called a solid.
(d) We can easily move our hand
(a)
in air but to do the same
through a solid block of wood
we need a karate expert.
4. Liquids generally have lower
density as compared to solids.
But you must have observed that
ice floats on water. Find out why.
1.4 Can Matter Change its State?
We all know from our observation that water
can exist in three states of matter–
• solid, as ice,
• liquid, as the familiar water, and
• gas, as water vapour.
What happens inside the matter during
this change of state? What happens to the
(b)
particles of matter during the change of
states? How does this change of state take
place? We need answers to these questions, Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b) conversion
isn’t it? of water to water vapour
6 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 17 ---
• Start heating the beaker on a low flame. state by overcoming the forces of attraction
• Note the temperature when the ice between the particles. As this heat energy is
starts melting. absorbed by ice without showing any rise in
• Note the temperature when all the ice temperature, it is considered that it gets
has converted into water. hidden into the contents of the beaker and is
• Record your observations for this known as the latent heat. The word latent
conversion of solid to liquid state.
means hidden. The amount of heat energy
• Now, put a glass rod in the beaker and
that is required to change 1 kg of a solid into
heat while stirring till the water starts
liquid at atmospheric pressure at its melting
boiling.
point is known as the latent heat of fusion.
• Keep a careful eye on the thermometer
So, particles in water at 0oC (273 K) have more
reading till most of the water has
energy as compared to particles in ice at the
vaporised.
same temperature.
• Record your observations for the
When we supply heat energy to water,
conversion of water in the liquid state
particles start moving even faster. At a certain
to the gaseous state.
temperature, a point is reached when the
On increasing the temperature of solids, particles have enough energy to break free
the kinetic energy of the particles increases. from the forces of attraction of each other. At
Due to the increase in kinetic energy, the this temperature the liquid starts changing
particles start vibrating with greater speed. into gas. The temperature at which a liquid
The energy supplied by heat overcomes the starts boiling at the atmospheric pressure is
forces of attraction between the particles. The known as its boiling point. Boiling is a bulk
particles leave their fixed positions and start phenomenon. Particles from the bulk of the
moving more freely. A stage is reached when liquid gain enough energy to change into the
the solid melts and is converted to a liquid. vapour state.
For water this temperature is 373 K
The minimum temperature at which a solid
(100oC = 273 + 100 = 373 K).
melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric
Can you define the latent heat of
pressure is called its melting point.
vaporisation? Do it in the same way as we
have defined the latent heat of fusion.
The melting point of a solid is an indication
Particles in steam, that is, water vapour at
of the strength of the force of attraction
373 K (1000 C) have more energy than water
between its particles.
at the same temperature. This is because
particles in steam have absorbed extra energy
The melting point of ice is 273.15 K*. The
in the form of latent heat of vaporisation.
process of melting, that is, change of solid
state into liquid state is also known as fusion.
When a solid melts, its temperature
remains the same, so where does the heat
energy go?
You must have observed, during the
experiment of melting, that the temperature So, we infer that the state of matter can
of the system does not change after the be changed into another state by changing
melting point is reached, till all the ice melts. the temperature.
This happens even though we continue to We have learnt that substances around
heat the beaker, that is, we continue to supply us change state from solid to liquid and from
heat. This heat gets used up in changing the liquid to gas on application of heat. But there
o o
*Note: Kelvin is the SI unit of temperature, 0 C =273.15 K. For convenience, we take 0 C = 273 K after
rounding off the decimal. To change a temperature on the Kelvin scale to the Celsius scale you
have to subtract 273 from the given temperature, and to convert a temperature on the Celsius
scale to the Kelvin scale you have to add 273 to the given temperature.
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS 7
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 18 ---
are some that change directly from solid state enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come
to gaseous state and vice versa without closer? Do you think that increasing or
changing into the liquid state. decreasing the pressure can change the state
of matter?
Activity _____________1.13
• Take some camphor. Crush it and put
it in a china dish.
• Put an inverted funnel over the china
dish.
• Put a cotton plug on the stem of the
funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7.
Fig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter
can be brought close together
Applying pressure and reducing
temperature can liquefy gases.
Have you heard of solid carbon dioxide
(CO )?It is stored under high pressure. Solid
2
CO gets converted directly into gaseous state
2
on decrease of pressure to 1 atmosphere*
without coming into liquid state. This is the
Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known
as dry ice.
• Now, heat slowly and observe.
Thus, we can say that pressure and
• What do you infer from the above
temperature determine the state of a
activity?
substance, whether it will be solid, liquid
or gas.
A change of state directly from solid to gas
without changing into liquid state is called
sublimation and the direct change of gas to
solid without changing into liquid is called
deposition.
1.4.2 E
FFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE
We have already learnt that the difference in
various states of matter is due to the Deposition
difference in the distances between the
constituent particles. What will happen when
we start putting pressure and compress a gas Fig. 1.9: Interconversion of the three states of matter
* atmosphere (atm) is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa):
1 atmosphere = 1.01 × 105 Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The
atmospheric pressure at sea level is 1 atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure.
8 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 19 ---
Q
uestions dish and keep it inside a cupboard or
on a shelf in your class.
1. Convert the following temperature • Record the room temperature.
to celsius scale: • Record the time or days taken for the
a. 300 K b. 573 K evaporation process in the above cases.
2. What is the physical state of • Repeat the above three steps of activity
water at: on a rainy day and record your
a. 250oC b. 100oC ? observations.
3. For any substance, why does the • What do you infer about the effect of
temperature remain constant temperature, surface area and wind
during the change of state? velocity (speed) on evaporation?
4. Suggest a method to liquefy
You must have observed that the rate of
atmospheric gases.
evaporation increases with–
• an increase of surface area:
1.5 Evaporation
We know that evaporation is a surface
phenomenon. If the surface area is
Do we always need to heat or change pressure
for changing the state of matter? Can you increased, the rate of evaporation
quote some examples from everyday life where increases. For example, while putting
change of state from liquid to vapour takes clothes for drying up we spread them out.
place without the liquid reaching the boiling • an increase of temperature:
point? Water, when left uncovered, slowly With the increase of temperature, more
changes into vapour. Wet clothes dry up. What number of particles get enough kinetic
happens to water in the above two examples? energy to go into the vapour state.
We know that particles of matter are
• a decrease in humidity:
always moving and are never at rest. At a given
Humidity is the amount of water vapour
temperature in any gas, liquid or solid, there
present in air. The air around us cannot
are particles with different amounts of kinetic
hold more than a definite amount of
energy. In the case of liquids, a small fraction
water vapour at a given temperature. If
of particles at the surface, having higher
the amount of water in air is already high,
kinetic energy, is able to break away from the
the rate of evaporation decreases.
forces of attraction of other particles and gets
converted into vapour. This phenomenon of • an increase in wind speed:
change of liquid into vapours at any It is a common observation that clothes
temperature below its boiling point is called dry faster on a windy day. With the
evaporation. increase in wind speed, the particles of
water vapour move away with the wind,
1.5.1 F ACTORS AFFECTING decreasing the amount of water vapour
in the surrounding.
EVAPORATION
Let us understand this with an activity. 1.5.2 H OW DOES EVAPORATION CAUSE
?
COOLING
Activity _____________1.14
In an open vessel, the liquid keeps on
• Take 5 mL of water in a test tube and evaporating. The particles of liquid absorb
keep it near a window or under a fan. energy from the surrounding to regain the
• Take 5 mL of water in an open china energy lost during evaporation. This
dish and keep it near a window or
absorption of energy from the surroundings
under a fan.
make the surroundings cold.
• Take 5 mL of water in an open china
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS 9
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 20 ---
What happens when you pour some Why do we see water droplets on the outer
acetone (nail polish remover) on your palm? surface of a glass containing ice-cold
The particles gain energy from your palm or water?
surroundings and evaporate causing the palm Let us take some ice-cold water in a
to feel cool. tumbler. Soon we will see water droplets on
After a hot sunny day, people sprinkle the outer surface of the tumbler. The water
water on the roof or open ground because vapour present in air, on coming in contact
the large latent heat of vaporisation of water with the cold glass of water, loses energy and
helps to cool the hot surface. gets converted to liquid state, which we see
Can you cite some more examples from as water droplets.
Q
daily life where we can feel the effect of cooling
uestions
due to evaporation?
Why should we wear cotton clothes in
summer? 1. Why does a desert cooler cool
During summer, we perspire more better on a hot dry day?
because of the mechanism of our body which 2. How does the water kept in an
keeps us cool. We know that during earthen pot (matka) become cool
evaporation, the particles at the surface of during summer?
the liquid gain energy from the surroundings 3. Why does our palm feel cold
or body surface and change into vapour. The when we put some acetone or
heat energy equal to the latent heat of petrol or perfume on it?
vaporisation is absorbed from the body 4. Why are we able to sip hot tea or
leaving the body cool. Cotton, being a good milk faster from a saucer rather
absorber of water helps in absorbing the than a cup?
sweat and exposing it to the atmosphere for 5. What type of clothes should we
easy evaporation. wear in summer?
What
you have
learnt
• Matter is made up of small particles.
• The matter around us exists in three states—solid, liquid
and gas.
• The forces of attraction between the particles are maximum in
solids, intermediate in liquids and minimum in gases.
• The spaces in between the constituent particles and kinetic
energy of the particles are minimum in the case of solids,
intermediate in liquids and maximum in gases.
10 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 21 ---
• The arrangement of particles is most ordered in the case of
solids, in the case of liquids layers of particles can slip and
slide over each other while for gases, there is no order,
particles just move about randomly.
• The states of matter are inter-convertible. The state of matter
can be changed by changing temperature or pressure.
• Sublimation is the change of solid state directly to gaseous
state without going through liquid state.
• Deposition is the change of gaseous state directly to solid
state without going through liquid state.
• Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk
(whole) of the liquid change into vapour state.
• Evaporation is a surface phenomenon. Particles from the
surface gain enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction
present in the liquid and change into the vapour state.
• The rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed
to the atmosphere, the temperature, the humidity and the
wind speed.
• Evaporation causes cooling.
• Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change
1 kg of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its
boiling point.
• Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required
to change 1 kg of solid into liquid at its melting point.
• Some measurable quantities and their units to remember:
Quantity Unit Symbol
Temperature kelvin K
Length metre m
Mass kilogram kg
Weight newton N
Volume cubic metre m3
Density kilogram per cubic metre kg m–3
Pressure pascal Pa
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS 11
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 22 ---
Exercises
1. Convert the following temperatures to the celsius scale.
(a) 293 K (b) 470 K
2. Convert the following temperatures to the kelvin scale.
(a) 25o°C (b) 373o°C
3. Give reason for the following observations.
(a) Naphthalene balls disappear with time without leaving
any solid.
(b) We can get the smell of perfume sitting several metres
away.
4. Arrange the following substances in increasing order of forces
of attraction between the particles— water, sugar, oxygen.
5. What is the physical state of water at—
(a) 25o°C (b) 0o°C (c) 100o°C ?
6. Give two reasons to justify—
(a) water at room temperature is a liquid.
(b) an iron almirah is a solid at room temperature.
7. Why is ice at 273 K more effective in cooling than water at the
same temperature?
8. What produces more severe burns, boiling water or steam?
9. Name A,B,C,D,E and F in the following diagram showing
change in its state
12 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 23 ---
Group Activity
Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids,
liquids and gases.
For making this model you will need
• A transparent jar
• A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet
• A string
• Few chickpeas or black gram or dry green peas.
How to make?
• Put the seeds in the jar.
• Sew the string to the centre of the rubber sheet and put some
tape to keep it tied securely.
• Stretch and tie the rubber sheet on the mouth of the jar.
• Your model is ready. Now run your fingers up and down the
string by first tugging at it slowly and then rapidly.
Fig. 1.10: A model for converting of solid to liquid and liquid to gas.
MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS 13
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 24 ---
2
C
hapter
IIIII MMMMM AAAAA UUUUU PPPPP ?????
SSSSS AAAAATTTTTTTTTTEEEEERRRRR RRRRROOOOOUUUUUNNNNNDDDDD SSSSS UUUUURRRRREEEEE
How do we judge whether milk, ghee, butter, a pure substance and cannot be separated by
salt, spices, mineral water or juice that we buy physical process into its chemical constituents.
from the market are pure? Similarly, sugar is a substance which contains
only one kind of pure matter and its
composition is the same throughout.
Soft drink and soil are not single pure
substances. Whatever the source of a
pure substance may be, it will always have
the same characteristic properties.
Therefore, we can say that a mixture
contains more than one pure substance.
2.1.1 T
YPES OF MIXTURES
Fig. 2.1: Some consumable items
Depending upon the nature of the components
Have you ever noticed the word ‘pure’ that form a mixture, we can have different
written on the packs of these consumables? types of mixtures.
For a common person pure means having no Activity ______________2.1
adulteration. But, for a scientist all these things
are actually mixtures of different substances • Let us divide the class into groups A,
and hence not pure. For example, milk is B, C and D.
•
actually a mixture of water, fat, proteins, etc. Group A takes a beaker containing
50 mL of water and one spatula full
When a scientist says that something is pure,
of copper sulphate powder. Group B
it means that all the constituent particles of
takes 50 mL of water and two spatula
that substance are the same in their chemical
full of copper sulphate powder in a
nature. A pure substance consists of a single beaker.
•
type of particle. In other words, a substance is Groups C and D can take different
a pure single form of matter. amounts of copper sulphate and
potassium permanganate or common
As we look around, we can see that most
salt (sodium chloride) and mix the
of the matter around us exists as mixtures of
given components to form a mixture.
two or more pure components, for example, •
Report the observations on the
sea water, minerals, soil, etc., are all mixtures. uniformity in colour and texture.
•
Groups A and B have obtained a
2.1 What is a Mixture?
mixture which has a uniform
Mixtures are constituted by more than one composition throughout. Such
mixtures are called homogeneous
kind of pure form of matter. We know that
mixtures or solutions. Some other
dissolved sodium chloride can be separated
examples of such mixtures are: (i) salt
from water by the physical process of
dissolved in water and (ii) sugar
evaporation. However, sodium chloride is itself dissolved in water. Compare the
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 25 ---
wonk
ot
eroM
colour of the solutions of the two
groups. Though both the groups have
obtained copper sulphate solution but
the intensity of colour of the solutions
is different. This shows that a
homogeneous mixture can have a
variable composition.
•
Groups C and D have obtained
mixtures, which contain physically
distinct parts and have non-uniform
compositions. Such mixtures are called
heterogeneous mixtures. Mixtures of Fig. 2.2: Filtration
sodium chloride and iron filings, salt
Now, we shall learn about solutions,
and sulphur, and oil and water are
suspensions and colloidal solutions in the
examples of heterogeneous mixtures.
following sections.
Q
Activity ______________2.2
uestions
•
Let us again divide the class into four
1. What is meant by a substance?
groups— A, B, C and D.
2. List the points of differences
•
Distribute the following samples to
between homogeneous and
each group:
heterogeneous mixtures.
−
Few crystals of copper sulphate
to group A.
−
One spatula full of copper
sulphate to group B. 2.2 What is a Solution?
−
Chalk powder or wheat flour to
group C. A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two
− Few drops of milk or ink to or more substances. You come across various
group D. types of solutions in your daily life. Lemonade,
• Each group should add the given soda water, etc., are all examples of solutions.
sample in water and stir properly Usually we think of a solution as a liquid that
using a glass rod. Are the particles contains either a solid, liquid or a gas dissolved
in the mixture visible? in it. But, we can also have solid solutions
• Direct a beam of light from a torch (alloys) and gaseous solutions (air). In a
through the beaker containing the solution there is homogeneity at the particle
mixture and observe from the front. Was level. For example, lemonade tastes the same
the path of the beam of light visible? throughout. This shows that particles of sugar
•
Leave the mixtures undisturbed for or salt are evenly distributed in
a few minutes (and set up the the solution.
filtration apparatus in the meantime).
Is the mixture stable or do the
Alloys: Alloys are mixtures of two or
particles begin to settle after some
more metals or ametal and a non-metal time?
• and cannot be separated into their
Filter the mixture. Is there any
components by physical methods. But
residue on the filter paper?
still, an alloy is considered as a mixture
• because it shows the properties of its
Discuss the results and form an
constituents and can have variable
opinion.
Groups A and B have got a solution. composition. For example, brass is a
Group C has got a suspension. mixture of approximately 30% zinc and
Group D has got a colloidal solution. 70% copper.
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 15
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 26 ---
A solution has a solvent and a solute as its proportion of the solute and solvent can be
components. The component of the solution varied. Depending upon the amount of solute
that dissolves the other component in it present in a solution, it can be called dilute,
(usually the component present in larger concentrated or saturated solution. Dilute
amount) is called the solvent. The component and concentrated are comparative terms. In
of the solution that is dissolved in the solvent activity 2.2, the solution obtained by group
(usually present in lesser quantity) is called A is dilute as compared to that obtained by
the solute. group B.
Activity ______________2.3
Examples:
(i) A solution of sugar in water is a solid • Take approximately 50 mL of water
in liquid solution. In this solution, each in two separate beakers.
sugar is the solute and water is • Add salt in one beaker and sugar or
the solvent. barium chloride in the second beaker
with continuous stirring.
(ii) A solution of iodine in alcohol known
• When no more solute can be dissolved,
as ‘tincture of iodine’, has iodine (solid)
heat the contents of the beaker to raise
as the solute and alcohol (liquid) as the
the temperature by about 5oC.°
solvent.
• Start adding the solute again.
(iii) Aerated drinks like soda water, etc., are
Is the amount of salt and sugar or barium
gas in liquid solutions. These contain
chloride, that can be dissolved in water at a
carbon dioxide (gas) as solute and water
given temperature, the same?
(liquid) as solvent.
At any particular temperature, a solution
(iv) Air is a mixture of gas in gas. Air is a
that has dissolved as much solute as it is
homogeneous mixture of a number of
capable of dissolving, is said to be a saturated
gases. Its two main constituents are:
solution. In other words, when no more solute
oxygen (21%) and nitrogen (78%). The
can be dissolved in a solution at a given
other gases are present in very
temperature, it is called a saturated solution.
small quantities.
The amount of the solute present in the
saturated solution at this temperature is called
Properties of a Solution
its solubility.
• A solution is a homogeneous mixture. If the amount of solute contained in a
• The particles of a solution are smaller solution is less than the saturation level, it is
than 1 nm (10-9 metre) in diameter. So, called an unsaturated solution.
they cannot be seen by naked eyes. What would happen if you were to take a
• Because of very small particle size, they saturated solution at a certain temperature
do not scatter a beam of light passing and cool it slowly.
through the solution. So, the path of We can infer from the above activity that
light is not visible in a solution. different substances in a given solvent have
• The solute particles cannot be separated different solubilities at the same temperature.
from the mixture by the process of The concentration of a solution is the amount
filtration. The solute particles do not (mass or volume) of solute present in a given
settle down when left undisturbed, that amount (mass or volume) of solution.
is, a solution is stable.
There are various ways of expressing the
concentration of a solution, but here we will
2.2.1 C
ONCENTRATION OF A SOLUTION
learn only three methods.
(i) Mass by mass percentage of a solution
In activity 2.2, we observed that groups A and
Mass of solute
B obtained different shades of solutions. So,
= ×100
we understand that in a solution the relative Mass of solution
16 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 27 ---
(ii) Mass by volume percentage of a solution • The particles of a suspension scatter a
beam of light passing through it and
Mass of solute
= ×100 make its path visible.
Volume ofsolution
• The solute particles settle down when a
(iii) Volume by volume percentage of a suspension is left undisturbed, that is,
solution a suspension is unstable. They can be
separated from the mixture by the
Volume of solute
= ×100 process of filtration. When the particles
Volume ofsolution
settle down, the suspension breaks and
it does not scatter light any more.
Example 2.1 A solution contains 40 g of
common salt in 320 g of water. Calculate
2.2.3 W ?
HAT IS A COLLOIDAL SOLUTION
the concentration in terms of mass by
mass percentage of the solution.
The mixture obtained by group D in activity
Solution: 2.2 is called a colloid or a colloidal solution.
The particles of a colloid are uniformly spread
Mass of solute (salt) = 40 g
throughout the solution. Due to the relatively
Mass of solvent (water) = 320 g
smaller size of particles, as compared to that of
We know,
a suspension, the mixture appears to be
Mass of solution = Mass of solute +
Mass of solvent homogeneous. But actually, a colloidal solution
= 40 g + 320 g is a heterogeneous mixture, for example, milk.
= 360 g Because of the small size of colloidal
particles, we cannot see them with naked eyes.
Mass percentage of solution
But, these particles can easily scatter a beam
Mass of solute of visible light as observed in activity 2.2. This
= ×100
Massofsolution scattering of a beam of light is called the
Tyndall effect after the name of the scientist
40 who discovered this effect.
= ×100=11.1%
360 Tyndall effect can also be observed when a
fine beam of light enters a room through a small
hole. This happens due to the scattering of light
2.2.2 W ?
HAT IS A SUSPENSION
by the particles of dust and smoke in the air.
Non-homogeneous systems, like those
obtained by group C in activity 2.2, in which
solids are dispersed in liquids, are called
suspensions. A suspension is a heterogeneous
mixture in which the solute particles do not
dissolve but remain suspended throughout
the bulk of the medium. Particles of a
suspension are visible to the naked eye.
Properties of a Suspension (a) (b)
• Suspension is a heterogeneous
mixture.
Fig. 2.3: (a) Solution of copper sulphate does not
• The particles of a suspension can be seen show Tyndall effect, (b) mixture of water
by the naked eye. and milk shows Tyndall effect.
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 17
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 28 ---
Tyndall effect can be observed when • Colloids are big enough to scatter a
sunlight passes through the canopy of a dense beam of light passing through it and
forest. In the forest, mist contains tiny droplets make its path visible.
of water, which act as particles of colloid • They do not settle down when left
dispersed in air. undisturbed, that is, a colloid is quite
stable.
• They cannot be separated from the
mixture by the process of filtration. But,
a special technique of separation known
as centrifugation (perform activity 2.5),
can be used to separate the colloidal
particles.
The components of a colloidal solution are
the dispersed phase and the dispersion
medium. The solute-like component or the
dispersed particles in a colloid form the
dispersed phase, and the component in which
the dispersed phase is suspended is known
Fig. 2.4: The Tyndall effect
as the dispersing medium. Colloids are
Properties of a Colloid classified according to the state (solid, liquid
or gas) of the dispersing medium and the
• A colloid is a heterogeneous mixture.
• The size of particles of a colloid is too dispersed phase. A few common examples are
small to be individually seen with given in Table 2.1. From this table you can
Q
naked eyes. see that they are very common everyday life.
uestions
1. Differentiate between homogen- eous and heterogeneous mixtures with examples.
2. How are sol, solution and suspension different from each other?
3. To make a saturated solution, 36 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in 100 g of water
at 293 K. Find its concentration at this temperature.
Table 2.1: Common examples of colloids
Dispersed Dispersing Type Example
phase Medium
Liquid Gas Aerosol Fog, clouds, mist
Solid Gas Aerosol Smoke, automobile exhaust
Gas Liquid Foam Shaving cream
Liquid Liquid Emulsion Milk, face cream
Solid Liquid Sol Milk of magnesia, mud
Gas Solid Foam Foam, rubber, sponge, pumice
Liquid Solid Gel Jelly, cheese, butter
Solid Solid Solid Sol Coloured gemstone, milky glass
18 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 29 ---
2.3 Physical and Chemical • burning of paper and wood.
2. Try segregating the things
Changes
around you as pure substances
or mixtures.
In the previous chapter, we have learnt about
a few physical properties of matter. The
2.4 What are the Types of Pure
properties that can be observed and specified
like colour, hardness, rigidity, fluidity, Substances?
density, melting point, boiling point etc. are
the physical properites. On the basis of their chemical composition,
The interconversion of states is a physical substances can be classified either as elements
change because these changes occur without or compounds.
a change in composition and no change in the
chemical nature of the substance. Although 2.4.1 E LEMENTS
ice, water and water vapour all look different
Robert Boyle was the first scientist to use the
and display different physical properties, they
term element in 1661. Antoine Laurent
are chemically the same.
Lavoisier (1743–94), a French chemist, was the
Both water and cooking oil are liquid but
first to establish an experimentally useful
their chemical characteristics are different.
definition of an element. He defined an element
They differ in odour and inflammability. We
as a basic form of matter that cannot be broken
know that oil burns in air whereas water
extinguishes fire. It is this chemical property down into simpler substances by chemical
of oil that makes it different from water. reactions.
Burning is a chemical change. During this Elements can be normally divided into
process one substance reacts with another to metals, non-metals and metalloids.
undergo a change in chemical composition. Metals usually show some or all of the
Chemical change brings change in the following properties:
chemical properties of matter and we get new • They have a lustre (shine).
substances. A chemical change is also called • They have silvery-grey or golden-yellow
a chemical reaction. colour.
During burning of a candle, both physical • They conduct heat and electricity.
and chemical changes take place. Can you • They are ductile (can be drawn into
distinguish these? wires).
Q
• They are malleable (can be hammered
uestions into thin sheets).
• They are sonorous (make a ringing
sound when hit).
1. Classify the following as chemical
Examples of metals are gold, silver,
or physical changes:
copper, iron, sodium, potassium etc. Mercury
• cutting of trees,
is the only metal that is liquid at room
• melting of butter in a pan,
temperature.
• rusting of almirah,
• boiling of water to form steam, Non-metals usually show some or all of the
• passing of electric current, following properties:
through water and the water • They display a variety of colours.
breaking down into hydrogen • They are poor conductors of heat and
and oxygen gases, electricity.
• dissolving common salt in • They are not lustrous, sonorous
water, or malleable.
• making a fruit salad with raw Examples of non-metals are hydrogen,
fruits, and oxygen, iodine, carbon (coal, coke), bromine,
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 19
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 30 ---
chlorine etc. Some elements have intermediate
properties between those of metals and non-
metals, they are called metalloids; examples
are boron, silicon, germanium, etc.
20 SCIENCE
wonk
ot
eroM
• Compare the texture and colour of the
material obtained by the groups.
• Add carbon disulphide to one part of
the material obtained. Stir well
and filter.
• Add dilute sulphuric acid or dilute
• The number of elements
hydrochloric acid to the other part of
known at present are more
the material obtained.(Note: teacher
than 100. Ninety-two elements
supervision is necessary for
are naturally occurring and the
this activity).
rest are man-made.
• Perform all the above steps with both
• Majority of the elements are
the elements (iron and sulphur)
solid.
separately.
• Eleven elements are in gaseous
state at room temperature.
Now answer
• Two elements are liquid at
room temperature—mercury
• Did the material obtained by the two
and bromine.
groups look the same?
• Elements, gallium and cesium
become liquid at a temperature • Which group has obtained a material
slightly above room with magnetic properties?
temperature (303 K).
• Can we separate the components of the
material obtained?
2.4.2 C
OMPOUNDS
• On adding dilute sulphuric acid or
A compound is a substance composed of two dilute hydrochloric acid, did both the
or more elements, chemically combined with groups obtain a gas? Did the gas in
one another in a fixed proportion. both the cases smell the same
What do we get when two or more elements or different?
are combined?
The gas obtained by Group I is hydrogen,
Activity ______________2.4 it is colourless, odourless and combustible– it
is not advised to do the combustion test for
• Divide the class into two groups. Give
hydrogen in the class. The gas obtained by
5 g of iron filings and 3 g of sulphur
Group II is hydrogen sulphide. It is a colourless
powder in a china dish to both
gas with the smell of rotten eggs.
the groups.
You must have observed that the products
Group I
obtained by both the groups show different
• Mix and crush iron filings and
properties, though the starting materials were
sulphur powder.
the same. Group I has carried out the activity
Group II
involving a physical change whereas in case
• Mix and crush iron filings and
of Group II, a chemical change (a chemical
sulphur powder. Heat this mixture
strongly till red hot. Remove from reaction) has taken place.
flame and let the mixture cool. • The material obtained by group I is a
mixture of the two substances. The
Groups I and II
• Check for magnetism in the material substances given are the elements—iron
obtained. Bring a magnet near the and sulphur.
material and check if the material is
• The properties of the mixture are the
attracted towards the magnet.
same as that of its constituents.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 31 ---
Table 2.2: Mixtures and Compounds
Mixtures Compounds
1. Elements or compounds just mix 1. Elements react to form new compounds.
together to form a mixture and no
new compound is formed.
2. A mixture has a variable composition. 2. The composition of each new substance
is always fixed.
3, A mixture shows the properties of the 3. The new substance has totally different
constituent substances. properties.
4. The constituents can be seperated 4. The constituents can be separated only
fairly easily by physical methods. by chemical or electrochemical
reactions.
• The material obtained by group II is a • The composition of a compound is the
compound. same throughout. We can also observe
• On heating the two elements strongly we that the texture and the colour of the
get a compound, which has totally compound are the same throughout.
different properties compared to the Thus, we can summarise the physical
combining elements. and chemical nature of matter in the
following graphical organiser:
What
you have
learnt
• A mixture contains more than one substance (element and/
or compound) mixed in any proportion.
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 21
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 32 ---
• Mixtures can be separated into pure substances using
appropriate separation techniques.
• A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more
substances. The major component of a solution is called the
solvent, and the minor, the solute.
• The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute present
per unit volume or per unit mass of the solution.
• Materials that are insoluble in a solvent and have particles
that are visible to naked eyes, form a suspension.
A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture.
• Colloids are heterogeneous mixtures in which the particle
size is too small to be seen with the naked eye, but is big
enough to scatter light. Colloids are useful in industry and
daily life. The particles are called the dispersed phase and
the medium in which they are distributed is called the
dispersion medium.
• Pure substances can be elements or compounds. An element
is a form of matter that cannot be broken down by chemical
reactions into simpler substances. A compound is a substance
composed of two or more different types of elements,
chemically combined in a fixed proportion.
• Properties of a compound are different from its constituent
elements, whereas a mixture shows the properties of its
constituting elements or compounds.
Exercises
1. Which separation techniques will you apply for the separation
of the following?
(a) Sodium chloride from its solution in water
(b) Ammonium chloride from a mixture containing sodium
chloride and ammonium chloride
(c) Small pieces of metal in the engine oil of a car
(d) Different pigments from an extract of flower petals
(e) Butter from curd
(f) Oil from water
(g) Tea leaves from tea
(h) Iron pins from sand
(i) Wheat grains from husk
(j) Fine mud particles suspended in water
22 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 33 ---
2. Write the steps you would use for making tea. Use the words
solution, solvent, solute, dissolve, soluble, insoluble, filtrate
and residue.
3. Pragya tested the solubility of three different substances at
different temperatures and collected the data as given below
(results are given in the following table, as grams of substance
dissolved in 100 grams of water to form a saturated solution).
Temperature in K
Substance Dissolved
283 293 313 333 353
Solubility
Potassium nitrate 21 32 62 106 167
Sodium chloride 36 36 36 37 37
Potassium chloride 35 35 40 46 54
Ammonium chloride 24 37 41 55 66
(a) What mass of potassium nitrate would be needed to
produce a saturated solution of potassium nitrate in
50 grams of water at 313 K?
(b) Pragya makes a saturated solution of potassium chloride
in water at 353 K and leaves the solution to cool at
room temperature. What would she observe as the
solution cools? Explain.
(c) Find the solubility of each salt at 293 K. Which salt has
the highest solubility at this temperature?
(d) What is the effect of change of temperature on the
solubility of a salt?
4. Explain the following giving examples.
(a) Saturated solution
(b) Pure substance
(c) Colloid
(d) Suspension
5. Classify each of the following as a homogeneous or
heterogeneous mixture.
soda water, wood, air, soil, vinegar, filtered tea.
6. How would you confirm that a colourless liquid given to you
is pure water?
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 23
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 34 ---
7. Which of the following materials fall in the category of a
“pure substance”?
(a) Ice
(b) Milk
(c) Iron
(d) Hydrochloric acid
(e) Calcium oxide
(f) Mercury
(g) Brick
(h) Wood
(i) Air
8. Identify the solutions among the following mixtures.
(a) Soil
(b) Sea water
(c) Air
(d) Coal
(e) Soda water
9. Which of the following will show “Tyndall effect”?
(a) Salt solution
(b) Milk
(c) Copper sulphate solution
(d) Starch solution
10. Classify the following into elements, compounds and mixtures.
(a) Sodium
(b) Soil
(c) Sugar solution
(d) Silver
(e) Calcium carbonate
(f) Tin
(g) Silicon
(h) Coal
(i) Air
(j) Soap
(k) Methane
(l) Carbon dioxide
(m) Blood
11. Which of the following are chemical changes?
(a) Growth of a plant
(b) Rusting of iron
24 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 35 ---
(c) Mixing of iron filings and sand
(d) Cooking of food
(e) Digestion of food
(f) Freezing of water
(g) Burning of a candle
Group Activity
Take an earthen pot (mutka), some pebbles and sand. Design a
small-scale filtration plant that you could use to clean
muddy water.
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE? 25
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 36 ---
3
C
hapter
AAAAA MMMMM
TTTTTOOOOOMMMMMSSSSS AAAAANNNNNDDDDD OOOOOLLLLLEEEEECCCCCUUUUULLLLLEEEEESSSSS
Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have much experimentations by Lavoisier and
always wondered about the unknown and Joseph L. Proust.
unseen form of matter. The idea of divisibility
of matter was considered long back in India, 3.1.1 L
AW OF CONSERVATION OF MASS
around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher
Maharishi Kanad, postulated that if we go on Is there a change in mass when a chemical
dividing matter (padarth), we shall get smaller change (chemical reaction) takes place?
and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will Activity ______________3.1
come when we shall come across the smallest
particles beyond which further division will •
Take one of the following sets, X and Y
not be possible. He named these particles
of chemicals—
Parmanu. Another Indian philosopher, X Y
Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine (i) copper sulphate sodium carbonate
and said that these particles normally exist
in a combined form which gives us various (ii) barium chloride sodium sulphate
forms of matter.
Around the same era, ancient Greek (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride
philosophers – Democritus and Leucippus
•
Prepare separately a 5% solution of
suggested that if we go on dividing matter, a
any one pair of substances listed
stage will come when particles obtained
under X and Y each in 10 mL in water.
cannot be divided further. Democritus called •
Take a little amount of solution of Y in
these indivisible particles atoms (meaning
a conical flask and some solution of
indivisible). All this was based on
X in an ignition tube.
philosophical considerations and not much •
Hang the ignition tube in the flask
experimental work to validate these ideas carefully; see that the solutions do not
could be done till the eighteenth century. get mixed. Put a cork on the flask
By the end of the eighteenth century, (see Fig. 3.1).
scientists recognised the difference between
elements and compounds and naturally
became interested in finding out how and why
elements combine and what happens when
they combine.
Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation
of chemical sciences by establishing two
important laws of chemical combination.
3.1 Laws of Chemical Combination
The following two laws of chemical Fig. 3.1: Ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped
combination were established after in a conical flask containing solution of Y
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 37 ---
• Weigh the flask with its contents conservation of mass and the law of
carefully. definite proportions.
•
Now tilt and swirl the flask, so that the
solutions X and Y get mixed. John Dalton was born in
•
Weigh again. a poor weaver’s family in
•
What happens in the reaction flask? 1766 in England. He
•
Do you think that a chemical reaction began his career as a
has taken place? teacher at the age of
•
Why should we put a cork on the mouth twelve. Seven years later
of the flask?
he became a school
•
Does the mass of the flask and its
principal. In 1793, Dalton
contents change?
left for Manchester to
teach mathematics, John Dalton
Law of conservation of mass states that
physics and chemistry in
mass can neither be created nor destroyed in
a college. He spent most of his life there
a chemical reaction.
teaching and researching. In 1808, he
presented his atomic theory which was a
3.1.2 L
AW OF CONSTANT PROPORTIONS
turning point in the study of matter.
Lavoisier, along with other scientists, noted
that many compounds were composed of two According to Dalton’s atomic theory, all
or more elements and each such compound matter, whether an element, a compound or
had the same elements in the same a mixture is composed of small particles called
proportions, irrespective of where the atoms. The postulates of this theory may be
compound came from or who prepared it. stated as follows:
In a compound such as water, the ratio of (i) All matter is made of very tiny particles
the mass of hydrogen to the mass of oxygen is called atoms, which participate in
always 1:8, whatever the source of water. Thus, chemical reactions.
if 9 g of water is decomposed, 1 g of hydrogen (ii) Atoms are indivisible particles, which
and 8 g of oxygen are always obtained. cannot be created or destroyed in a
Similarly in ammonia, nitrogen and hydrogen chemical reaction.
are always present in the ratio 14:3 by mass, (iii) Atoms of a given element are identical
in mass and chemical properties.
whatever the method or the source from which
(iv) Atoms of different elements have
it is obtained.
different masses and chemical
This led to the law of constant proportions
properties.
which is also known as the law of definite
(v) Atoms combine in the ratio of small
proportions. This law was stated by Proust as
whole numbers to form compounds.
“In a chemical substance the elements are
(vi) The relative number and kinds of
always present in definite proportions by
atoms are constant in a given
mass”.
compound.
The next problem faced by scientists was
You will study in the next chapter that all
to give appropriate explanations of these laws.
atoms are made up of still smaller particles.
British chemist John Dalton provided the Q
basic theory about the nature of matter. uestions
Dalton picked up the idea of divisibility of
matter, which was till then just a philosophy.
1. In a reaction, 5.3 g of sodium
He took the name ‘atoms’ as given by the
carbonate reacted with 6 g of
Greeks and said that the smallest particles of acetic acid. The products were
matter are atoms. His theory was based on the 2.2 g of carbon dioxide, 0.9 g
laws of chemical combination. Dalton’s atomic water and 8.2 g of sodium
theory provided an explanation for the law of acetate. Show that these
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 27
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 38 ---
observations are in agreement We might think that if atoms are so
with the law of conservation of insignificant in size, why should we care about
mass. them? This is because our entire world is made
sodium carbonate + acetic acid up of atoms. We may not be able to see them,
→ sodium acetate + carbon but they are there, and constantly affecting
dioxide + water whatever we do. Through modern techniques,
2. Hydrogen and oxygen combine in we can now produce magnified images of
the ratio of 1:8 by mass to form
surfaces of elements showing atoms.
water. What mass of oxygen gas
would be required to react
completely with 3 g of hydrogen
gas?
3. Which postulate of Dalton’s
atomic theory is the result of the
law of conservation of mass?
4. Which postulate of Dalton’s
atomic theory can explain the law
of definite proportions?
3.2 What is an Atom?
Have you ever observed a mason building
walls, from these walls a room and then a
Fig. 3.2: An image of the surface of silicon
collection of rooms to form a building? What
is the building block of the huge building?
What about the building block of an ant-hill? 3.2.1 W HAT ARE THE MODERN DAY
It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the
SYMBOLS OF ATOMS OF DIFFERENT
building blocks of all matter are atoms.
?
ELEMENTS
How big are atoms?
Dalton was the first scientist to use the
Atoms are very small, they are smaller than
symbols for elements in a very specific sense.
anything that we can imagine or compare
When he used a symbol for an element he
with. More than millions of atoms when
also meant a definite quantity of that element,
stacked would make a layer barely as thick
that is, one atom of that element. Berzilius
as this sheet of paper.
suggested that the symbols of elements be
Atomic radius is measured in nanometres. made from one or two letters of the name of
1/10 9 m = 1 nm the element.
1 m = 109 nm
Relative Sizes
Radii (in m) Example
10–10 Atom of hydrogen
10–9 Molecule of water
10–8 Molecule of haemoglobin
10–4 Grain of sand
10–3 Ant
Fig. 3.3: Symbols for some elements as proposed by
10–1 Apple
Dalton
28 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 39 ---
In the beginning, the names of elements passage of time and repeated usage you will
were derived from the name of the place
automatically be able to reproduce
where they were found for the first time. For
the symbols).
example, the name copper was taken from
Cyprus. Some names were taken from
3.2.2 A
TOMIC MASS
specific colours. For example, gold was taken
from the English word meaning yellow.
The most remarkable concept that Dalton’s
Now-a-days, IUPAC (International Union of
atomic theory proposed was that of the atomic
Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an
mass. According to him, each element had a
international scientific organisation which
approves names of elements, symbols and characteristic atomic mass. The theory could
units. Many of the symbols are the first one explain the law of constant proportions so well
or two letters of the element’s name in that scientists were prompted to measure the
English. The first letter of a symbol is always
atomic mass of an atom. Since determining the
written as a capital letter (uppercase) and the
mass of an individual atom was a relatively
second letter as a small letter (lowercase).
difficult task, relative atomic masses were
For example
determined using the laws of chemical
(i) hydrogen, H combinations and the compounds formed.
(ii) aluminium, Al and not AL
Let us take the example of a compound,
(iii) cobalt, Co and not CO.
carbon monoxide (CO) formed by carbon and
Symbols of some elements are formed from oxygen. It was observed experimentally that 3
the first letter of the name and a letter,
g of carbon combines with 4 g of oxygen to
appearing later in the name. Examples are: (i)
form CO. In other words, carbon combines
chlorine, Cl, (ii) zinc, Zn etc.
with 4/3 times its mass of oxygen. Suppose
Other symbols have been taken from the
names of elements in Latin, German or Greek. we define the atomic mass unit (earlier
For example, the symbol of iron is Fe from its abbreviated as ‘amu’, but according to the
Latin name ferrum, sodium is Na from natrium, latest IUPAC recommendations, it is now
potassium is K from kalium. Therefore, each
written as ‘u’ – unified mass) as equal to the
element has a name and a unique
mass of one carbon atom, then we would
chemical symbol.
Table 3.1: Symbols for some elements
Element Symbol Element Symbol Element Symbol
Aluminium Al Copper Cu Nitrogen N
Argon Ar Fluorine F Oxygen O
Barium Ba Gold Au Potassium K
Boron B Hydrogen H Silicon Si
Bromine Br Iodine I Silver Ag
Calcium Ca Iron Fe Sodium Na
Carbon C Lead Pb Sulphur S
Chlorine Cl Magnesium Mg Uranium U
Cobalt Co Neon Ne Zinc Zn
(The above table is given for you to refer to assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and
whenever you study about elements. Do not oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However, it
bother to memorise all in one go. With the is more convenient to have these numbers as
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 29
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 40 ---
whole numbers or as near to a whole numbers mass of the atom, as compared to 1/12th the
as possible. While searching for various mass of one carbon-12 atom.
atomic mass units, scientists initially took 1/
16 of the mass of an atom of naturally Table 3.2: Atomic masses of
occurring oxygen as the unit. This was a few elements
considered relevant due to two reasons:
• oxygen reacted with a large number of Element Atomic Mass (u)
elements and formed compounds.
• this atomic mass unit gave masses of Hydrogen 1
most of the elements as whole numbers. Carbon 12
However, in 1961 for a universally Nitrogen 14
accepted atomic mass unit, carbon-12 isotope
Oxygen 16
was chosen as the standard reference for
measuring atomic masses. One atomic mass Sodium 23
unit is a mass unit equal to exactly one-twelfth Magnesium 24
(1/12th) the mass of one atom of carbon-12.
Sulphur 32
The relative atomic masses of all elements
have been found with respect to an atom of Chlorine 35.5
carbon-12. Calcium 40
Imagine a fruit seller selling fruits without
any standard weight with him. He takes a
watermelon and says, “this has a mass equal 3.2.3 H ?
OW DO ATOMS EXIST
to 12 units” (12 watermelon units or 12 fruit
mass units). He makes twelve equal pieces of Atoms of most elements are not able to exist
the watermelon and finds the mass of each fruit independently. Atoms form molecules and
he is selling, relative to the mass of one piece ions. These molecules or ions aggregate in
of the watermelon. Now he sells his fruits by large numbers to form the matter that we can
relative fruit mass unit (fmu), as in Fig. 3.4. see, feel or touch.
Q
uestions
1. Define the atomic mass unit.
2. Why is it not possible to see an
atom with naked eyes?
3.3 What is a Molecule?
A molecule is in general a group of two or
more atoms that are chemically bonded
together, that is, tightly held together by
attractive forces. A molecule can be defined
as the smallest particle of an element or a
Fig. 3.4 : (a) Watermelon, (b) 12 pieces, (c) 1/12 of
watermelon, (d) how the fruit seller can compound that is capable of an independent
weigh the fruits using pieces of watermelon existence and shows all the properties of that
substance. Atoms of the same element or of
Similarly, the relative atomic mass of the different elements can join together to form
atom of an element is defined as the average molecules.
30 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 41 ---
3.3.1 M
OLECULES OF ELEMENTS Table 3.4 : Molecules of some
compounds
The molecules of an element are constituted
by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many Compound Combining Ratio
elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) etc. Elements by
are made up of only one atom of that element. Mass
But this is not the case with most of the non- Water (H O) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8
2
metals. For example, a molecule of oxygen
Ammonia (NH ) Nitrogen, Hydrogen 14:3
3
consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it
Carbon
is known as a diatomic molecule, O . If 3
2 dioxide (CO ) Carbon, Oxygen 3:8
atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead 2
of the usual 2, we get ozone, O . The number
3 Activity ______________3.2
of atoms constituting a molecule is known as
its atomicity. •
Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of
Metals and some other elements, such as atoms present in molecules and Table
carbon, do not have a simple structure but 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find
the ratio by number of the atoms of
consist of a very large and indefinite number
elements in the molecules of
of atoms bonded together.
compounds given in Table 3.4.
Let us look at the atomicity of some • The ratio by number of atoms for a
non-metals. water molecule can be found as follows:
Element Ratio Atomic Mass Simplest
Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some by mass ratio/ ratio
elements mass (u) atomic
mass
Type of Name Atomicity
1
Element
H 1 1 =1 2
1
Non-Metal Argon Monoatomic
8 1
Helium Monoatomic O 8 16 = 1
16 2
Oxygen Diatomic
•
Thus, the ratio by number of atoms for
Hydrogen Diatomic
water is H:O = 2:1.
Nitrogen Diatomic
3.3.3 W ?
Chlorine Diatomic HATISANION
Phosphorus Tetra-atomic Compounds composed of metals and non-
metals contain charged species. The charged
Sulphur Poly-atomic
species are known as ions. Ions may consist
of a single charged atom or a group of atoms
that have a net charge on them. An ion can be
negatively or positively charged. A negatively
3.3.2 M
OLECULES OF COMPOUNDS
charged ion is called an ‘anion’ and the
Atoms of different elements join together positively charged ion, a ‘cation’. Take, for
in definite proportions to form molecules example, sodium chloride (NaCl). Its
of compounds. Few examples are given in constituent particles are positively charged
Table 3.4. sodium ions (Na+) and negatively charged
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 31
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 42 ---
chloride ions (Cl–). A group of atoms carrying learn the symbols and combining capacity of
a charge is known as a polyatomic ion (Table the elements.
3.6). We shall learn more about the formation
The combining power (or capacity) of an
of ions in Chapter 4.
element is known as its valency. Valency can
be used to find out how the atoms of an
Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds
element will combine with the atom(s) of
Ionic Constituting Ratio another element to form a chemical compound.
Compound Elements by The valency of the atom of an element can be
Mass
thought of as hands or arms of that atom.
Calcium oxide Calcium and Human beings have two arms and an
oxygen 5:2 octopus has eight. If one octopus has to catch
hold of a few people in such a manner that all
Magnesium Magnesium
the eight arms of the octopus and both arms
sulphide and sulphur 3:4
of all the humans are locked, how many
Sodium Sodium humans do you think the octopus can hold?
chloride and chlorine 23:35.5 Represent the octopus with O and humans
with H. Can you write a formula for this
combination? Do you get OH as the formula?
3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae 4
The subscript 4 indicates the number of
humans held by the octopus.
The chemical formula of a compound is a
symbolic representation of its composition. The The valencies of some common ions are
chemical formulae of different compounds can given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about
be written easily. For this exercise, we need to valency in the next chapter.
Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions
Vale- Name of Symbol Non- Symbol Polyatomic Symbol
ncy ion metallic ions
element
1. Sodium Na+ Hydrogen H+ Ammonium NH+
4
Potassium K+ Hydride H- Hydroxide OH–
Silver Ag+ Chloride Cl- Nitrate NO –
3
Copper (I)* Cu+ Bromide Br- Hydrogen
Iodide I– carbonate HCO–
3
2. Magnesium Mg2+ Oxide O2- Carbonate CO 2–
3
Calcium Ca2+ Sulphide S2- Sulphite SO 2–
3
Zinc Zn2+ Sulphate SO 2–
4
Iron (II)* Fe2+
Copper (II)* Cu2+
3. Aluminium Al3+ Nitride N3- Phosphate PO 3–
4
Iron (III)* Fe3+
* Some elements show more than one valency. A Roman numeral shows their valency in a bracket.
32 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 43 ---
The rules that you have to follow while writing 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride
a chemical formula are as follows:
• the valencies or charges on the ion
must balance.
• when a compound consists of a metal and
a non-metal, the name or symbol of the
metal is written first. For example: calcium
oxide (CaO), sodium chloride (NaCl), iron
sulphide (FeS), copper oxide (CuO), etc.,
where oxygen, chlorine, sulphur are non- For magnesium chloride, we write the
metals and are written on the right, symbol of cation (Mg2+) first followed by the
whereas calcium, sodium, iron and symbol of anion (Cl-). Then their charges are
copper are metals, and are written on
criss-crossed to get the formula.
the left.
• in compounds formed with polyatomic ions, 4. Formula of magnesium chloride
the number of ions present in the
compound is indicated by enclosing the
formula of ion in a bracket and writing the
number of ions outside the bracket. For
example, Mg (OH) . In case the number of
2
polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not Formula : MgCl
2
required. For example, NaOH.
Thus, in magnesium chloride, there are
3.4.1 F
ORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS
two chloride ions (Cl-) for each magnesium
The simplest compounds, which are made up
ion (Mg2+).The positive and negative charges
of two different elements are called binary
must balance each other and the overall
compounds. Valencies of some ions are given
structure must be neutral. Note that in the
in Table 3.6. You can use these to write
formula, the charges on the ions are
formulae for compounds.
not indicated.
While writing the chemical formulae for
compounds, we write the constituent elements
and their valencies as shown below. Then we Some more examples
must crossover the valencies of the
(a) Formula for aluminium oxide:
combining atoms.
Examples
1. Formula of hydrogen chloride
Formula : Al O
2 3
(b) Formula for calcium oxide:
Formula of the compound would be HCl.
2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide
Here, the valencies of the two elements
are the same. You may arrive at the formula
Ca O . But we simplify the formula as CaO.
2 2
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 33
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 44 ---
(c) Formula of sodium nitrate:
following formulae:
(i) Al (SO )
2 4 3
(ii) CaCl
2
(iii) K SO
2 4
(iv) KNO
3
Formula : NaNO (v) CaCO .
3 3
3. What is meant by the term
(d) Formula of calcium hydroxide: chemical formula?
4. How many atoms are present in a
(i) H S molecule and
2
(ii) PO 3– ion?
4
Formula : Ca(OH) 3.5 Molecular Mass
2
Note that the formula of calcium
3.5.1 M
OLECULAR MASS
hydroxide is Ca(OH) and not CaOH . We use
2 2
brackets when we have two or more of the In section 3.2.2 we discussed the concept of
same ions in the formula. Here, the bracket atomic mass. This concept can be extended
around OH with a subscript 2 indicates that to calculate molecular masses. The molecular
there are two hydroxyl (OH) groups joined to mass of a substance is the sum of the atomic
one calcium atom. In other words, there are masses of all the atoms in a molecule of the
two atoms each of oxygen and hydrogen in substance. It is therefore the relative mass of
calcium hydroxide. a molecule expressed in atomic mass units (u).
(e) Formula of sodium carbonate:
Example 3.1 (a) Calculate the relative
molecular mass of water (H O).
2
(b) Calculate the molecular mass of
HNO .
3
Solution:
Formula : Na CO
2 3
(a) Atomic mass of hydrogen = 1u,
In the above example, brackets are not needed
oxygen = 16 u
if there is only one ion present.
So the molecular mass of water, which
(f) Formula of ammonium sulphate: contains two atoms of hydrogen and one
atom of oxygen is = 2 × 1+ 1×16
= 18 u
(b) The molecular mass of HNO = the
3
atomic mass of H + the atomic mass of
Q Formula : (NH ) SO N+ 3 × the atomic mass of O
4 2 4
uestions = 1 + 14 + 48 = 63 u
1. Write down the formulae of
3.5.2 F
ORMULA UNIT MASS
(i) sodium oxide
(ii) aluminium chloride The formula unit mass of a substance is a sum
(iii) sodium suphide of the atomic masses of all atoms in a formula
(iv) magnesium hydroxide unit of a compound. Formula unit mass is
2. Write down the names of calculated in the same manner as we calculate
compounds represented by the the molecular mass. The only difference is that
34 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 45 ---
Q
we use the word formula unit for those uestions
substances whose constituent particles are
ions. For example, sodium chloride as 1. Calculate the molecular masses
discussed above, has a formula unit NaCl. Its of H , O , Cl , CO , CH , C H ,
2 2 2 2 4 2 6
formula unit mass can be calculated as– C H , NH , CH OH.
1 × 23 + 1 × 35.5 = 58.5 u 2. C 2 alc 4 ulat 3 e th 3 e formula unit
masses of ZnO, Na O, K CO ,
Example 3.2 Calculate the formula unit 2 2 3
given atomic masses of Zn = 65 u,
mass of CaCl .
Na = 23 u, K = 39 u, C = 12 u,
2
Solution: and O = 16 u.
Atomic mass of Ca
+ (2 × atomic mass of Cl)
= 40 + 2 × 35.5 = 40 + 71 = 111 u
What
you have
learnt
• During a chemical reaction, the sum of the masses of the
reactants and products remains unchanged. This is known
as the Law of Conservation of Mass.
• In a pure chemical compound, elements are always present
in a definite proportion by mass. This is known as the Law
of Definite Proportions.
• An atom is the smallest particle of the element that cannot
usually exist independently and retain all its chemical
properties.
• A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or a
compound capable of independent existence under ordinary
conditions. It shows all the properties of the substance.
• A chemical formula of a compound shows its constituent
elements and the number of atoms of each combining
element.
• Clusters of atoms that act as an ion are called polyatomic
ions. They carry a fixed charge on them.
• The chemical formula of a molecular compound is
determined by the valency of each element.
• In ionic compounds, the charge on each ion is used to
determine the chemical formula of the compound.
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 35
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 46 ---
Exercises
1. A 0.24 g sample of compound of oxygen and boron was found
by analysis to contain 0.096 g of boron and 0.144 g of oxygen.
Calculate the percentage composition of the compound by
weight.
2. When 3.0 g of carbon is burnt in 8.00 g oxygen, 11.00 g of
carbon dioxide is produced. What mass of carbon dioxide will
be formed when 3.00 g of carbon is burnt in 50.00 g of
oxygen? Which law of chemical combination will govern your
answer?
3. What are polyatomic ions? Give examples.
4. Write the chemical formulae of the following.
(a) Magnesium chloride
(b) Calcium oxide
(c) Copper nitrate
(d) Aluminium chloride
(e) Calcium carbonate.
5. Give the names of the elements present in the following
compounds.
(a) Quick lime
(b) Hydrogen bromide
(c) Baking powder
(d) Potassium sulphate.
6. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances.
(a) Ethyne, C H
2 2
(b) Sulphur molecule, S
8
(c) Phosphorus molecule, P (Atomic mass of phosphorus
4
= 31)
(d) Hydrochloric acid, HCl
(e) Nitric acid, HNO
3
Group Activity
Play a game for writing formulae.
Example1 : Make placards with symbols and valencies of the
elements separately. Each student should hold two
placards, one with the symbol in the right hand and
the other with the valency in the left hand. Keeping
the symbols in place, students should criss-cross their
valencies to form the formula of a compound.
36 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 47 ---
Example 2 : A low cost model for writing formulae: Take empty
blister packs of medicines. Cut them in groups,
according to the valency of the element, as shown in
the figure. Now, you can make formulae by fixing
one type of ion into other.
For example:
Na+ SO 2- P0 3-
4 4
Formula for sodium sulphate:
2 sodium ions can be fixed on one sulphate ion.
Hence, the formula will be: Na SO
2 4
Do it yourself :
Now, write the formula of sodium phosphate.
ATOMS AND MOLECULES 37
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 48 ---
4
C
hapter
SSSSS AAAAA
TTTTTRRRRRUUUUUCCCCCTTTTTUUUUURRRRREEEEE OOOOOFFFFF TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE TTTTTOOOOOMMMMM
In Chapter 3, we have learnt that atoms and From these activities, can we conclude
molecules are the fundamental building that on rubbing two objects together, they
blocks of matter. The existence of different become electrically charged? Where does this
kinds of matter is due to different atoms
charge come from? This question can be
constituting them. Now the questions arise:
answered by knowing that an atom is divisible
(i) What makes the atom of one element
and consists of charged particles.
different from the atom of another element?
Many scientists contributed in revealing
and (ii) Are atoms really indivisible, as
the presence of charged particles in an atom.
proposed by Dalton, or are there smaller
It was known by 1900 that the atom was
constituents inside the atom? We shall find
out the answers to these questions in this indivisible particle but contained at least one
chapter. We will learn about sub-atomic sub-atomic particle – the electron identified by
particles and the various models that have J.J. Thomson. Even before the electron was
been proposed to explain how these particles identified, E. Goldstein in 1886 discovered the
are arranged within the atom. presence of new radiations in a gas discharge
A major challenge before the scientists at and called them canal rays. These rays were
the end of the 19th century was to reveal the
positively charged radiations which ultimately
structure of the atom as well as to explain its
led to the discovery of another sub-atomic
important properties. The elucidation of the
particle. This sub-atomic particle had a charge,
structure of atoms is based on a series of
equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to that
experiments.
of the electron. Its mass was approximately
One of the first indications that atoms are
2000 times as that of the electron. It was given
not indivisible, comes from studying static
electricity and the condition under which the name of proton. In general, an electron is
electricity is conducted by different represented as ‘e–’ and a proton as ‘p+’. The
substances. mass of a proton is taken as one unit and its
charge as plus one. The mass of an electron is
4.1 Charged Particles in Matter considered to be negligible and its charge is
minus one.
For understanding the nature of charged
It seemed that an atom was composed of
particles in matter, let us carry out the
protons and electrons, mutually balancing
following activities:
their charges. It also appeared that the protons
Activity ______________4.1 were in the interior of the atom, for whereas
electrons could easily be removed off but
A. Comb dry hair. Does the comb then
not protons. Now the big question was:
attract small pieces of paper?
what sort of structure did these particles of
B. Rub a glass rod with a silk cloth and
bring the rod near an inflated balloon. the atom form? We will find the answer to
Observe what happens. this question below.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 49 ---
Q
uestions
J.J. Thomson (1856–
1940), a British
1. What are canal rays?
physicist, was born in
2. If an atom contains one electron
Cheetham Hill, a suburb
and one proton, will it carry any
of Manchester, on
charge or not?
18 December 1856. He
was awarded the Nobel
prize in Physics in 1906
for his work on the
4.2 The Structure of an Atom
discovery of electrons. He
directed the Cavendish Laboratory at
We have learnt Dalton’s atomic theory in
Cambridge for 35 years and seven of his
Chapter 3, which suggested that the atom
research assistants subsequently won
was indivisible and indestructible. But the
Nobel prizes.
discovery of two fundamental particles
(electrons and protons) inside the atom, led Thomson proposed that:
to the failure of this aspect of Dalton’s atomic (i) An atom consists of a positively
theory. It was then considered necessary to charged sphere and the electrons are
know how electrons and protons are arranged embedded in it.
within an atom. For explaining this, many
(ii) The negative and positive charges are
scientists proposed various atomic models.
equal in magnitude. So, the atom as a
J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a
whole is electrically neutral.
model for the structure of an atom.
Although Thomson’s model explained that
atoms are electrically neutral, the results of
4.2.1 T ’
HOMSON SMODELOFANATOM
experiments carried out by other scientists
could not be explained by this model, as we
Thomson proposed the model of an atom to
will see below.
be similar to that of a Christmas pudding.
The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge,
4.2.2 R ’
were like currants (dry fruits) in a spherical UTHERFORD SMODELOFANATOM
Christmas pudding. We can also think of a
Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing
watermelon, the positive charge in the atom
how the electrons are arranged within an
is spread all over like the red edible part of
atom. Rutherford designed an experiment for
the watermelon, while the electrons are
this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha
studded in the positively charged sphere, like
(α)-particles were made to fall on a thin
the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1).
gold foil.
• He selected a gold foil because he wanted
as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil
was about 1000 atoms thick.
• α-particles are doubly-charged helium
ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u, the
fast-moving α-particles have a
considerable amount of energy.
• It was expected that α-particles would be
deflected by the sub-atomic particles in
the gold atoms. Since the α-particles were
much heavier than the protons, he did
Fig.4.1: Thomson’s model of an atom not expect to see large deflections.
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 39
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 50 ---
He will hear a sound when each stone strikes
the wall. If he repeats this ten times, he will
hear the sound ten times. But if a blind-folded
child were to throw stones at a barbed-wire
fence, most of the stones would not hit the
fencing and no sound would be heard. This is
because there are lots of gaps in the fence
which allow the stone to pass through them.
Following a similar reasoning, Rutherford
concluded from the α-particle scattering
experiment that—
(i) Most of the space inside the atom is
empty because most of the α-particles
passed through the gold foil without
getting deflected.
(ii) Very few particles were deflected from
their path, indicating that the positive
charge of the atom occupies very little
Fig. 4.2: Scattering of α-particles by a gold foil
space.
(iii) A very small fraction of α-particles
But, the α-particle scattering experiment
were deflected by 1800, indicating that
gave totally unexpected results (Fig. 4.2). The
all the positive charge and mass of the
following observations were made:
gold atom were concentrated in a very
(i) Most of the fast moving α-particles
small volume within the atom.
passed straight through the gold foil.
From the data he also calculated that the
(ii) Some of the α-particles were deflected radius of the nucleus is about 105 times less
by the foil by small angles. than the radius of the atom.
(iii) Surprisingly one out of every 12000 On the basis of his experiment,
particles appeared to rebound. Rutherford put forward the nuclear model of
In the words of Rutherford, “This result an atom, which had the following features:
was almost as incredible as if you fire a (i) There is a positively charged centre in
15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it an atom called the nucleus. Nearly all
comes back and hits you”. the mass of an atom resides in the
nucleus.
(ii) The electrons revolve around the
E. Rutherford (1871–1937)
nucleus in circular paths.
was born at Spring Grove
(iii) The size of the nucleus is very small
on 30 August 1871. He was
as compared to the size of the atom.
known as the ‘Father’ of
nuclear physics. He is
Drawbacks of Rutherford’s model of
famous for his work on
the atom
radioactivity and the
The revolution of the electron in a circular orbit
discovery of the nucleus of an atom with
is not expected to be stable. Any particle in a
the gold foil experiment. He got the Nobel
circular orbit would undergo acceleration.
prize in chemistry in 1908.
During acceleration, charged particles would
radiate energy. Thus, the revolving electron
Let us think of an activity in an open field would lose energy and finally fall into the
to understand the implications of this nucleus. If this were so, the atom should be
experiment. Let a child stand in front of a highly unstable and hence matter would not
wall with his eyes closed. Let him throw exist in the form that we know. We know that
stones at the wall from a distance. atoms are quite stable.
40 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 51 ---
Q
4.2.3 B ’ uestions
OHR SMODELOFATOM
In order to overcome the objections raised 1. On the basis of Thomson’s model
against Rutherford’s model of the atom, of an atom, explain how the atom
Neils Bohr put forward the following is neutral as a whole.
postulates about the model of an atom: 2. On the basis of Rutherford’s
(i) Only certain special orbits known as model of an atom, which sub-
discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed atomic particle is present in the
inside the atom. nucleus of an atom?
(ii) While revolving in discrete orbits the 3. Draw a sketch of Bohr’s model
electrons do not radiate energy. of an atom with three shells.
4. What do you think would be the
observation if the α-particle
Neils Bohr (1885–1962) scattering experiment is carried
was born in Copenhagen out using a foil of a metal other
on 7 October 1885. He was than gold?
appointed professor of
physics at Copenhagen 4.2.4 N EUTRONS
University in 1916. He got
In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another sub-
the Nobel prize for his work
atomic particle which had no charge and a
on the structure of atom in
mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was
1922. Among Professor
eventually named as neutron. Neutrons are
Bohr’s numerous writings, three appearing
present in the nucleus of all atoms, except
as books are:
hydrogen. In general, a neutron is
(i) The Theory of Spectra and Atomic
represented as ‘n’. The mass of an atom is
Constitution, (ii) Atomic Theory and,
therefore given by the sum of the masses of
(iii) The Description of Nature.
protons and neutrons present in the nucleus.
Q
uestions
These orbits or shells are called energy
levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in 1. Name the three sub-atomic
Fig. 4.3. particles of an atom.
2. Helium atom has an atomic mass
of 4 u and two protons in its
nucleus. How many neutrons
does it have?
4.3 How are Electrons Distributed
in Different Orbits (Shells)?
The distribution of electrons into different
orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr
and Bury.
Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an atom The following rules are followed for writing
the number of electrons in different energy
These orbits or shells are represented by levels or shells:
the letters K,L,M,N,… or the numbers, (i) The maximum number of electrons
n=1,2,3,4,…. present in a shell is given by the
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 41
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 52 ---
formula 2n2, where ‘n’ is the orbit • The composition of atoms of the first
number or energy level index, 1,2,3,…. eighteen elements is given in Table 4.1.
Q
Hence the maximum number of
uestions
electrons in different shells are as
follows:
1. Write the distribution of electrons
first orbit or K-shell will be = 2 × 12 = 2,
in carbon and sodium atoms.
second orbit or L-shell will be = 2 × 22 = 8,
2. If K and L shells of an atom are
third orbit or M-shell will be = 2 × 32 = 18, full, then what would be the total
fourth orbit or N-shell will be = 2 × 42 number of electrons in the atom?
= 32, and so on.
(ii) The maximum number of electrons that
can be accommodated in the outermost
4.4 Valency
orbit is 8.
(iii) Electrons are not accommodated in a
We have learnt how the electrons in an atom
given shell, unless the inner shells are
are arranged in different shells/orbits. The
filled. That is, the shells are filled in a
electrons present in the outermost shell of
step-wise manner. an atom are known as the valence electrons.
Atomic structure of the first eighteen From the Bohr-Bury scheme, we also know
elements is shown schematically in Fig. 4.4. that the outermost shell of an atom can
Fig.4.4: Schematic atomic structure of the first eighteen elements
Activity ______________4.2 accommodate a maximum of 8 electrons. It
was observed that the atoms of elements,
completely filled with 8 electrons in the
• Make a static atomic model displaying outermost shell show little chemical activity.
electronic configuration of the first In other words, their combining capacity or
eighteen elements. valency is zero. Of these inert elements, the
42 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 53 ---
Table 4.1: Composition of Atoms of the First Eighteen Elements
with Electron Distribution in Various Shells
Name of Symbol Atomic Number Number Number Distribution of Vale-
Element Number of of of Electrons ncy
Protons Neutrons Electrons K L M N
Hydrogen H 1 1 - 1 1 - - - 1
Helium He 2 2 2 2 2 - - - 0
Lithium Li 3 3 4 3 2 1 - - 1
Beryllium Be 4 4 5 4 2 2 - - 2
Boron B 5 5 6 5 2 3 - - 3
Carbon C 6 6 6 6 2 4 - - 4
Nitrogen N 7 7 7 7 2 5 - - 3
Oxygen O 8 8 8 8 2 6 - - 2
Fluorine F 9 9 10 9 2 7 - - 1
Neon Ne 10 10 10 10 2 8 - - 0
Sodium Na 11 11 12 11 2 8 1 - 1
Magnesium Mg 12 12 12 12 2 8 2 - 2
Aluminium Al 13 13 14 13 2 8 3 - 3
Silicon Si 14 14 14 14 2 8 4 - 4
Phosphorus P 15 15 16 15 2 8 5 - 3,5
Sulphur S 16 16 16 16 2 8 6 - 2
Chlorine Cl 17 17 18 17 2 8 7 - 1
Argon Ar 18 18 22 18 2 8 8 0
helium atom has two electrons in its outermost element, that is, the valency discussed in the
shell and all other elements have atoms with previous chapter. For example, hydrogen/
eight electrons in the outermost shell. lithium/sodium atoms contain one electron
each in their outermost shell, therefore each
The combining capacity of the atoms of
one of them can lose one electron. So, they are
elements, that is, their tendency to react and
said to have valency of one. Can you tell, what
form molecules with atoms of the same or
is valency of magnesium and aluminium? It
different elements, was thus explained as an
is two and three, respectively, because
attempt to attain a fully-filled outermost shell.
magnesium has two electrons in its outermost
An outermost-shell, which had eight electrons
shell and aluminium has three electrons in
was said to possess an octet. Atoms would
its outermost shell.
thus react, so as to achieve an octet in the
If the number of electrons in the
outermost shell. This was done by sharing, outermost shell of an atom is close to its full
gaining or losing electrons. The number of capacity, then valency is determined in a
electrons gained, lost or shared so as to make different way. For example, the fluorine atom
the octet of electrons in the outermost shell, has 7 electrons in the outermost shell, and its
gives us directly the combining capacity of the valency could be 7. But it is easier for
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 43
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 54 ---
fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing 6 neutrons, 6 u + 6 u = 12 u. Similarly, the
seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14
by subtracting seven electrons from the octet neutrons). The mass number is defined as the
and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. sum of the total number of protons and
Valency can be calculated in a similar manner neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It
for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that is denoted by ‘A’. In the notation for an atom,
you get from this calculation? the atomic number, mass number and symbol
Therefore, an atom of each element has a of the element are to be written as:
definite combining capacity, called its valency.
Mass Number
Valency of the first eighteen elements is given A
in the last column of Table 4.1. Symbol of
Q X
element
uestion
Z
Atomic Number
1. How will you find the valency
For example, nitrogen is written as
14N.
7
of chlorine, sulphur and
Q
magnesium?
uestions
1. If number of electrons in an atom
is 8 and number of protons is also
4.5 Atomic Number and Mass
8, then (i) what is the atomic
Number number of the atom? and (ii) what
is the charge on the atom?
2. With the help of Table 4.1, find
4.5.1 A TOMIC NUMBER out the mass number of oxygen
and sulphur atom.
We know that protons are present in the
nucleus of an atom. It is the number of
4.6 Isotopes
protons of an atom, which determines its
atomic number. It is denoted by ‘Z’. All atoms
In nature, a number of atoms of some
of an element have the same atomic number,
elements have been identified, which have the
Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number
same atomic number but different mass
of protons they possess. For hydrogen, Z = 1,
numbers. For example, take the case of
because in hydrogen atom, only one proton
hydrogen atom, it has three atomic species,
is present in the nucleus. Similarly, for
1 2
carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number namely protium ( H), deuterium ( H or D)
1 1
is defined as the total number of protons
3
and tritium ( H or T). The atomic number of
present in the nucleus of an atom. 1
each one is 1, but the mass number is 1, 2
4.5.2 M ASS NUMBER and 3, respectively. Other such examples are
12 14 35
After studying the properties of the sub- (i) carbon, C and C, (ii) chlorine, Cl
6 6 17
atomic particles of an atom, we can conclude
37
that mass of an atom is practically due to and 17 Cl, etc.
protons and neutrons alone. These are On the basis of these examples, isotopes
present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence are defined as the atoms of the same element,
protons and neutrons are also called having the same atomic number but different
nucleons. Therefore, the mass of an atom mass numbers. Therefore, we can say that
resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of there are three isotopes of hydrogen atom,
carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and namely protium, deuterium and tritium.
44 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 55 ---
Many elements consist of a mixture of Applications
isotopes. Each isotope of an element is a pure
Since the chemical properties of all the
substance. The chemical properties of
isotopes of an element are the same,
isotopes are similar but their physical
normally we are not concerned about
properties are different.
taking a mixture. But some isotopes have
Chlorine occurs in nature in two isotopic
special properties which find them useful
forms, with masses 35 u and 37 u in the ratio
in various fields. Some of them are :
of 3:1. Obviously, the question arises: what (i) An isotope of uranium is used as a fuel
should we take as the mass of chlorine atom? in nuclear reactors.
Let us find out. (ii) An isotope of cobalt is used in the
The average atomic mass of chlorine atom, treatment of cancer.
on the basis of above data, will be (iii) An isotope of iodine is used in the
treatment of goitre.
 75 25 
35 × + 37 × 
  100 100 4.6.1 I SOBARS
Let us consider two elements — calcium,
105 37 142 
=  +  = = 35.5u atomic number 20, and argon, atomic
 4 4  4  number 18. The number of protons in these
atoms is different, but the mass number of
both these elements is 40. That is, the total
The mass of an atom of any natural element
number of nucleons is the same in the atoms
is taken as the average mass of all the naturally
of this pair of elements. Atoms of different
occuring atoms of that element. If an element
elements with different atomic numbers, which
has no isotopes, then the mass of its atom
have the same mass number, are known as
would be the same as the sum of protons and
isobars.
neutrons in it. But if an element occurs in Q
isotopic forms, then we have to know the uestions
percentage of each isotopic form and then the
average mass is calculated. 1. For the symbol H,D and T
This does not mean that any one atom of tabulate three sub-atomic
chlorine has a fractional mass of 35.5 u. It particles found in each of them.
means that if you take a certain amount of 2. Write the electronic
chlorine, it will contain both isotopes of configuration of any one pair of
chlorine and the average mass is 35.5 u. isotopes and isobars.
What
you have
learnt
• Credit for the discovery of electron and proton goes to J.J.
Thomson and E.Goldstein, respectively.
• J.J. Thomson proposed that electrons are embedded in a
positive sphere.
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 45
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 56 ---
• Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment led to the
discovery of the atomic nucleus.
• Rutherford’s model of the atom proposed that a very tiny
nucleus is present inside the atom and electrons revolve
around this nucleus. The stability of the atom could not be
explained by this model.
• Neils Bohr’s model of the atom was more successful. He
proposed that electrons are distributed in different shells with
discrete energy around the nucleus. If the atomic shells are
complete, then the atom will be stable and less reactive.
• J. Chadwick discovered presence of neutrons in the nucleus of
an atom. So, the three sub-atomic particles of an atom are:
(i) electrons, (ii) protons and (iii) neutrons. Electrons are
negatively charged, protons are positively charged and neutrons
1
have no charges. The mass of an electron is about times
2000
the mass of an hydrogen atom. The mass of a proton and a
neutron is taken as one unit each.
• Shells of an atom are designated as K,L,M,N,….
• Valency is the combining capacity of an atom.
• The atomic number of an element is the same as the number
of protons in the nucleus of its atom.
• The mass number of an atom is equal to the number of nucleons
in its nucleus.
• Isotopes are atoms of the same element, which have different
mass numbers.
• Isobars are atoms having the same mass number but different
atomic numbers.
• Elements are defined by the number of protons they possess.
Exercises
1. Compare the properties of electrons, protons and neutrons.
2. What are the limitations of J.J. Thomson’s model of the atom?
3. What are the limitations of Rutherford’s model of the atom?
4. Describe Bohr’s model of the atom.
5. Compare all the proposed models of an atom given in this
chapter.
6. Summarise the rules for writing of distribution of electrons in
various shells for the first eighteen elements.
7. Define valency by taking examples of silicon and oxygen.
46 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 57 ---
8. Explain with examples (i) Atomic number, (ii) Mass number,
(iii) Isotopes and iv) Isobars. Give any two uses of isotopes.
9. Na+ has completely filled K and L shells. Explain.
10. If bromine atom is available in the form of, say, two isotopes
79 81
Br (49.7%) and Br (50.3%), calculate the average atomic
35 35
mass of bromine atom.
11. The average atomic mass of a sample of an element X is 16.2 u.
16 18
What are the percentages of isotopes X and X in the
8 8
sample?
12. If Z = 3, what would be the valency of the element? Also, name
the element.
13. Composition of the nuclei of two atomic species X and Y are
given as under
X Y
Protons = 6 6
Neutrons = 6 8
Give the mass numbers of X and Y. What is the relation between
the two species?
14. For the following statements, write T for True and F for False.
(a) J.J. Thomson proposed that the nucleus of an atom
contains only nucleons.
(b) A neutron is formed by an electron and a proton
combining together. Therefore, it is neutral.
1
(c) The mass of an electron is about times that of proton.
2000
(d) An isotope of iodine is used for making tincture iodine,
which is used as a medicine.
Put tick (ü) against correct choice and cross (×) against
wrong choice in questions 15, 16 and 17
15. Rutherford’s alpha-particle scattering experiment was
responsible for the discovery of
(a) Atomic Nucleus (b) Electron
(c) Proton (d) Neutron
16. Isotopes of an element have
(a) the same physical properties
(b) different chemical properties
(c) different number of neutrons
(d) different atomic numbers.
17. Number of valence electrons in Cl– ion are:
(a) 16 (b) 8 (c) 17 (d) 18
STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM 47
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 58 ---
18. Which one of the following is a correct electronic configuration
of sodium?
(a) 2,8 (b) 8,2,1 (c) 2,1,8 (d) 2,8,1
19. Complete the following table.
Atomic Mass Number Number Number Name of
Number Number of of of the Atomic
Neutrons Protons Electrons Species
9 - 10 - - -
16 32 - - - Sulphur
- 24 - 12 - -
- 2 - 1 - -
- 1 0 1 0 -
48 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 59 ---
5
C
hapter
TTTTT FFFFF UUUUU LLLLL
HHHHHEEEEE UUUUUNNNNNDDDDDAAAAAMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTTAAAAALLLLL NNNNNIIIIITTTTT OOOOOFFFFF IIIIIFFFFFEEEEE
While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert avoid air bubbles while putting the
Hooke saw that the cork resembled the cover slip with the help of a mounting
needle. Ask your teacher for help. We
structure of a honeycomb consisting of many
have prepared a temporary mount of
little compartments. Cork is a substance
onion peel. We can observe this slide
which comes from the bark of a tree. This
under low power followed by high
was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this
powers of a compound microscope.
chance observation through a self-designed
microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes
Eyepiece
cells. Cell is a Latin word for ‘a little room’.
This may seem to be a very small and
insignificant incident but it is very important
in the history of science. This was the very first Coarse adjustment
Body tube
time that someone had observed that living
Fine adjustment
things appear to consist of separate units. The
use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is Arm
Clip Objective lens
being used till this day in biology.
Microscope slide
Let us find out about cells. Stage
Swivel
Condenser
5.1 What are Living Organisms
Mirror
Made Up of? Base
Activity ______________5.1
Fig. 5.1: Compound microscope
• Let us take a small piece from an onion What do we observe as we look through
bulb. With the help of a pair of forceps,
the lens? Can we draw the structures that
we can peel off the skin (called
we are able to see through the microscope,
epidermis) from the concave side (inner
on an observation sheet? Does it look like
layer) of the onion. This layer can be
Fig. 5.2?
put immediately in a watch-glass
containing water. This will prevent the
peel from getting folded or getting dry.
What do we do with this peel?
• Let us take a glass slide, put a drop of Nucleus
water on it and transfer a small piece
of the peel from the watch glass to the
Cells
slide. Make sure that the peel is
perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel
hair paintbrush might be necessary to
help transfer the peel. Now we put a
drop of safranin solution on this piece
followed by a cover slip. Take care to Fig. 5.2: Cells of an onion peel
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 60 ---
Chlamydomonas, Paramoecium and bacteria.
These organisms are called unicellular
organisms (uni = single). On the other hand,
many cells group together in a single body
and assume different functions in it to form
various body parts in multicellular organisms
(multi = many) such as some fungi, plants
and animals. Can we find out names of some
more unicellular organisms?
Every multi-cellular organism has come
from a single cell. How? Cells divide to
produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus
come from pre-existing cells.
Activity ______________5.2
• We can try preparing temporary
mounts of leaf peels, tip of roots of
onion or even peels of onions of different
sizes.
• After performing the above activity, let
us see what the answers to the following
questions would be:
(a) Do all cells look alike in terms of
shape and size?
(b) Do all cells look alike in structure?
(c) Could we find differences among
cells from different parts of a
plant body?
(d) What similarities could we find?
Some organisms can also have cells of
different kinds. Look at the following picture.
It depicts some cells from the human body.
Blood
cells
Smooth
muscle
cell
Bone
cell
Ovum Sperm
Fig. 5.3: Various cells from the human body
50 SCIENCE
wonk
ot
eroM
We can try preparing temporary mounts
of peels of onions of different sizes. What do
we observe? Do we see similar structures or
different structures?
What are these structures?
These structures look similar to each other.
Together they form a big structure like an
onion bulb! We find from this activity that
onion bulbs of different sizes have similar
small structures visible under a microscope.
The cells of the onion peel will all look the
same, regardless of the size of the onion they
came from.
These small structures that we see are
the basic building units of the onion bulb.
These structures are called cells. Not only
onions, but all organisms that we observe
around are made up of cells. However, there
are also single cells that live on their own.
Cells were first discovered by
Robert Hooke in 1665. He observed
the cells in a cork slice with the help
of a primitive microscope.
Leeuwenhoek (1674), with the
improved microscope, discovered the
free living cells in pond water for the
first time. It was Robert Brown in
1831 who discovered the nucleus in
the cell. Purkinje in 1839 coined the
term ‘protoplasm’ for the fluid
substance of the cell. The cell theory,
that all the plants and animals are
composed of cells and that the cell is
the basic unit of life, was presented
by two biologists, Schleiden (1838)
and Schwann (1839). The cell theory
was further expanded by Virchow
(1855) by suggesting that all cells
Nerve Cell
arise from pre-existing cells. With the
discovery of the electron microscope
in 1940, it was possible to observe and
understand the complex structure of
the cell and its various organelles.
Fat cell
The invention of magnifying lenses led to
the discovery of the microscopic world. It is
now known that a single cell may constitute
a whole organism as in Amoeba,
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 61 ---
The shape and size of cells are related to every cell; plasma membrane, nucleus and
the specific function they perform. Some cells cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and
like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some interactions of the cell with its environment
cases the cell shape could be more or less are possible due to these features. Let us see
fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell; how.
for example, nerve cells have a typical shape.
Each living cell has the capacity to 5.2.1 P
LASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL
perform certain basic functions that are
MEMBRANE
characteristic of all living forms. How does
a living cell perform these basic functions? This is the outermost covering of the cell that
We know that there is a division of labour in separates the contents of the cell from its
multicellular organisms such as human external environment. The plasma membrane
beings. This means that different parts of allows or permits the entry and exit of some
the human body perform different functions. materials in and out of the cell. It also
The human body has a heart to pump blood, prevents movement of some other materials.
a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly, The cell membrane, therefore, is called a
division of labour is also seen within a single selectively permeable membrane.
cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain How does the movement of substances
specific components within it known as cell take place into the cell? How do substances
organelles. Each kind of cell organelle
move out of the cell?
performs a special function, such as making
Some substances like carbon dioxide or
new material in the cell, clearing up the
oxygen can move across the cell membrane
waste material from the cell and so on. A
by a process called diffusion. We have studied
cell is able to live and perform all its
the process of diffusion in earlier chapters.
functions because of these organelles. These
We saw that there is spontaneous movement
organelles together constitute the basic unit
of a substance from a region of high
called the cell. It is interesting that all cells
concentration to a region where its
are found to have the same organelles, no
concentration is low.
matter what their function is or what
Something similar to this happens in cells
organism they are found in.
when, for example, some substance like CO
Q 2
(which is cellular waste and requires to be
uestions
excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high
concentrations inside the cell. In the cell’s
1. Who discovered cells, and how?
external environment, the concentration of
2. Why is the cell called the
CO is low as compared to that inside the
structural and functional unit of 2
cell. As soon as there is a difference of
life?
concentration of CO inside and outside a cell,
2
CO moves out of the cell, from a region of
2
high concentration, to a region of low
5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? concentration outside the cell by the process
of diffusion. Similarly, O enters the cell by
What is the Structural 2
the process of diffusion when the level or
Organisation of a Cell? concentration of O inside the cell decreases.
2
Thus, diffusion plays an important role in
We saw above that the cell has special gaseous exchange between the cells as well
components called organelles. How is a cell as the cell and its external environment.
organised? Water also obeys the law of diffusion. The
If we study a cell under a microscope, we movement of water molecules through such a
would come across three features in almost selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis.
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 51
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 62 ---
The movement of water across the plasma Activity ______________5.3
membrane is also affected by the
amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus, Osmosis with an egg
osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a (a) Remove the shell of an egg by dissolving
it in dilute hydrochloric acid. The shell
selectively permeable membrane toward a
is mostly calcium carbonate. A thin
higher solute concentration.
outer skin now encloses the egg. Put
What will happen if we put an animal cell
the egg in pure water and observe after
or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt 5 minutes. What do we observe?
in water? The egg swells because water passes
One of the following three things could into it by osmosis.
happen: (b) Place a similar de-shelled egg in a
concentrated salt solution and observe
1. If the medium surrounding the cell has
for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why?
a higher water concentration than the
Water passes out of the egg solution
cell, meaning that the outside solution into the salt solution because the salt
is very dilute, the cell will gain water by solution is more concentrated.
osmosis. Such a solution is known as We can also try a similar activity with dried
a hypotonic solution. raisins or apricots.
Water molecules are free to pass Activity ______________5.4
across the cell membrane in both
directions, but more water will come • Put dried raisins or apricots in plain
into the cell than will leave. The net water and leave them for some time.
Then place them into a concentrated
(overall) result is that water enters the
solution of sugar or salt. You will
cell. The cell is likely to swell up. observe the following:
2. If the medium has exactly the same (a) Each gains water and swells
when placed in water.
water concentration as the cell, there
(b) However, when placed in the
will be no net movement of water across
concentrated solution it loses
the cell membrane. Such a solution is water, and consequently shrinks.
known as an isotonic solution. Unicellular freshwater organisms and
Water crosses the cell membrane in most plant cells tend to gain water through
both directions, but the amount going osmosis. Absorption of water by plant roots
is also an example of osmosis.
in is the same as the amount going out,
Thus, diffusion is important in exhange
so there is no overall movement of
of gases and water in the life of a cell. In
water. The cell will stay the same size.
additions to this, the cell also obtains
3. If the medium has a lower
nutrition from its environment. Different
concentration of water than the cell, molecules move in and out of the cell
meaning that it is a very concentrated through a type of transport requiring use
solution, the cell will lose water by of energy.
osmosis. Such a solution is known as The plasma membrane is flexible and is
made up of organic molecules called lipids
a hypertonic solution.
and proteins. However, we can observe the
Again, water crosses the cell
structure of the plasma membrane only
membrane in both directions, but this
through an electron microscope.
time more water leaves the cell than
The flexibility of the cell membrane also
enters it. Therefore the cell will shrink.
enables the cell to engulf in food and other
Thus, osmosis is a special case of diffusion material from its external environment. Such
through a selectively permeable membrane. processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba
Now let us try out the following activity: acquires its food through such processes.
52 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 63 ---
Activity ______________5.5 What do we infer from this activity? It
appears that only living cells, and not dead
• Find out about electron microscopes cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis.
from resources in the school library or
Cell walls permit the cells of plants, fungi
through the internet. Discuss it with
and bacteria to withstand very dilute
your teacher.
Q (hypotonic) external media without bursting.
uestions In such media the cells tend to take up water
by osmosis. The cell swells, building up
1. How do substances like CO and pressure against the cell wall. The wall exerts
2
water move in and out of the cell?
an equal pressure against the swollen cell.
Discuss.
Because of their walls, such cells can
2. Why is the plasma membrane
withstand much greater changes in the
called a selectively permeable
surrounding medium than animal cells.
membrane?
5.2.3 N
UCLEUS
5.2.2 C
ELLWALL
Remember the temporary mount of onion peel
Plant cells, in addition to the plasma
we prepared? We had put iodine solution on
membrane, have another rigid outer covering
the peel. Why? What would we see if we tried
called the cell wall. The cell wall lies outside
observing the peel without putting the iodine
the plasma membrane. The plant cell wall is
solution? Try it and see what the difference
mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a
is. Further, when we put iodine solution on
complex substance and provides structural
the peel, did each cell get evenly coloured?
strength to plants.
According to their chemical composition
When a living plant cell loses water
through osmosis there is shrinkage or different regions of cells get coloured
contraction of the contents of the cell away differentially. Some regions appear darker
from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known than other regions. Apart from iodine solution
as plasmolysis. We can observe this we could also use safranin solution or
phenomenon by performing the following methylene blue solution to stain the cells.
activity: We have observed cells from an onion; let
Activity ______________5.6 us now observe cells from our own body.
Activity ______________5.7
• Mount the peel of a Rhoeo leaf in water
on a slide and examine cells under
the high power of a microscope. Note • Let us take a glass slide with a drop of
the small green granules, called water on it. Using an ice-cream spoon
chloroplasts. They contain a green gently scrape the inside surface of the
substance called chlorophyll. Put a cheek. Does any material get stuck on
strong solution of sugar or salt on the the spoon? With the help of a needle
mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for a we can transfer this material and
minute and observe under a
spread it evenly on the glass slide kept
microscope. What do we see?
ready for this. To colour the material
• Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling
we can put a drop of methylene blue
water for a few minutes. This kills the
solution on it. Now the material is ready
cells. Then mount one leaf on a slide
for observation under microscope. Do
and observe it under a microscope. Put
not forget to put a cover-slip on it!
a strong solution of sugar or salt on
the mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for • What do we observe? What is the
a minute and observe it again. What shape of the cells we see? Draw it on
do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now? the observation sheet.
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 53
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 64 ---
• Was there a darkly coloured, spherical present in eukaryotic cells. Many of the
or oval, dot-like structure near the functions of such organelles are also
centre of each cell? This structure is performed by poorly organised parts of the
called nucleus. Were there similar cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlorophyll
structures in onion peel cells?
in photosynthetic prokaryotic bacteria is
The nucleus has a double layered covering associated with membranous vesicles (bag
called nuclear membrane. The nuclear like structures) but not with plastids as in
membrane has pores which allow the transfer eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5).
of material from inside the nucleus to its
outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we
will talk about in section 5.2.4). Ribosomes
Plasma
The nucleus contains chromosomes, membrane
which are visible as rod-shaped structures
only when the cell is about to divide.
Cell wall
Chromosomes contain information for
inheritance of characters from parents to next
Nucleoid
generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribo
Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chromosomes are
composed of DNA and protein. DNA molecules
contain the information necessary for
constructing and organising cells. Functional Fig. 5.4: Prokaryotic cell
segments of DNA are called genes. In a cell
which is not dividing, this DNA is present as
5.2.4 C
YTOPLASM
part of chromatin material. Chromatin
material is visible as entangled mass of thread
When we look at the temporary mounts of
like structures. Whenever the cell is about to
onion peel as well as human cheek cells, we
divide, the chromatin material gets organised
can see a large region of each cell enclosed
into chromosomes.
by the cell membrane. This region takes up
The nucleus plays a central role in cellular
very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm.
reproduction, the process by which a single
The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the
cell divides and forms two new cells. It also
plasma membrane. It also contains many
plays a crucial part, along with the
specialised cell organelles. Each of these
environment, in determining the way the cell
organelles performs a specific function for the
will develop and what form it will exhibit at
cell.
maturity, by directing the chemical activities
of the cell. Cell organelles are enclosed by
In some organisms like bacteria, the membranes. In prokaryotes, beside the
nuclear region of the cell may be poorly absence of a defined nuclear region, the
defined due to the absence of a nuclear membrane-bound cell organelles are also
membrane. Such an undefined nuclear region absent. On the other hand, the eukaryotic
containing only nucleic acids is called a cells have nuclear membrane as well as
nucleoid. Such organisms, whose cells lack membrane-enclosed organelles.
a nuclear membrane, are called prokaryotes The significance of membranes can be
(Pro = primitive or primary; karyote ≈ karyon illustrated with the example of viruses.
= nucleus). Organisms with cells having a Viruses lack any membranes and hence do
nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes. not show characteristics of life until they enter
Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack a living body and use its cell machinery to
most of the other cytoplasmic organelles multiply.
54 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 65 ---
Q
uestion 5.2.5 (i) E (ER)
NDOPLASMIC RETICULUM
1. Fill in the gaps in the following The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a large
table illustrating differences network of membrane-bound tubes and
between prokaryotic and sheets. It looks like long tubules or round or
eukaryotic cells. oblong bags (vesicles). The ER membrane is
similar in structure to the plasma membrane.
There are two types of ER– rough endoplasmic
reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic
Prokaryotic Cell Eukaryotic Cell
reticulum (SER). RER looks rough under a
1. Size : generally 1.Size: generally microscope because it has particles called
small ( 1-10 µm) large ( 5-100 µm) ribosomes attached to its surface. The
1 µm = 10–6 m ribosomes, which are present in all active
cells, are the sites of protein manufacture.
2. Nuclear region: 2.Nuclear region: The manufactured proteins are then sent to
_______________ well defined and various places in the cell depending on need,
_______________ surrounded by a using the ER. The SER helps in the
and known as__ nuclear membrane manufacture of fat molecules, or lipids,
important for cell function. Some of these
3. Chromosome: 3.More than one proteins and lipids help in building the cell
single chromosome membrane. This process is known as
membrane biogenesis. Some other proteins
4. Membrane-bound 4._______________ and lipids function as enzymes and
cell organelles _______________ hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in
absent _______________ appearance in different cells, it always forms a
network system.
5.2.5 C
ELLORGANELLES
Every cell has a membrane around it to keep
its own contents separate from the external
environment. Large and complex cells,
including cells from multicellular organisms,
need a lot of chemical activities to support
their complicated structure and function. To
keep these activities of different kinds
separate from each other, these cells use
membrane-bound little structures (or
‘organelles’) within themselves. This is one of
the features of the eukaryotic cells that
distinguish them from prokaryotic cells. Some
of these organelles are visible only with an
electron microscope. Fig. 5.5: Animal cell
We have talked about the nucleus in a
previous section. Some important examples Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as
of cell organelles which we will discuss now channels for the transport of materials
are: endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, (especially proteins) between various regions
lysosomes, mitochondria and plastids. They of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm
are important because they carry out some and the nucleus. The ER also functions as a
very crucial functions in cells. cytoplasmic framework providing a surface
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 55
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 66 ---
for some of the biochemical activities of the
Camillo Golgi was born at
cell. In the liver cells of the group of animals
Corteno near Brescia in
called vertebrates (see Chapter 7), SER plays
1843. He studied
a crucial role in detoxifying many poisons
medicine at the University
and drugs.
of Pavia. After graduating
in 1865, he continued to
work in Pavia at the
Hospital of St. Matteo. At
that time most of his
investigations were
concerned with the nervous system, In 1872
he accepted the post of Chief Medical Officer
at the Hospital for the Chronically Sick at
Abbiategrasso. He first started his
investigations into the nervous system in a
little kitchen of this hospital, which he had
converted into a laboratory. However, the
work of greatest importance, which Golgi
carried out was a revolutionary method of
staining individual nerve and cell structures.
This method is referred to as the ‘black
reaction’. This method uses a weak solution
of silver nitrate and is particularly valuable
in tracing the processes and most delicate
ramifications of cells. All through his life,
he continued to work on these lines,
modifying and improving this technique.
Fig. 5.6: Plant cell Golgi received the highest honours and
awards in recognition of his work. He shared
the Nobel prize in 1906 with Santiago
5.2.5 (ii) G
OLGI APPARATUS Ramony Cajal for their work on the structure
of the nervous system.
The Golgi apparatus, first described by
Camillo Golgi, consists of a system of
membrane-bound vesicles (flattened sacs)
5.2.5 (iii) L
YSOSOMES
arranged approximately parallel to each other
in stacks called cisterns. These membranes Structurally, lysosomes are membrane-bound
often have connections with the membranes sacs filled with digestive enzymes. These
of ER and therefore constitute another portion enzymes are made by RER. Lysosomes are a
kind of waste disposal system of the cell. These
of a complex cellular membrane system.
help to keep the cell clean by digesting any
The material synthesised near the ER is
foreign material as well as worn-out cell
packaged and dispatched to various targets
organelles. Foreign materials entering the cell,
inside and outside the cell through the Golgi
such as bacteria or food, as well as old
apparatus. Its functions include the storage,
organelles end up in the lysosomes, which
modification and packaging of products in
break complex substances into simpler
vesicles. In some cases, complex sugars may
substances. Lysosomes are able to do this
be made from simple sugars in the Golgi
because they contain powerful digestive
apparatus. The Golgi apparatus is also
enzymes capable of breaking down all organic
involved in the formation of lysosomes [see material. During the disturbance in cellular
5.2.5 (iii)]. metabolism, for example, when the cell gets
56 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 67 ---
damaged, lysosomes may burst and the In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap
enzymes digest their own cell. Therefore, and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell.
lysosomes are also known as the ‘suicide bags’ Many substances of importance in the life of
of a cell. the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These
include amino acids, sugars, various organic
5.2.5 (iv) M ITOCHONDRIA acids and some proteins. In single-celled
organisms like Amoeba, the food vacuole
Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses
contains the food items that the Amoeba has
of the cell. Mitochondria have two membrane
consumed. In some unicellular organisms,
coverings. The outer membrane is porous
specialised vacuoles also play important roles
while the inner membrane is deeply folded.
in expelling excess water and some wastes
These folds increase surface area for ATP-
from the cell.
generating chemical reactions. The energy
Q
required for various chemical activities needed
uestions
for life is released by mitochondria in the form
of ATP (Adenosine triphopshate) molecules.
1. Can you name the two organelles
ATP is known as the energy currency of the
we have studied that contain
cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for
making new chemical compounds and for their own genetic material?
mechanical work. 2. If the organisation of a cell is
Mitochondria are strange organelles in the destroyed due to some physical
sense that they have their own DNA and or chemical influence, what will
ribosomes. Therefore, mitochondria are able happen?
to make some of their own proteins.
3. Why are lysosomes known as
suicide bags?
5.2.5 ( ) P
V LASTIDS
4. Where are proteins synthesised
Plastids are present only in plant cells. There inside the cell?
are two types of plastids – chromoplasts
(coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or Each cell thus acquires its structure and
colourless plastids). Chromoplasts containing ability to function because of the organisation
the pigment chlorophyll are known as of its membrane and organelles in specific
chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important for ways. The cell thus has a basic structural
photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also organisation. This helps the cells to perform
functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition,
contain various yellow or orange pigments in
and clearing of waste material, or forming
addition to chlorophyll. Leucoplasts are
new proteins.
primarily organelles in which materials such
Thus, the cell is the fundamental structural
as starch, oils and protein granules are stored.
unit of living organisms. It is also the basic
The internal organisation of the Chloroplast
functional unit of life.
consists of numerous membrane layers
embedded in a material called the stroma. These Cell Division
are similar to mitochondria in external
New cells are formed in organisms in order to
structure. Like the mitochondria, plastids also
grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells,
have their own DNA and ribosomes.
and to form gametes required for
5.2.5 (vi) V reproduction. The process by which new cells
ACUOLES
are made is called cell division. There are two
Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid main types of cell division: mitosis
contents. Vacuoles are small sized in animal and meiosis.
.
cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles The process of cell division by which most
The central vacuole of some plant cells may of the cells divide for growth is called mitosis.
occupy 50-90% of the cell volume. In this process, each cell called mother cell
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 57
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 68 ---
Fig. 5.7: Mitosis Fig. 5.8: Meiosis
divides to form two identical daughter cells They divide by a different process called
(Fig. 5.7). The daughter cells have the same meiosis which involves two consecutive
number of chromosomes as mother cell. It divisions. When a cell divides by meiosis it
helps in growth and repair of tissues produces four new cells instead of just two (Fig.
in organisms. 5.8). The new cells only have half the number
Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues of chromosomes than that of the mother cells.
in animals and plants divide to form gametes, Can you think as to why the chromosome
which after fertilisation give rise to offspring. number has reduced to half in daughter cells?
What
you have
learnt
• The fundamental organisational unit of life is the cell.
• Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids
and proteins.
• The cell membrane is an active part of the cell. It regulates
the movement of materials between the ordered interior of
the cell and the outer environment.
• In plant cells, a cell wall composed mainly of cellulose is
located outside the cell membrane.
• The presence of the cell wall enables the cells of plants,
fungi and bacteria to exist in hypotonic media without
bursting.
• The nucleus in eukaryotes is separated from the cytoplasm
by double-layered membrane and it directs the life processes
of the cell.
• The ER functions both as a passageway for intracellular
transport and as a manufacturing surface.
• The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membrane-bound
vesicles that function in the storage, modification and
packaging of substances manufactured in the cell.
• Most plant cells have large membranous organelles called
plastids, which are of two types—chromoplasts and
leucoplasts.
58 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 69 ---
• Chromoplasts that contain chlorophyll are called chloroplasts
and they perform photosynthesis.
• The primary function of leucoplasts is storage.
• Most mature plant cells have a large central vacuole that
helps to maintain the turgidity of the cell and stores
important substances including wastes.
• Prokaryotic cells have no membrane-bound organelles, their
chromosomes are composed of only nucleic acid, and they
have only very small ribosomes as organelles.
• Cells in organisms divide for growth of body, for repalcing
dead cells, and for forming gametes for reproduction.
Exercises
1. Make a comparison and write down ways in which plant
cells are different from animal cells.
2. How is a prokaryotic cell different from a eukaryotic cell?
3. What would happen if the plasma membrane ruptures or
breaks down?
4. What would happen to the life of a cell if there was no Golgi
apparatus?
5. Which organelle is known as the powerhouse of the cell? Why?
6. Where do the lipids and proteins constituting the cell
membrane get synthesised?
7. How does an Amoeba obtain its food?
8. What is osmosis?
9. Carry out the following osmosis experiment:
• Take four peeled potato halves and scoos each one out to
make potato cups. One of these potato cups should be
made from a boiled potato. Put each potato cup in a trough
containing water. Now,
(a) Keep cup A empty
(b) Put one teaspoon sugar in cup B
(c) Put one teaspoon salt in cup C
(d) Put one teaspoon sugar in the boiled potato cup D.
Keep these for two hours. Then observe the four potato
cups and answer the following:
(i) Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of
B and C.
(ii) Why is potato A necessary for this experiment?
(iii) Explain why water does not gather in the hollowed
out portions of A and D.
10. Which type of cell division is required for growth and repair
of body and which type is involved in formation of gametes?
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE 59
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 70 ---
6
C
hapter
TTTTT
IIIIISSSSSSSSSSUUUUUEEEEESSSSS
From the last chapter, we recall that all living There are noticeable differences between
organisms are made of cells. In unicellular the two. Plants are stationary or fixed – they
organisms, a single cell performs all basic don’t move. Since they have to be upright, they
functions. For example, in Amoeba, a single have a large quantity of supportive tissue. The
cell carries out movement, intake of food, supportive tissue generally has dead cells.
gaseous exchange and excretion. But in multi-
Animals on the other hand move around
cellular organisms there are millions of cells.
in search of food, mates and shelter. They
Most of these cells are specialised to carry out
consume more energy as compared to plants.
specific functions. Each specialised function
Most of the tissues they contain are living.
is taken up by a different group of cells. Since
Another difference between animals and
these cells carry out only a particular function,
plants is in the pattern of growth. The growth
they do it very efficiently. In human beings,
in plants is limited to certain regions, while this
muscle cells contract and relax to cause
movement, nerve cells carry messages, blood is not so in animals. There are some tissues in
flows to transport oxygen, food, hormones and plants that divide throughout their life. These
waste material and so on. In plants, vascular tissues are localised in certain regions. Based
tissues conduct food and water from one part on the dividing capacity of the tissues, various
of the plant to other parts. So, multi-cellular plant tissues can be classified as growing or
organisms show division of labour. Cells meristematic tissue and permanent tissue. Cell
specialising in one function are often grouped growth in animals is more uniform. So, there
together in the body. This means that a
is no such demarcation of dividing and non-
particular function is carried out by a cluster
dividing regions in animals.
of cells at a definite place in the body. This
The structural organisation of organs and
cluster of cells, called a tissue, is arranged and
organ systems is far more specialised and
designed so as to give the highest possible
localised in complex animals than even in very
efficiency of function. Blood, phloem and
complex plants. This fundamental difference
muscle are all examples of tissues.
reflects the different modes of life pursued by
A group of cells that are similar in structure
and/or work together to achieve a particular these two major groups of organisms,
function forms a tissue. particularly in their different feeding methods.
Also, they are differently adapted for a
6.1 Are Plants and Animals Made sedentary existence on one hand (plants) and
active locomotion on the other (animals),
of Same Types of Tissues?
contributing to this difference in organ system
Let us compare their structure and functions. design.
Do plants and animals have the same It is with reference to these complex animal
structure? Do they both perform similar and plant bodies that we will now talk about
functions? the concept of tissues in some detail.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 71 ---
Q
uestions • From the above observations, answer
the following questions:
1. What is a tissue? 1. Which of the two onions has longer
2. What is the utility of tissues in roots? Why?
2. Do the roots continue growing
multi-cellular organisms?
even after we have removed their
tips?
3. Why would the tips stop growing
6.2 Plant Tissues in jar 2 after we cut them?
The growth of plants occurs only in certain
6.2.1 M
ERISTEMATIC TISSUE specific regions. This is because the dividing
tissue, also known as meristematic tissue, is
located only at these points. Depending on
the region where they are present,
meristematic tissues are classified as apical,
lateral and intercalary (Fig. 6.2). New cells
produced by meristem are initially like those
of meristem itself, but as they grow and
mature, their characteristics slowly change and
they become differentiated as components of
other tissues.
Apical meristem
Jar 1 Jar 2
Fig. 6.1: Growth of roots in onion bulbs
Intercalary meristem
Activity ______________6.1
• Take two glass jars and fill them with
water.
• Now, take two onion bulbs and place
one on each jar, as shown in
Fig. 6.1.
• Observe the growth of roots in both
the bulbs for a few days.
• Measure the length of roots on day 1,
2 and 3.
• On day 4, cut the root tips of the onion
bulb in jar 2 by about 1 cm. After this, Lateral meristem
observe the growth of roots in both the
jars and measure their lengths each
day for five more days and record the
Fig. 6.2: Location of meristematic tissue in plant body
observations in tables, like the table
below: Apical meristem is present at the growing
tips of stems and roots and increases the
Length Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 length of the stem and the root. The girth of
the stem or root increases due to lateral
Jar 1
meristem (cambium). Intercalary meristem
Jar 2 seen in some plants is located near the node.
TISSUES 61
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 72 ---
Cells of meristematic tissue are very active, 3. Can we think of reasons why there
they have dense cytoplasm, thin cellulose walls would be so many types of cells?
and prominent nuclei. They lack vacuoles. Can • We can also try to cut sections of plant
we think why they would lack vacuoles? (You roots. We can even try cutting sections
of root and stem of different plants.
might want to refer to the functions of vacuoles
in the chapter on cells.)
S
6.2.2 (i) IMPLEPERMANENT TISSUE
6.2.2 P
ERMANENT TISSUE A few layers of cells beneath the epidermis are
generally simple permanent tissue.
What happens to the cells formed by
Parenchyma is the most common simple
meristematic tissue? They take up a specific
permanent tissue. It consists of relatively
role and lose the ability to divide. As a result,
unspecialised cells with thin cell walls. They
they form a permanent tissue. This process
are living cells. They are usually loosely
of taking up a permanent shape, size, and a
arranged, thus large spaces between cells
function is called differentiation. Differentiation
(intercellular spaces) are found in this tissue
leads to the development of various types of
(Fig. 6.4a). This tissue generally stores food.
permanent tissues.
Cuticle
Epidermis
Collenchyma
Parenchyma
Phloem
Xylem
Vascular bundle
Fig. 6.3: Section of a stem
Activity ______________6.2 In some situations, it contains chlorophyll and
performs photosynthesis, and then it is called
• Take a plant stem and with the help chlorenchyma. In aquatic plants, large air
of your teacher cut into very thin slices cavities are present in parenchyma to help
or sections. them float. Such a parenchyma type is called
• Now, stain the slices with safranin. aerenchyma.
Place one neatly cut section on a slide, The flexibility in plants is due to another
and put a drop of glycerine. permanent tissue, collenchyma. It allows
• Cover with a cover-slip and observe bending of various parts of a plant like tendrils
under a microscope. Observe the and stems of climbers without breaking. It
various types of cells and their also provides mechanical support. We can find
arrangement. Compare it with Fig. 6.3.
this tissue in leaf stalks below the epidermis.
• Now, answer the following on the
The cells of this tissue are living, elongated
basis of your observation:
and irregularly thickened at the
1. Are all cells similar in structure?
corners. There is very little intercellular space
2. How many types of cells can
(Fig. 6.4 b).
be seen?
62 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 73 ---
Intercellular spaces
Wall thickenings
Nucleus
Thick lignified
Vacuole walls Narrow lumen
Cell wall
Lignified
thick wall
a b c (i) c (ii)
Fig. 6.4:Various types of simple tissues: (a) Parenchyma (b) Collenchyma (c) Sclerenchyma (i) transverse section,
(ii) longitudinal section.
Yet another type of permanent tissue is
sclerenchyma. It is the tissue which makes the
plant hard and stiff. We have seen the husk of
a coconut. It is made of sclerenchymatous
tissue. The cells of this tissue are dead. They
are long and narrow as the walls are thickened Guard
due to lignin. Often these walls are so thick cells
that there is no internal space inside the cell
Stoma
(Fig. 6.4 c). This tissue is present in stems,
Epidermal
around vascular bundles, in the veins of leaves
cell
Guard
and in the hard covering of seeds and nuts. It
cell
provides strength to the plant parts. (a) (b)
Activity ______________6.3
Fig. 6.5: Guard cells and epidermal cells: (a) lateral
• Take a freshly plucked leaf of Rhoeo. view, (b) surface view
• Stretch and break it by applying
pressure. parts of the plant often secrete a waxy, water-
• While breaking it, keep it stretched
resistant layer on their outer surface. This aids
gently so that some peel or skin
in protection against loss of water, mechanical
projects out from the cut.
injury and invasion by parasitic fungi. Since
• Remove this peel and put it in a petri
it has a protective role to play, cells of
dish filled with water.
• Add a few drops of safranin. epidermal tissue form a continuous layer
• Wait for a couple of minutes and then without intercellular spaces. Most epidermal
transfer it onto a slide. Gently place cells are relatively flat. Often their outer and
a cover slip over it. side walls are thicker than the inner wall.
• Observe under microscope. We can observe small pores here and
What you observe is the outermost layer there in the epidermis of the leaf. These pores
of cells, called epidermis. The epidermis is are called stomata (Fig. 6.5). Stomata are
usually made of a single layer of cells. In some enclosed by two kidney-shaped cells
plants living in very dry habitats, the epidermis called guard cells. They are necessary for
may be thicker since protection against water exchanging gases with the atmosphere.
loss is critical. The entire surface of a plant has Transpiration (loss of water in the form of
an outer covering epidermis. It protects all the water vapour) also takes place
parts of the plant. Epidermal cells on the aerial through stomata.
TISSUES 63
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 74 ---
is a distinctive feature of the complex plants,
Recall which gas is required for
one that has made possible their survival in
photosynthesis.
the terrestrial environment. In Fig. 6.3 showing
Find out the role of transpiration in plants.
a section of stem, can you see different types
Epidermal cells of the roots, whose function of cells in the vascular bundle?
is water absorption, commonly bear long hair- Xylem consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem
like parts that greatly increase the total parenchyma (Fig. 6.7 a,b,c) and xylem fibres.
absorptive surface area. Tracheids and vessels have thick walls, and
In some plants like desert plants, many are dead cells when mature. Tracheids
epidermis has a thick waxy coating of cutin and vessels are tubular structures. This allows
(chemical substance with waterproof quality) them to transport water and minerals
on its outer surface. Can we think of a reason vertically. The parenchyma stores food. Xylem
for this? fibres are mainly supportive in function.
Is the outer layer of a branch of a tree
Phloem is made up of five types of cells:
different from the outer layer of a young stem?
sieve cells, sieve tubes, companion cells,
As plants grow older, the outer protective
phloem fibres and the phloem parenchyma
tissue undergoes certain changes. A strip of
[Fig. 6.7 (d)]. Sieve tubes are tubular cells with
secondary meristem located in the cortex forms
perforated walls. Phloem transports food from
layers of cells which constitute the cork. Cells
leaves to other parts of the plant. Except
of cork are dead and compactly arranged
phloem fibres, other phloem cells are living cells.
without intercellular spaces (Fig. 6.6). They
also have a substance called suberin in their
walls that makes them impervious to gases
and water.
Nucleus
Cork cells Ruptured epidermis
Pit
Pits
Cytoplasm
(a) Tracheid (b) Vessel (c) Xylem parenchyma
Fig. 6.6: Protective tissue
C
6.2.2 (ii) OMPLEX PERMANENT TISSUE Sieve plate
Sieve tube
The different types of tissues we have discussed
until now are all made of one type of cells,
which look like each other. Such tissues are
Phloem
called simple permanent tissue. Yet another parenchyma
type of permanent tissue is complex tissue.
Complex tissues are made of more than one Companion cell
type of cells. All these cells coordinate to
perform a common function. Xylem and
phloem are examples of such complex tissues.
They are both conducting tissues and (d) Section of phloem
constitute a vascular bundle. Vascular tissue Fig. 6.7: Types of complex tissue
64 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 75 ---
Q
uestions
During breathing we inhale oxygen. Where
does this oxygen go? It is absorbed in the lungs
1. Name types of simple tissues.
and then is transported to all the body cells
2. Where is apical meristem found?
through blood. Why would cells need oxygen?
3. Which tissue makes up the husk
The functions of mitochondria we studied
of coconut?
earlier provide a clue to this question. Blood
4. What are the constituents of
flows and carries various substances from one
phloem?
part of the body to the other. For example, it
carries oxygen and food to all cells. It also
collects wastes from all parts of the body and
6.3 Animal Tissues
carries them to the liver and kidney for
disposal.
When we breathe we can actually feel the
Blood and muscles are both examples of
movement of our chest. How do these body
tissues found in our body. On the basis of the
parts move? For this we have specialised cells
functions they perform we can think of different
called muscle cells (Fig. 6.8). The contraction
types of animal tissues, such as epithelial
and relaxation of these cells result
tissue, connective tissue, muscular tissue and
in movement.
nervous tissue. Blood is a type of connective
tissue, and muscle forms muscular tissue.
6.3.1 E
PITHELIAL TISSUE
The covering or protective tissues in the animal
body are epithelial tissues. Epithelium covers
most organs and cavities within the body. It
also forms a barrier to keep different body
systems separate. The skin, the lining of the
mouth, the lining of blood vessels, lung alveoli
and kidney tubules are all made of epithelial
tissue. Epithelial tissue cells are tightly packed
and form a continuous sheet. They have only
a small amount of cementing material between
them and almost no intercellular spaces.
Obviously, anything entering or leaving the
body must cross at least one layer of
epithelium. As a result, the permeability of the
cells of various epithelia play an important role
in regulating the exchange of materials
between the body and the external
environment and also between different parts
of the body. Regardless of the type, all
epithelium is usually separated from the
Smooth muscle fibres
underlying tissue by an extracellular fibrous
basement membrane.
Nucleus Different epithelia (Fig. 6.9) show differing
Smooth muscle fibre structures that correlate with their unique
functions. For example, in cells lining blood
(Cell)
vessels or lung alveoli, where transportation
of substances occurs through a selectively
Fig. 6.8: Location of muscle fibres permeable surface, there is a simple flat kind
TISSUES 65
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 76 ---
of epithelium. This is called the simple of skin). Simple squamous epithelial cells are
squamous epithelium (squama means scale extremely thin and flat and form a delicate
lining. The oesophagus and the lining of the
mouth are also covered with squamous
epithelium. The skin, which protects the body,
is also made of squamous epithelium. Skin
epithelial cells are arranged in many layers to
prevent wear and tear. Since they are arranged
(a) Squamous
in a pattern of layers, the epithelium is called
stratified squamous epithelium.
Where absorption and secretion occur, as
in the inner lining of the intestine, tall epithelial
cells are present. This columnar (meaning
‘pillar-like’) epithelium facilitates movement
across the epithelial barrier. In the respiratory
tract, the columnar epithelial tissue also has
cilia, which are hair-like projections on the
outer surfaces of epithelial cells. These cilia can
move, and their movement pushes the mucus
forward to clear it. This type of epithelium is
thus ciliated columnar epithelium.
Cuboidal epithelium (with cube-shaped
cells) forms the lining of kidney tubules and
ducts of salivary glands, where it provides
(b) Stratified squamous mechanical support. Epithelial cells often
acquire additional specialisation as gland cells,
which can secrete substances at the epithelial
surface. Sometimes a portion of the epithelial
tissue folds inward, and a multicellular gland
is formed. This is glandular epithelium.
6.3.2 C
ONNECTIVE TISSUE
Blood is a type of connective tissue. Why would
it be called ‘connective’ tissue? A clue is
(c) Cuboidal provided in the introduction of this chapter!
Now, let us look at this type of tissue in some
more detail. The cells of connective tissue are
loosely spaced and embedded in an
intercellular matrix (Fig. 6.10). The matrix may
be jelly like, fluid, dense or rigid. The nature
of matrix differs in concordance with the
function of the particular connective tissue.
Activity 6.4
(d) Columnar (Ciliated) Take a drop of blood on a slide and
observe different cells present in it
Fig. 6.9: Different types of epithelial tissues under a microscope.
66 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 77 ---
Cytoplasm Blood has a fluid (liquid) matrix called
Nucleus plasma, in which red blood corpuscles (RBCs),
white blood corpuscles (WBCs) and platelets
are suspended. The plasma contains proteins,
Neutrophil Eosinophil Basophil
Different white (polynuclear salts and hormones. Blood flows and
blood corpuscles leucocyte) transports gases, digested food, hormones
and waste materials to different parts of
the body.
Bone is another example of a connective
Lymphocyte Monocyte Platelets
tissue. It forms the framework that supports
(a)
the body. It also anchors the muscles and
Haversian canal
(contains blood vessels supports the main organs of the body. It is a
Chondrocyte
and nerve fibres) strong and nonflexible tissue (what would be
Hyaline matrix the advantage of these properties for bone
functions?). Bone cells are embedded in a
hard matrix that is composed of calcium and
phosphorus compounds.
Canaliculus (contains (c) Two bones can be connected to each other
slender process of bone
by another type of connective tissue called the
cell or osteocyte)
(b) ligament. This tissue is very elastic. It has
Red blood considerable strength. Ligaments contain
corpuscle
very little matrix and connect bones with
Reticular fibre Fibroblast bones. Tendons connect muscles to bones and
are another type of connective tissue. Tendons
are fibrous tissue with great strength but
limited flexibility.
Another type of connective tissue,
cartilage, has widely spaced cells. The solid
matrix is composed of proteins and sugars.
Macrophage
Cartilage smoothens bone surfaces at joints
and is also present in the nose, ear, trachea
Collagen fibre and larynx. We can fold the cartilage of the ears,
Mast cell Plasma cell
but we cannot bend the bones in our arms.
(d)
Think of how the two tissues are different!
Nucleus
Fat droplet
Areolar connective tissue is found between
the skin and muscles, around blood vessels
and nerves and in the bone marrow. It fills
the space inside the organs, supports internal
organs and helps in repair of tissues.
Where are fats stored in our body? Fat-
storing adipose tissue is found below the skin
and between internal organs. The cells of this
tissue are filled with fat globules. Storage of
fats also lets it act as an insulator.
Adipocyte
6.3.3 M
(e) USCULAR TISSUE
Fig. 6.10: Types of connective tissues: (a) types of blood Muscular tissue consists of elongated cells,
cells, (b) compact bone, (c) hyaline cartilage, also called muscle fibres. This tissue is
(d) areolar tissue, (e) adipose tissue responsible for movement in our body.
TISSUES 67
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 78 ---
Muscles contain special proteins called [Fig. 6.11(a)]. These muscles are also called
contractile proteins, which contract and relax skeletal muscles as they are mostly attached
to cause movement. to bones and help in body movement. Under
the microscope, these muscles show alternate
Nuclei
light and dark bands or striations when
Striations stained appropriately. As a result, they are
also called striated muscles. The cells of this
tissue are long, cylindrical, unbranched and
multinucleate (having many nuclei).
(a) The movement of food in the alimentary
canal or the contraction and relaxation of blood
vessels are involuntary movements. We cannot
Spindle shaped
muscle cell really start them or stop them simply by
wanting to do so! Smooth muscles [Fig.
6.11(b)] or involuntary muscles control such
movements. They are also found in the iris of
the eye, in ureters and in the bronchi of the
lungs. The cells are long with pointed ends
(spindle-shaped) and uninucleate (having a
single nucleus). They are also called unstriated
muscles – why would they be called that?
Nucleus
The muscles of the heart show rhythmic
(b)
contraction and relaxation throughout life.
These involuntary muscles are called cardiac
muscles [Fig. 6.11(c)]. Heart muscle cells are
cylindrical, branched and uninucleate.
Striations Activity 6.5
Compare the structures of different
types of muscular tissues. Note down
their shape, number of nuclei and
Nuclei position of nuclei within the cell in
the Table 6.1.
Table 6.1:
Features Striated Smooth Cardiac
Shape
Number of nuclei
(c)
Position of nuclei
Fig. 6.11: Types of muscles fibres: (a) striated muscle,
(b) smooth muscle, (c) cardiac muscle
6.3.4 N
ERVOUS TISSUE
We can move some muscles by conscious
will. Muscles present in our limbs move when All cells possess the ability to respond to
we want them to, and stop when we so decide. stimuli. However, cells of the nervous tissue
Such muscles are called voluntary muscles are highly specialised for being stimulated and
68 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 79 ---
then transmitting the stimulus very rapidly (processes) called dendrites. An individual
from one place to another within the body. The nerve cell may be up to a metre long. Many
brain, spinal cord and nerves are all composed nerve fibres bound together by connective
of the nervous tissue. The cells of this tissue tissue make up a nerve.
are called nerve cells or neurons. A neuron The signal that passes along the nerve fibre
consists of a cell body with a nucleus and is called a nerve impulse. Nerve impulses allow
cytoplasm, from which long thin hair-like us to move our muscles when we want to. The
parts arise (Fig. 6.12). Usually each neuron functional combination of nerve and muscle
has a single long part (process), called the tissue is fundamental to most animals. This
axon, and many short, branched parts combination enables animals to move rapidly
in response to stimuli.
Nucleus Q
uestions
Dendrite
1. Name the tissue responsible for
movement in our body.
Axon 2. What does a neuron look like?
Nerve ending
3. Give three features of cardiac
muscles.
Cell body 4. What are the functions of
Fig. 6.12: Neuron-unit of nervous tissue areolar tissue?
What
you have
learnt
• Tissue is a group of cells similar in structure and function.
• Plant tissues are of two main types – meristematic and
permanent.
• Meristematic tissue is the dividing tissue present in the
growing regions of the plant.
• Permanent tissues are derived from meristematic tissue once
they lose the ability to divide. They are classified as simple
and complex tissues.
• Parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma are three types
of simple tissues. Xylem and phloem are types of complex
tissues.
• Animal tissues can be epithelial, connective, muscular and
nervous tissue.
• Depending on shape and function, epithelial tissue is
classified as squamous, cuboidal, columnar, ciliated and
glandular.
TISSUES 69
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 80 ---
• The different types of connective tissues in our body include
areolar tissue, adipose tissue, bone, tendon, ligament,
cartilage and blood.
• Striated, unstriated and cardiac are three types of muscle
tissues.
• Nervous tissue is made of neurons that receive and
conduct impulses.
Exercises
1. Define the term “tissue”.
2. How many types of elements together make up the xylem
tissue? Name them.
3. How are simple tissues different from complex tissues in
plants?
4. Differentiate between parenchyma, collenchyma and
sclerenchyma on the basis of their cell wall.
5. What are the functions of the stomata?
6. Diagrammatically show the difference between the three
types of muscle fibres.
7. What is the specific function of the cardiac muscle?
8. Differentiate between striated, unstriated and cardiac
muscles on the basis of their structure and site/location in
the body.
9. Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron.
10. Name the following.
(a) Tissue that forms the inner lining of our mouth.
(b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans.
(c) Tissue that transports food in plants.
(d) Tissue that stores fat in our body.
(e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix.
(f) Tissue present in the brain.
11. Identify the type of tissue in the following: skin, bark of
tree, bone, lining of kidney tubule, vascular bundle.
70 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 81 ---
12. Name the regions in which parenchyma tissue is present.
13. What is the role of epidermis in plants?
14. How does the cork act as a protective tissue?
15. Complete the following chart:
TISSUES 71
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 82 ---
7
C
hapter
MMMMM
OOOOOTTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN
In everyday life, we see some objects at rest Activity ______________7.1
and others in motion. Birds fly, fish swim,
• Discuss whether the walls of your
blood flows through veins and arteries, and
classroom are at rest or in motion.
cars move. Atoms, molecules, planets, stars
Activity ______________7.2
and galaxies are all in motion. We often
perceive an object to be in motion when its
• Have you ever experienced that the
position changes with time. However, there
train in which you are sitting appears
are situations where the motion is inferred to move while it is at rest?
through indirect evidences. For example, we • Discuss and share your experience.
infer the motion of air by observing the
Think and Act
movement of dust and the movement of leaves
and branches of trees. What causes the
We sometimes are endangered by the
phenomena of sunrise, sunset and changing
motion of objects around us, especially
of seasons? Is it due to the motion of the
if that motion is erratic and
earth? If it is true, why don’t we directly
uncontrolled as observed in a flooded
perceive the motion of the earth?
river, a hurricane or a tsunami. On the
An object may appear to be moving for other hand, controlled motion can be a
one person and stationary for some other. For service to human beings such as in the
the passengers in a moving bus, the roadside generation of hydro-electric power. Do
trees appear to be moving backwards. A you feel the necessity to study the
erratic motion of some objects and
person standing on the road–side perceives
learn to control them?
the bus alongwith the passengers as moving.
However, a passenger inside the bus sees his
7.1 Describing Motion
fellow passengers to be at rest. What do these
observations indicate?
We describe the location of an object by
Most motions are complex. Some objects
specifying a reference point. Let us
may move in a straight line, others may take understand this by an example. Let us
a circular path. Some may rotate and a few assume that a school in a village is 2 km north
others may vibrate. There may be situations of the railway station. We have specified the
involving a combination of these. In this position of the school with respect to the
chapter, we shall first learn to describe the railway station. In this example, the railway
motion of objects along a straight line. We station is the reference point. We could have
shall also learn to express such motions also chosen other reference points according
through simple equations and graphs. Later, to our convenience. Therefore, to describe the
we shall discuss ways of describing position of an object we need to specify a
circular motion. reference point called the origin.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 83 ---
7.1.1 M = 60 km + 25 km = 85 km while the magnitude
OTION ALONG A STRAIGHT LINE
of displacement = 35 km. Thus, the magnitude
The simplest type of motion is the motion of displacement (35 km) is not equal to the path
along a straight line. We shall first learn to length (85 km). Further, we will notice that the
describe this by an example. Consider the magnitude of the displacement for a course of
motion of an object moving along a straight motion may be zero but the corresponding
path. The object starts its journey from O distance covered is not zero. If we consider the
which is treated as its reference point object to travel back to O, the final position
(Fig. 7.1). Let A, B and C represent the position concides with the initial position, and therefore,
of the object at different instants. At first, the the displacement is zero. However, the distance
object moves through C and B and reaches A. covered in this journey is OA + AO = 60 km +
Then it moves back along the same path and 60 km = 120 km. Thus, two different physical
reaches C through B. quantities—the distance and the displacement,
Fig. 7.1: Positions of an object on a straight line path
The total path length covered by the object are used to describe the overall motion of an
is OA + AC, that is 60 km + 35 km = 95 km. object and to locate its final position with
This is the distance covered by the object. To reference to its initial position at a given time.
describe distance we need to specify only the
Activity ______________7.3
numerical value and not the direction of
motion. There are certain quantities which
• Take a metre scale and a long rope.
are described by specifying only their
• Walk from one corner of a basket-ball
numerical values. The numerical value of a
court to its oppposite corner along its
physical quantity is its magnitude. From this sides.
example, can you find out the distance of the • Measure the distance covered by you
final position C of the object from the initial and magnitude of the displacement.
position O? This difference will give you the • What difference would you notice
between the two in this case?
numerical value of the displacement of the
object from O to C through A. The shortest Activity ______________7.4
distance measured from the initial to the final
position of an object is known as • Automobiles are fitted with a device
the displacement. that shows the distance travelled. Such
Can the magnitude of the displacement be a device is known as an odometer. A
equal to the distance travelled by an object? car is driven from Bhubaneshwar to
New Delhi. The difference between the
Consider the example given in (Fig. 7.1). For
final reading and the initial reading of
motion of the object from O to A, the distance
the odometer is 1850 km.
covered is 60 km and the magnitude of
• Find the magnitude of the displacement
displacement is also 60 km. During its motion
between Bhubaneshwar and New Delhi
from O to A and back to B, the distance covered by using the Road Map of India.
MOTION 73
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 84 ---
Q
uestions
Table 7.1
1. An object has moved through a Time Distance Distance
distance. Can it have zero travelled by travelled by
displacement? If yes, support object A in m object B in m
your answer with an example.
9:30 am 10 12
2. A farmer moves along the
9:45 am 20 19
boundary of a square field of side
10:00 am 30 23
10 m in 40 s. What will be the
10:15 am 40 35
magnitude of displacement of the
farmer at the end of 2 minutes 20 10:30 am 50 37
seconds from his initial position? 10:45 am 60 41
3. Which of the following is true for 11:00 am 70 44
displacement?
(a) It cannot be zero.
(b) Its magnitude is greater than 7.2 Measuring the Rate of Motion
the distance travelled by the
object.
7.1.2 U -
NIFORM MOTION AND NON
UNIFORMMOTION
Consider an object moving along a straight
line. Let it travel 5 m in the first second,
5 m more in the next second, 5 m in the
third second and 5 m in the fourth second.
In this case, the object covers 5 m in each
second. As the object covers equal distances
(a)
in equal intervals of time, it is said to be in
uniform motion. The time interval in this
motion should be small. In our day-to-day
life, we come across motions where objects
cover unequal distances in equal intervals
of time, for example, when a car is moving
on a crowded street or a person is jogging
in a park. These are some instances of
non-uniform motion.
Activity ______________7.5
• The data regarding the motion of two
different objects A and B are given in
Table 7.1.
• Examine them carefully and state
whether the motion of the objects is
(b)
uniform or non-uniform.
Fig. 7.2
74 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 85 ---
Look at the situations given in Fig. 7.2. If
Total distancetravelled
the bowling speed is 143 km h–1 in Fig. 7.2(a) Average speed = Total timetaken
what does it mean? What do you understand
from the signboard in Fig. 7.2(b)? 32 m
Different objects may take different = 6s = 5.33 m s–1
amounts of time to cover a given distance.
Therefore, the average speed of the object
Some of them move fast and some move
is 5.33 m s–1.
slowly. The rate at which objects move can
be different. Also, different objects can move
at the same rate. One of the ways of 7.2.1 S
PEED WITH DIRECTION
measuring the rate of motion of an object is
to find out the distance travelled by the object The rate of motion of an object can be more
in unit time. This quantity is referred to as comprehensive if we specify its direction of
speed. The SI unit of speed is metre per motion along with its speed. The quantity that
second. This is represented by the symbol specifies both these aspects is called velocity.
m s–1 or m/s. The other units of speed include Velocity is the speed of an object moving in a
centimetre per second (cm s–1) and kilometre definite direction. The velocity of an object
per hour (km h–1). To specify the speed of an can be uniform or variable. It can be changed
object, we require only its magnitude. The by changing the object’s speed, direction of
speed of an object need not be constant. In motion or both. When an object is moving
most cases, objects will be in non-uniform along a straight line at a variable speed, we
motion. Therefore, we describe the rate of can express the magnitude of its rate of
motion of such objects in terms of their motion in terms of average velocity. It is
average speed. The average speed of an object
calculated in the same way as we calculate
is obtained by dividing the total distance
average speed.
travelled by the total time taken. That is,
In case the velocity of the object is
Total distance travelled changing at a uniform rate, then average
average speed =
Total time taken velocity is given by the arithmetic mean of
initial velocity and final velocity for a given
If an object travels a distance s in time t then
its speed v is, period of time. That is,
initialvelocity+finalvelocity
v = s (7.1) average velocity = 2
t
Let us understand this by an example. A u+v
v
car travels a distance of 100 km in 2 h. Its Mathematically, = (7.2)
av 2
average speed is 50 km h–1. The car might
not have travelled at 50 km h–1 all the time. where v is the average velocity, u is the initial
av
Sometimes it might have travelled faster and velocity and v is the final velocity of the object.
sometimes slower than this. Speed and velocity have the same units,
that is, m s–1 or m/s.
Example 7.1An object travels 16 m in 4 s
Activity ______________7.6
and then another 16 m in 2 s. What is
the average speed of the object?
• Measure the time it takes you to walk
Solution: from your house to your bus stop or
the school. If you consider that your
Total distance travelled by the object = average walking speed is 4 km h–1,
16 m + 16 m = 32 m estimate the distance of the bus stop
Total time taken = 4 s + 2 s = 6 s or school from your house.
MOTION 75
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 86 ---
Activity ______________7.7
km 1000m 1h
50 × ×
=
• At a time when it is cloudy, there may h 1km 3600s
be frequent thunder and lightning. The
= 13.9 m s–1
sound of thunder takes some time to
The average speed of the car is
reach you after you see the lightning.
• Can you answer why this happens? 50 km h–1 or 13.9 m s–1.
• Measure this time interval using a
digital wrist watch or a stop watch.
• Calculate the distance of the nearest Example 7.3 Usha swims in a 90 m long
point of lightning. (Speed of sound in pool. She covers 180 m in one minute
air = 346 m s-1.) by swimming from one end to the other
Q
and back along the same straight path.
uestions
Find the average speed and average
velocity of Usha.
1. Distinguish between speed and
Solution:
velocity.
Total distance covered by Usha in 1 min
2. Under what condition(s) is the
is 180 m.
magnitude of average velocity of
Displacement of Usha in 1 min = 0 m
an object equal to its average
Total distancecovered
speed?
3. What does the odometer of an Average speed = Totaltimetaken
automobile measure?
180m 180 m 1min
4. What does the path of an object = ×
=1min 1min 60s
look like when it is in uniform
motion? = 3 m s-1
5. During an experiment, a signal
from a spaceship reached the Displacement
ground station in five minutes. Average velocity = Totaltimetaken
What was the distance of the
spaceship from the ground 0m
station? The signal travels at the =
60 s
speed of light, that is, 3 × 108
m s–1. = 0 m s–1
The average speed of Usha is 3 m s–1
and her average velocity is 0 m s–1.
Example 7.2 The odometer of a car reads
2000 km at the start of a trip and
2400 km at the end of the trip. If the 7.3 Rate of Change of Velocity
trip took 8 h, calculate the average
speed of the car in km h–1 and m s–1. During uniform motion of an object along a
straight line, the velocity remains constant
Solution:
with time. In this case, the change in velocity
Distance covered by the car, of the object for any time interval is zero.
s = 2400 km – 2000 km = 400 km However, in non-uniform motion, velocity
Time elapsed, t = 8 h varies with time. It has different values at
Average speed of the car is, different instants and at different points of
the path. Thus, the change in velocity of the
s 400 km
v = = object during any time interval is not zero.
av t 8 h
Can we now express the change in velocity of
= 50 km h–1 an object?
76 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 87 ---
To answer such a question, we have to attain a velocity of 6 m s–1 in 30 s. Then
introduce another physical quantity called he applies brakes such that the velocity
acceleration, which is a measure of the of the bicycle comes down to 4 m s-1 in
change in the velocity of an object per unit the next 5 s. Calculate the acceleration
time. That is, of the bicycle in both the cases.
change in velocity Solution:
acceleration =
timetaken In the first case:
initial velocity, u = 0 ;
If the velocity of an object changes from
final velocity, v = 6 m s–1 ;
an initial value u to the final value v in time t,
time, t = 30 s .
the acceleration a is,
From Eq. (8.3), we have
v–u
a = v–u
(7.3)
t a =
t
This kind of motion is known as
Substituting the given values of u,v and
accelerated motion. The acceleration is taken
t in the above equation, we get
to be positive if it is in the direction of velocity
( )
and negative when it is opposite to the 6m s–1 –0m s–1
direction of velocity. The SI unit of a =
30 s
acceleration is m s–2 .
If an object travels in a straight line and
= 0.2 m s–2
its velocity increases or decreases by equal
In the second case:
amounts in equal intervals of time, then the
initial velocity, u = 6 m s–1;
acceleration of the object is said to be
final velocity, v = 4 m s–1;
uniform. The motion of a freely falling body
time, t = 5 s.
is an example of uniformly accelerated
( )
motion. On the other hand, an object can 4m s–1 –6m s–1
travel with non-uniform acceleration if its Then, a =
5 s
velocity changes at a non-uniform rate. For
example, if a car travelling along a straight
= –0.4 m s–2 .
road increases its speed by unequal amounts
The acceleration of the bicycle in the
in equal intervals of time, then the car is said
first case is 0.2 m s–2 and in the second
to be moving with non-uniform acceleration.
case, it is –0.4 m s–2.
Activity ______________7.8
Q
uestions
•
In your everyday life you come across
a range of motions in which
1. When will you say a body is in
(a) acceleration is in the direction of
motion, (i) uniform acceleration? (ii) non-
(b) acceleration is against the uniform acceleration?
direction of motion, 2. A bus decreases its speed from
(c) acceleration is uniform, 80 km h–1 to 60 km h–1 in 5 s.
(d) acceleration is non-uniform. Find the acceleration of the bus.
•
Can you identify one example each
3. A train starting from a railway
for the above type of motion?
station and moving with uniform
acceleration attains a speed
7.4
Example Starting from a stationary 40 km h–1 in 10 minutes. Find its
position, Rahul paddles his bicycle to acceleration.
MOTION 77
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 88 ---
7.4 Graphical Representation of distance travelled by the object is directly
proportional to time taken. Thus, for uniform
Motion
speed, a graph of distance travelled against
time is a straight line, as shown in Fig. 7.3.
Graphs provide a convenient method to The portion OB of the graph shows that the
present basic information about a variety of distance is increasing at a uniform rate. Note
events. For example, in the telecast of a that, you can also use the term uniform
one-day cricket match, vertical bar graphs velocity in place of uniform speed if you take
show the run rate of a team in each over. As the magnitude of displacement equal to the
you have studied in mathematics, a straight distance travelled by the object along the
line graph helps in solving a linear equation y-axis.
having two variables. We can use the distance-time graph to
To describe the motion of an object, we determine the speed of an object. To do so,
can use line graphs. In this case, line graphs consider a small part AB of the distance-time
show dependence of one physical quantity, graph shown in Fig 7.3. Draw a line parallel
such as distance or velocity, on another to the x-axis from point A and another line
quantity, such as time. parallel to the y-axis from point B. These two
lines meet each other at point C to form a
7.4.1 D ISTANCE – TIME GRAPHS triangle ABC. Now, on the graph, AC denotes
the time interval (t – t ) while BC corresponds
The change in the position of an object with 2 1
to the distance (s – s ). We can see from the
time can be represented on the distance-time 2 1
graph that as the object moves from the point
graph adopting a convenient scale of choice.
A to B, it covers a distance (s – s ) in time
In this graph, time is taken along the x–axis 2 1
(t – t ). The speed, v of the object, therefore
and distance is taken along the y-axis. 2 1
can be represented as
Distance-time graphs can be employed under
various conditions where objects move with s –s
2 1
uniform speed, non-uniform speed, remain v = t –t (7.4)
2 1
at rest etc.
We can also plot the distance-time graph
for accelerated motion. Table 7.2 shows the
distance travelled by a car in a time interval
of two seconds.
Table 7.2: Distance travelled by a
car at regular time intervals
Time in seconds Distance in metres
0 0
2 1
4 4
Fig. 7.3: Distance-time graph of an object moving 6 9
with uniform speed
8 16
We know that when an object travels equal 10 25
distances in equal intervals of time, it moves
12 36
with uniform speed. This shows that the
78 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 89 ---
is represented along the y-axis. If the object
moves at uniform velocity, the height of its
velocity-time graph will not change with time
(Fig. 7.5). It will be a straight line parallel to
the x-axis. Fig. 7.5 shows the velocity-time
graph for a car moving with uniform velocity
of 40 km h–1.
We know that the product of velocity and
time give displacement of an object moving
with uniform velocity. The area enclosed by
velocity-time graph and the time axis will be
equal to the magnitude of the displacement.
To know the distance moved by the car
between time t and t using Fig. 7.5, draw
1 2
perpendiculars from the points corresponding
to the time t and t on the graph. The velocity
1 2
of 40 km h–1 is represented by the height AC
or BD and the time (t – t ) is represented by
2 1
the length AB.
Fig. 7.4: Distance-time graph for a car moving with So, the distance s moved by the car in
non-uniform speed time (t – t ) can be expressed as
2 1
s = AC × CD
The distance-time graph for the motion = [(40 km h–1) × (t – t ) h]
2 1
of the car is shown in Fig. 7.4. Note that the = 40 (t – t ) km
2 1
shape of this graph is different from the earlier = area of the rectangle ABDC (shaded
distance-time graph (Fig. 7.3) for uniform in Fig. 7.5).
motion. The nature of this graph shows non- We can also study about uniformly
linear variation of the distance travelled by accelerated motion by plotting its velocity–
the car with time. Thus, the graph shown in time graph. Consider a car being driven along
Fig 7.4 represents motion with non-uniform a straight road for testing its engine. Suppose
speed. a person sitting next to the driver records its
velocity after every 5 seconds by noting the
7.4.2 V ELOCITY - TIME GRAPHS reading of the speedometer of the car. The
velocity of the car, in km h–1 as well as in
The variation in velocity with time for an object
m s–1, at different instants of time is shown
moving in a straight line can be represented
in table 7.3.
by a velocity-time graph. In this graph, time is
represented along the x-axis and the velocity
Table 7.3: Velocity of a car at
regular instants of time
Time Velocity of the car
–1
(s) (m s–1) (km h )
0 0 0
5 2.5 9
10 5.0 18
15 7.5 27
20 10.0 36
25 12.5 45
Fig. 7.5: Velocity-time graph for uniform motion
of a car 30 15.0 54
MOTION 79
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 90 ---
In this case, the velocity-time graph for the
motion of the car is shown in Fig. 7.6. The
nature of the graph shows that velocity
changes by equal amounts in equal intervals
of time. Thus, for all uniformly accelerated
motion, the velocity-time graph is a
straight line.
Fig. 7.7: Velocity-time graphs of an object in non-
uniformly accelerated motion.
Fig. 7.7(a) shows a velocity-time graph that
Fig. 7.6: Velocity-time graph for a car moving with represents the motion of an object whose
uniform accelerations. velocity is decreasing with time while
Fig. 7.7 (b) shows the velocity-time graph
You can also determine the distance representing the non-uniform variation of
moved by the car from its velocity-time graph. velocity of the object with time. Try to interpret
The area under the velocity-time graph gives these graphs.
the distance (magnitude of displacement) Activity ______________7.9
moved by the car in a given interval of time.
•
If the car would have been moving with The times of arrival and departure of
uniform velocity, the distance travelled by it a train at three stations A, B and C
would be represented by the area ABCD and the distance of stations B and C
from station A are given in Table 7.4.
under the graph (Fig. 7.6). Since the
magnitude of the velocity of the car is Table 7.4: Distances of stations B
changing due to acceleration, the distance s and C from A and times of arrival
travelled by the car will be given by the area
and departure of the train
ABCDE under the velocity-time graph
(Fig. 7.6). Station Distance Time of Time of
That is, from A arrival departure
s = area ABCDE (km) (hours) (hours)
= area of the rectangle ABCD + area of
A 0 08:00 08:15
the triangle ADE
B 120 11:15 11:30
1
C 180 13:00 13:15
= AB × BC + (AD × DE)
2
•
Plot and interpret the distance-time
In the case of non-uniformly accelerated
graph for the train assuming that its
motion, velocity-time graphs can have any
motion between any two stations is
shape.
uniform.
80 SCIENCE
)1–h
mk(
yticoleV
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 91 ---
Activity _____________7.10 4. What is the quantity which is
measured by the area occupied
• Feroz and his sister Sania go to school below the velocity-time graph?
on their bicycles. Both of them start at
the same time from their home but take
7.5 Equations of Motion
different times to reach the school
although they follow the same route.
When an object moves along a straight line
Table 7.5 shows the distance travelled
with uniform acceleration, it is possible to
by them in different times
relate its velocity, acceleration during motion
and the distance covered by it in a certain
Table 7.5: Distance covered by
time interval by a set of equations known as
Feroz and Sania at different
the equations of motion. For convenience, a
times on their bicycles set of three such equations are given below:
v = u + at (7.5)
s = ut + ½ at2 (7.6)
Time Distance Distance
2 a s = v2 – u2 (7.7)
travelled travelled
where u is the initial velocity of the object which
by Feroz by Sania
moves with uniform acceleration a for time t,
(km) (km)
v is the final velocity, and s is the distance
travelled by the object in time t. Eq. (7.5)
8:00 am 0 0
describes the velocity-time relation and Eq.
8:05 am 1.0 0.8 (7.6) represents the position-time relation. Eq.
(7.7), which represents the relation between the
8:10 am 1.9 1.6
position and the velocity, can be obtained from
Eqs. (7.5) and (7.6) by eliminating t. These
8:15 am 2.8 2.3
three equations can be derived by graphical
8:20 am 3.6 3.0 method.
8:25 am – 3.6
Example 7.5 A train starting from rest
attains a velocity of 72 km h–1 in 5
• Plot the distance-time graph for their
minutes. Assuming that the acceleration
motions on the same scale and
is uniform, find (i) the acceleration and
interpret.
Q
(ii) the distance travelled by the train for
attaining this velocity.
uestions
Solution:
1. What is the nature of the
We have been given
distance-time graphs for uniform
u = 0 ; v = 72 km h–1 = 20 m s-1 and
and non-uniform motion of an
t = 5 minutes = 300 s.
object?
(i) From Eq. (7.5) we know that
2. What can you say about the
( )
v–u
motion of an object whose
a=
distance-time graph is a straight t
line parallel to the time axis?
20 m s–1 – 0ms–1
3. What can you say about the
=
motion of an object if its speed- 300s
time graph is a straight line 1
= m s–2
parallel to the time axis?
15
MOTION 81
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 92 ---
(ii) From Eq. (7.7) we have
Example 7.7 The brakes applied to a car
2 a s = v2 – u2 = v2 – 0
produce an acceleration of 6 m s-2 in the
Thus,
opposite direction to the motion. If the
v2 car takes 2 s to stop after the application
s = of brakes, calculate the distance it
2a
travels during this time.
(20 ms–1)2
Solution:
=
2×(1/15) ms–2 We have been given
a = – 6 m s–2 ; t = 2 s and v = 0 m s–1.
= 3000 m
From Eq. (7.5) we know that
= 3 km
v = u + at
1
0 = u + (– 6 m s–2) × 2 s
The acceleration of the train is m s– 2
15 or u = 12 m s–1 .
and the distance travelled is 3 km. From Eq. (7.6) we get
1
s = u t + a t 2
2
Example 7.6 A car accelerates uniformly
from 18 km h –1 to 36 km h –1 in 5 s. 1
= (12 m s–1 ) × (2 s) + (–6 m s–2 ) (2 s)2
Calculate (i) the acceleration and (ii) the 2
distance covered by the car in that time.
= 24 m – 12 m
= 12 m
Solution:
Thus, the car will move 12 m before it
We are given that stops after the application of brakes. Can
u = 18 km h–1 = 5 m s–1 you now appreciate why drivers are
v = 36 km h–1 = 10 m s–1 and cautioned to maintain some distance
t = 5 s . between vehicles while travelling on the
road?
(i) From Eq. (7.5) we have Q
v–u uestions
a=
t
1. A bus starting from rest moves
10 m s-1 – 5 m s-1
with a uniform acceleration of
= 5s
0.1 m s-2 for 2 minutes. Find (a)
= 1 m s–2 the speed acquired, (b) the
(ii) From Eq. (7.6) we have
distance travelled.
1 2. A train is travelling at a speed
s = u t +
2
a t 2
of 90 km h–1. Brakes are applied
so as to produce a uniform
1
acceleration of – 0.5 m s-2. Find
= 5 m s–1 × 5 s + × 1 m s–2 × (5 s)2
2 how far the train will go before it
= 25 m + 12.5 m is brought to rest.
3. A trolley, while going down an
= 37.5 m
inclined plane, has an
–2
The acceleration of the car is 1 m s and
acceleration of 2 cm s-2. What will
the distance covered is 37.5 m.
be its velocity 3 s after the start?
82 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 93 ---
4. A racing car has a uniform straight parts AB, BC, CD and DA of the track.
acceleration of 4 m s-2. What In order to keep himself on track, he quickly
distance will it cover in 10 s after
changes his speed at the corners. How many
start?
times will the athlete have to change his
5. A stone is thrown in a vertically
direction of motion, while he completes one
upward direction with a velocity
round? It is clear that to move in a rectangular
of 5 m s-1. If the acceleration of
track once, he has to change his direction of
the stone during its motion is 10
motion four times.
m s–2 in the downward direction,
what will be the height attained Now, suppose instead of a rectangular
by the stone and how much time track, the athlete is running along a
will it take to reach there? hexagonal shaped path ABCDEF, as shown
in Fig. 7.8(b). In this situation, the athlete will
7.6 Uniform Circular Motion have to change his direction six times while
he completes one round. What if the track
When the velocity of an object changes, we say
was not a hexagon but a regular octagon,
that the object is accelerating. The change in
with eight equal sides as shown by
the velocity could be due to change in its
ABCDEFGH in Fig. 7.8(c)? It is observed that
magnitude or the direction of the motion or
as the number of sides of the track increases
both. Can you think of an example when an
the athelete has to take turns more and more
object does not change its magnitude of
often. What would happen to the shape of the
velocity but only its direction of motion?
track as we go on increasing the number of
sides indefinitely? If you do this you will
notice that the shape of the track approaches
the shape of a circle and the length of each of
the sides will decrease to a point. If the athlete
moves with a velocity of constant magnitude
(a) Rectangular track (b) Hexagonal track along the circular path, the only change in
his velocity is due to the change in the
direction of motion. The motion of the athlete
moving along a circular path is, therefore, an
example of an accelerated motion.
We know that the circumference of a circle
of radius r is given by 2p r . If the athlete takes
t seconds to go once around the circular path
(c) Octagonal shaped track (d) A circular track of radius r, the speed v is given by
Fig. 7.8: The motion of an athlete along closed tracks 2p r
v =
of different shapes. t
Let us consider an example of the motion
(7.8)
of a body along a closed path. Fig 8.9 (a)
shows the path of an athlete along a When an object moves in a circular path
rectangular track ABCD. Let us assume that with uniform speed, its motion is called
the athlete runs at a uniform speed on the uniform circular motion.
MOTION 83
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 94 ---
Activity _____________7.11 If you carefully note, on being released
the stone moves along a straight line
•
Take a piece of thread and tie a small tangential to the circular path. This is
piece of stone at one of its ends. Move
because once the stone is released, it
the stone to describe a circular path
continues to move along the direction it has
with constant speed by holding the
been moving at that instant. This shows that
thread at the other end, as shown in
Fig. 7.9. the direction of motion changed at every point
when the stone was moving along the circular
path.
When an athlete throws a hammer or a
discus in a sports meet, he/she holds the
hammer or the discus in his/her hand and
gives it a circular motion by rotating his/
her own body. Once released in the desired
Fig. 7.9: A stone describing a circular path with
direction, the hammer or discus moves in
a velocity of constant magnitude.
the direction in which it was moving at the
•
Now, let the stone go by releasing the time it was released, just like the piece of
thread. stone in the activity described above. There
•
Can you tell the direction in which
are many more familiar examples of objects
the stone moves after it is released?
moving under uniform circular motion,
•
By repeating the activity for a few
such as the motion of the moon and the
times and releasing the stone at
different positions of the circular earth, a satellite in a circular orbit around
path, check whether the direction in the earth, a cyclist on a circular track at
which the stone moves remains the constant speed and so on.
same or not.
What
you have
learnt
• Motion is a change of position; it can be described in terms
of the distance moved or the displacement.
• The motion of an object could be uniform or non-uniform
depending on whether its velocity is constant or changing.
• The speed of an object is the distance covered per unit time,
and velocity is the displacement per unit time.
• The acceleration of an object is the change in velocity per
unit time.
• Uniform and non-uniform motions of objects can be shown
through graphs.
• The motion of an object moving at uniform acceleration can
be described with the help of the following equations, namely
v = u + at
s = ut + ½ at2
2as = v2 – u2
84 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 95 ---
where u is initial velocity of the object, which moves with
uniform acceleration a for time t, v is its final velocity and s
is the distance it travelled in time t.
• If an object moves in a circular path with uniform speed, its
motion is called uniform circular motion.
Exercises
1. An athlete completes one round of a circular track of diameter
200 m in 40 s. What will be the distance covered and the
displacement at the end of 2 minutes 20 s?
2. Joseph jogs from one end A to the other end B of a straight
300 m road in 2 minutes 30 seconds and then turns around
and jogs 100 m back to point C in another 1 minute. What
are Joseph’s average speeds and velocities in jogging (a)
from A to B and (b) from A to C?
3. Abdul, while driving to school, computes the average speed
for his trip to be 20 km h–1. On his return trip along the
same route, there is less traffic and the average speed is
30 km h–1. What is the average speed for Abdul’s trip?
4. A motorboat starting from rest on a lake accelerates in a
straight line at a constant rate of 3.0 m s–2 for 8.0 s. How
far does the boat travel during this time?
5. A driver of a car travelling at 52 km h–1 applies the brakes
Shade the area on the graph that represents the distance
travelled by the car during the period.
(b) Which part of the graph represents uniform motion of
the car?
6. Fig 7.10 shows the distance-time graph of three objects A,B
and C. Study the graph and answer the following questions:
Fig. 7.10
MOTION 85
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 96 ---
(a) Which of the three is travelling the fastest?
(b) Are all three ever at the same point on the road?
(c) How far has C travelled when B passes A?
(d) How far has B travelled by the time it passes C?
7. A ball is gently dropped from a height of 20 m. If its velocity
increases uniformly at the rate of 10 m s-2, with what velocity
will it strike the ground? After what time will it strike the
ground?
8. The speed-time graph for a car is shown is Fig. 7.11.
Fig. 7.11
(a) Find how far does the car travel in the first 4 seconds.
Shade the area on the graph that represents the distance
travelled by the car during the period.
(b) Which part of the graph represents uniform motion of
the car?
9. State which of the following situations are possible and give
an example for each of these:
(a) an object with a constant acceleration but with zero
velocity
(b) an object moving with an acceleration but with uniform
speed.
(c) an object moving in a certain direction with an
acceleration in the perpendicular direction.
10. An artificial satellite is moving in a circular orbit of radius
42250 km. Calculate its speed if it takes 24 hours to revolve
around the earth.
86 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 97 ---
8
C
hapter
FFFFF LLLLL MMMMM
OOOOORRRRRCCCCCEEEEE AAAAANNNNNDDDDD AAAAAWWWWWSSSSS OOOOOFFFFF OOOOOTTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN
In the previous chapter, we described the In our everyday life we observe that some
motion of an object along a straight line in effort is required to put a stationary object
terms of its position, velocity and acceleration. into motion or to stop a moving object. We
We saw that such a motion can be uniform ordinarily experience this as a muscular effort
or non-uniform. We have not yet discovered and say that we must push or hit or pull on
what causes the motion. Why does the speed an object to change its state of motion. The
of an object change with time? Do all motions concept of force is based on this push, hit or
require a cause? If so, what is the nature of pull. Let us now ponder about a ‘force’. What
this cause? In this chapter we shall make an is it? In fact, no one has seen, tasted or felt a
attempt to quench all such curiosities. force. However, we always see or feel the effect
For many centuries, the problem of of a force. It can only be explained by
motion and its causes had puzzled scientists describing what happens when a force is
and philosophers. A ball on the ground, when applied to an object. Pushing, hitting and
given a small hit, does not move forever. Such pulling of objects are all ways of bringing
observations suggest that rest is the “natural objects in motion (Fig. 8.1). They move because
state” of an object. This remained the belief we make a force act on them.
until Galileo Galilei and Isaac Newton From your studies in earlier classes, you
developed an entirely different approach to are also familiar with the fact that a force can
understand motion. be used to change the magnitude of velocity
of an object (that is, to make the object move
faster or slower) or to change its direction of
motion. We also know that a force can change
the shape and size of objects (Fig. 8.2).
(a) The trolley moves along the (b) The drawer is pulled.
direction we push it.
(a)
(b)
(c) The hockey stick hits the ball forward Fig. 8.2: (a) A spring expands on application of force;
Fig. 8.1: Pushing, pulling, or hitting objects change (b) A spherical rubber ball becomes oblong
their state of motion. as we apply force on it.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 98 ---
8.1 Balanced and Unbalanced box with a small force, the box does not move
because of friction acting in a direction
Forces
opposite to the push [Fig. 8.4(a)]. This friction
force arises between two surfaces in contact;
Fig. 8.3 shows a wooden block on a horizontal
in this case, between the bottom of the box
table. Two strings X and Y are tied to the two
and floor’s rough surface. It balances the
opposite faces of the block as shown. If we
pushing force and therefore the box does not
apply a force by pulling the string X, the block
move. In Fig. 8.4(b), the children push the box
begins to move to the right. Similarly, if we
harder but the box still does not move. This is
pull the string Y, the block moves to the left.
because the friction force still balances the
But, if the block is pulled from both the sides
pushing force. If the children push the box
with equal forces, the block will not move.
harder still, the pushing force becomes bigger
Such forces are called balanced forces and
than the friction force [Fig. 8.4(c)].
do not change the state of rest or of motion of
There is an unbalanced force. So the box
an object. Now, let us consider a situation in
starts moving.
which two opposite forces of different
What happens when we ride a bicycle?
magnitudes pull the block. In this case, the
When we stop pedalling, the bicycle begins
block would begin to move in the direction of
to slow down. This is again because of the
the greater force. Thus, the two forces are
friction forces acting opposite to the direction
not balanced and the unbalanced force acts
of motion. In order to keep the bicycle moving,
in the direction the block moves. This
suggests that an unbalanced force acting on we have to start pedalling again. It thus
an object brings it in motion. appears that an object maintains its motion
under the continuous application of an
unbalanced force. However, it is quite
incorrect. An object moves with a uniform
velocity when the forces (pushing force and
frictional force) acting on the object are
balanced and there is no net external force
on it. If an unbalanced force is applied on
the object, there will be a change either in its
speed or in the direction of its motion. Thus,
to accelerate the motion of an object, an
unbalanced force is required. And the change
Fig. 8.3: Two forces acting on a wooden block
in its speed (or in the direction of motion)
What happens when some children try to would continue as long as this unbalanced
push a box on a rough floor? If they push the force is applied. However, if this force is
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 8.4
88 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 99 ---
removed completely, the object would continue
to move with the velocity it has acquired till
then.
8.2 First Law of Motion
By observing the motion of objects on an
inclined plane Galileo deduced that objects
move with a constant speed when no force
acts on them. He observed that when a marble
rolls down an inclined plane, its velocity
increases [Fig. 8.5(a)]. In the next chapter, you
will learn that the marble falls under the
unbalanced force of gravity as it rolls down
and attains a definite velocity by the time it
reaches the bottom. Its velocity decreases
when it climbs up as shown in Fig. 8.5(b).
Fig. 8.5(c) shows a marble resting on an ideal
frictionless plane inclined on both sides. Fig. 8.5: (a) the downward motion; (b) the upward
Galileo argued that when the marble is motion of a marble on an inclined plane;
released from left, it would roll down the slope and (c) on a double inclined plane.
and go up on the opposite side to the same
Newton further studied Galileo’s ideas on
height from which it was released. If the
force and motion and presented three
inclinations of the planes on both sides are
fundamental laws that govern the motion of
equal then the marble will climb the same
objects. These three laws are known as
distance that it covered while rolling down. If
Newton’s laws of motion. The first law of
the angle of inclination of the right-side plane
motion is stated as:
were gradually decreased, then the marble
An object remains in a state of rest or of
would travel further distances till it reaches
uniform motion in a straight line unless
the original height. If the right-side plane were
compelled to change that state by an
ultimately made horizontal (that is, the slope
applied force.
is reduced to zero), the marble would continue
In other words, all objects resist a change
to travel forever trying to reach the same
in their state of motion. In a qualitative way,
height that it was released from. The the tendency of undisturbed objects to stay
unbalanced forces on the marble in this case at rest or to keep moving with the same
are zero. It thus suggests that an unbalanced velocity is called inertia. This is why, the first
(external) force is required to change the law of motion is also known as the law
motion of the marble but no net force is of inertia.
needed to sustain the uniform motion of the Certain experiences that we come across
marble. In practical situations it is difficult while travelling in a motorcar can be
to achieve a zero unbalanced force. This is explained on the basis of the law of inertia.
because of the presence of the frictional force We tend to remain at rest with respect to the
acting opposite to the direction of motion. seat until the driver applies a braking force
Thus, in practice the marble stops after to stop the motorcar. With the application of
travelling some distance. The effect of the brakes, the car slows down but our body
frictional force may be minimised by using a tends to continue in the same state of motion
smooth marble and a smooth plane and because of its inertia. A sudden application of
providing a lubricant on top of the planes. brakes may thus cause injury to us by impact
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 89
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 100 ---
or collision with the panels in front. Safety belts
Galileo Galilei was born
are worn to prevent such accidents. Safety belts
on 15 February 1564 in
exert a force on our body to make the forward
Pisa, Italy. Galileo, right
motion slower. An opposite experience is
from his childhood, had
encountered when we are standing in a bus
interest in mathematics
and natural philosophy. and the bus begins to move suddenly. Now
But his father we tend to fall backwards. This is because the
Vincenzo Galilei wanted sudden start of the bus brings motion to the
him to become a medical bus as well as to our feet in contact with the
doctor. Accordingly, floor of the bus. But the rest of our body
Galileo Galilei
Galileo enrolled himself opposes this motion because of its inertia.
(1564 – 1642)
for a medical degree at the When a motorcar makes a sharp turn at a
University of Pisa in 1581 which he never
high speed, we tend to get thrown to one side.
completed because of his real interest in
This can again be explained on the basis of
mathematics. In 1586, he wrote his first
the law of inertia. We tend to continue in our
scientific book ‘The Little Balance [La
straight-line motion. When an unbalanced
Balancitta]’, in which he described
force is applied by the engine to change the
Archimedes’ method of finding the relative
direction of motion of the motorcar, we slip to
densities (or specific gravities) of substances
one side of the seat due to the inertia of
using a balance. In 1589, in his series of
essays – De Motu, he presented his theories our body.
about falling objects using an inclined plane The fact that a body will remain at rest
to slow down the rate of descent. unless acted upon by an unbalanced force
In 1592, he was appointed professor of can be illustrated through the
mathematics at the University of Padua in following activities:
the Republic of Venice. Here he continued his
Activity ______________8.1
observations on the theory of motion and
through his study of inclined planes and the
pendulum, formulated the correct law for • Make a pile of similar carom coins on
uniformly accelerated objects that the a table, as shown in Fig. 8.6.
distance the object moves is proportional to • Attempt a sharp horizontal hit at the
bottom of the pile using another carom
the square of the time taken.
coin or the striker. If the hit is strong
Galileo was also a remarkable craftsman.
enough, the bottom coin moves out
He developed a series of telescopes whose
quickly. Once the lowest coin is
optical performance was much better than
removed, the inertia of the other coins
that of other telescopes available during those
makes them ‘fall’ vertically on the
days. Around 1640, he designed the first
table.
pendulum clock. In his book ‘Starry
Messenger’ on his astronomical discoveries,
Galileo claimed to have seen mountains on
the moon, the milky way made up of tiny
stars, and four small bodies orbiting Jupiter.
In his books ‘Discourse on Floating Bodies’
and ‘Letters on the Sunspots’, he disclosed
his observations of sunspots.
Using his own telescopes and through his
observations on Saturn and Venus, Galileo
argued that all the planets must orbit the Sun
Fig. 8.6: Only the carom coin at the bottom of a
and not the earth, contrary to what was
pile is removed when a fast moving carom
believed at that time.
coin (or striker) hits it.
90 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 101 ---
Activity ______________8.2 five-rupees coin if we use a one-rupee coin, we
find that a lesser force is required to perform
• Set a five-rupee coin on a stiff card the activity. A force that is just enough to cause
covering an empty glass tumbler a small cart to pick up a large velocity will
standing on a table as shown in produce a negligible change in the motion of a
Fig. 8.7.
train. This is because, in comparison to the
• Give the card a sharp horizontal flick
cart the train has a much lesser tendency to
with a finger. If we do it fast then the
change its state of motion. Accordingly, we say
card shoots away, allowing the coin to
that the train has more inertia than the cart.
fall vertically into the glass tumbler due
to its inertia. Clearly, heavier or more massive objects offer
• The inertia of the coin tries to larger inertia. Quantitatively, the inertia of an
maintain its state of rest even when object is measured by its mass. We may thus
the card flows off. relate inertia and mass as follows:
Inertia is the natural tendency of an object to
resist a change in its state of motion or of
rest. The mass of an object is a measure of
its inertia.
Q
uestions
Fig. 8.7: When the card is flicked with the
1. Which of the following has more
finger the coin placed over it falls in the
inertia: (a) a rubber ball and a
tumbler.
stone of the same size? (b) a
Activity ______________8.3 bicycle and a train? (c) a five-
rupees coin and a one-rupee coin?
• Place a water-filled tumbler on a tray. 2. In the following example, try to
• Hold the tray and turn around as fast identify the number of times the
as you can. velocity of the ball changes:
• We observe that the water spills. Why? “A football player kicks a football
to another player of his team who
Observe that a groove is provided in a kicks the football towards the
saucer for placing the tea cup. It prevents goal. The goalkeeper of the
the cup from toppling over in case of opposite team collects the football
sudden jerks. and kicks it towards a player of
his own team”.
8.3 Inertia and Mass Also identify the agent supplying
the force in each case.
All the examples and activities given so far
3. Explain why some of the leaves
illustrate that there is a resistance offered by
may get detached from a tree if
an object to change its state of motion. If it is
we vigorously shake its branch.
at rest it tends to remain at rest; if it is moving
4. Why do you fall in the forward
it tends to keep moving. This property of an
direction when a moving bus
object is called its inertia. Do all bodies have
brakes to a stop and fall
the same inertia? We know that it is easier to
backwards when it accelerates
push an empty box than a box full of books.
from rest?
Similarly, if we kick a football it flies away.
But if we kick a stone of the same size with 8.4 Second Law of Motion
equal force, it hardly moves. We may, in fact,
get an injury in our foot while doing so! The first law of motion indicates that when an
Similarly, in activity 8.2, instead of a unbalanced external force acts on an object,
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 91
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 102 ---
its velocity changes, that is, the object gets an on the time rate at which the momentum is
acceleration. We would now like to study how changed.
the acceleration of an object depends on the The second law of motion states that the
force applied to it and how we measure a force. rate of change of momentum of an object is
Let us recount some observations from our proportional to the applied unbalanced force
everyday life. During the game of table tennis in the direction of force.
if the ball hits a player it does not hurt him.
On the other hand, when a fast moving cricket 8.4.1 M ATHEMATICAL FORMULATION OF
ball hits a spectator, it may hurt him. A truck
SECONDLAWOFMOTION
at rest does not require any attention when
parked along a roadside. But a moving truck, Suppose an object of mass, m is moving along
even at speeds as low as 5 m s–1, may kill a a straight line with an initial velocity, u. It is
person standing in its path. A small mass, uniformly accelerated to velocity, v in time, t
such as a bullet may kill a person when fired by the application of a constant force, F
from a gun. These observations suggest that throughout the time, t. The initial and final
the impact produced by the objects depends momentum of the object will be, p = mu and
1
on their mass and velocity. Similarly, if an p = mv respectively.
2
object is to be accelerated, we know that a
The change in momentum ∝ p – p
greater force is required to give a greater ∝ m 2 v – m 1 u
velocity. In other words, there appears to exist ∝ m × (v – u).
some quantity of importance that combines
the object’s mass and its velocity. One such m· (v- u)
The rate of change of momentum ∝
property called momentum was introduced by t
Newton. The momentum, p of an object is
Or, the applied force,
defined as the product of its mass, m and
m· (v- u)
velocity, v. That is, F ∝
t
p = mv (8.1)
Momentum has both direction and F =
km· (v- u)
(8.2)
magnitude. Its direction is the same as that t
of velocity, v. The SI unit of momentum is = kma (8.3)
kilogram-metre per second (kg m s-1). Since
Here a [ = (v – u)/t ] is the acceleration,
the application of an unbalanced force brings
which is the rate of change of velocity. The
a change in the velocity of the object, it is
quantity, k is a constant of proportionality.
therefore clear that a force also produces a
The SI units of mass and acceleration are kg
change of momentum.
Let us consider a situation in which a car and m s-2 respectively. The unit of force is so
with a dead battery is to be pushed along a chosen that the value of the constant, k
straight road to give it a speed of 1 m s-1, which becomes one. For this, one unit of force is
is sufficient to start its engine. If one or two defined as the amount that produces an
persons give a sudden push (unbalanced force) acceleration of 1 m s-2 in an object of 1 kg
to it, it hardly starts. But a continuous push mass. That is,
over some time results in a gradual acceleration 1 unit of force = k × (1 kg) × (1 m s-2).
of the car to this speed. It means that the change
of momentum of the car is not only determined Thus, the value of k becomes 1. From Eq. (8.3)
by the magnitude of the force but also by the
F = ma (8.4)
time during which the force is exerted. It may
then also be concluded that the force necessary The unit of force is kg m s-2 or newton,
to change the momentum of an object depends which has the symbol N. The second law of
92 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 103 ---
motion gives us a method to measure the force The first law of motion can be
acting on an object as a product of its mass mathematically stated from the mathematical
and acceleration. expression for the second law of motion. Eq.
The second law of motion is often seen in (8.4) is
action in our everyday life. Have you noticed
F = ma
that while catching a fast moving cricket ball,
a fielder in the ground gradually pulls his m(v- u)
=
hands backwards with the moving ball? In or F t (8.5)
doing so, the fielder increases the time during
or Ft = mv – mu
which the high velocity of the moving ball
decreases to zero. Thus, the acceleration of That is, when F = 0, v = u for whatever time, t
the ball is decreased and therefore the impact is taken. This means that the object will
of catching the fast moving ball (Fig. 8.8) is
continue moving with uniform velocity, u
also reduced. If the ball is stopped suddenly
throughout the time, t. If u is zero then v will
then its high velocity decreases to zero in a
also be zero. That is, the object will remain
very short interval of time. Thus, the rate of
at rest.
change of momentum of the ball will be large.
Therefore, a large force would have to be
applied for holding the catch that may hurt Example 8.1 A constant force acts on an
the palm of the fielder. In a high jump athletic object of mass 5 kg for a duration of
event, the athletes are made to fall either on 2 s. It increases the object’s velocity
a cushioned bed or on a sand bed. This is to from 3 m s–1 to 7 m s-1. Find the
increase the time of the athlete’s fall to stop magnitude of the applied force. Now, if
after making the jump. This decreases the rate the force was applied for a duration of
of change of momentum and hence the force.
5 s, what would be the final velocity of
Try to ponder how a karate player breaks a
the object?
slab of ice with a single blow.
Solution:
We have been given that u = 3 m s–1
and v = 7 m s-1, t = 2 s and m = 5 kg.
From Eq. (8.5) we have,
m(v- u)
=
F
t
Substitution of values in this relation
gives
F = 5 kg (7 m s-1 – 3 m s-1)/2 s = 10 N.
Now, if this force is applied for a
duration of 5 s (t = 5 s), then the final
velocity can be calculated by rewriting
Eq. (8.5) as
Ft
v =u +
m
On substituting the values of u, F, m and
t, we get the final velocity,
Fig. 8.8: A fielder pulls his hands gradually with the v = 13 m s-1.
moving ball while holding a catch.
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 93
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 104 ---
Solution:
Example 8.2 Which would require a
greater force –– accelerating a 2 kg mass From Eq. (8.4) we have m = F/a ; and
1 1
at 5 m s–2 or a 4 kg mass at 2 m s-2 ? m = F/a . Here, a = 10 m s-2;
2 2 1
a = 20 m s-2 and F = 5 N.
Solution: 2
Thus, m = 5 N/10 m s-2 = 0.50 kg; and
1
From Eq. (8.4), we have F = ma. m = 5 N/20 m s-2 = 0.25 kg.
2
Here we have m = 2 kg; a = 5 m s-2 If the two masses were tied together,
1 1
and m = 4 kg; a = 2 m s-2. the total mass, m would be
2 2
Thus, F = m a = 2 kg × 5 m s-2 = 10 N; m = 0.50 kg + 0.25 kg = 0.75 kg.
1 1 1
and F = m a = 4 kg × 2 m s-2 = 8 N. The acceleration, a produced in the
2 2 2
⇒ F > F . combined mass by the 5 N force would
1 2
Thus, accelerating a 2 kg mass at be, a = F/m = 5 N/0.75 kg = 6.67 m s-2.
5 m s-2 would require a greater force.
Example 8.5 The velocity-time graph of a
Example 8.3 A motorcar is moving with a ball of mass 20 g moving along a
velocity of 108 km/h and it takes 4 s to straight line on a long table is given in
stop after the brakes are applied. Fig. 8.9.
Calculate the force exerted by the
brakes on the motorcar if its mass along
with the passengers is 1000 kg.
Solution:
The initial velocity of the motorcar
u = 108 km/h
= 108 × 1000 m/(60 × 60 s)
= 30 m s-1
and the final velocity of the motorcar
v = 0 m s-1.
The total mass of the motorcar along Fig. 8.9
with its passengers = 1000 kg and the
time taken to stop the motorcar, t = 4 s. How much force does the table exert on
From Eq. (8.5) we have the magnitude the ball to bring it to rest?
of the force (F) applied by the brakes as
Solution:
m(v – u)/t.
On substituting the values, we get
The initial velocity of the ball is 20 cm s-1.
F = 1000 kg × (0 – 30) m s-1/4 s
Due to the frictional force exerted by the
= – 7500 kg m s-2 or – 7500 N. table, the velocity of the ball decreases
The negative sign tells us that the force down to zero in 10 s. Thus, u = 20 cm s–1;
exerted by the brakes is opposite to the v = 0 cm s-1 and t = 10 s. Since the
direction of motion of the motorcar. velocity-time graph is a straight line, it is
clear that the ball moves with a constant
acceleration. The acceleration a is
Example 8.4 A force of 5 N gives a mass
v - u
m , an acceleration of 10 m s–2 and a a =
1 t
mass m , an acceleration of 20 m s-2.
2
What acceleration would it give if both = (0 cm s-1 – 20 cm s-1)/10 s
the masses were tied together? = –2 cm s-2 = –0.02 m s-2.
94 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 105 ---
The force exerted on the ball F is,
F = ma= (20/1000) kg × (– 0.02 m s-2)
= – 0.0004 N.
The negative sign implies that the
frictional force exerted by the table is
Fig. 8.10: Action and reaction forces are equal and
opposite to the direction of motion of
opposite.
the ball.
Suppose you are standing at rest and
intend to start walking on a road. You must
8.5 Third Law of Motion
accelerate, and this requires a force in
accordance with the second law of motion.
The first two laws of motion tell us how an
Which is this force? Is it the muscular effort
applied force changes the motion and provide
you exert on the road? Is it in the direction
us with a method of determining the force.
we intend to move? No, you push the road
The third law of motion states that when one
below backwards. The road exerts an equal
object exerts a force on another object, the
and opposite force on your feet to make you
second object instantaneously exerts a force
move forward.
back on the first. These two forces are always
It is important to note that even though
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction.
the action and reaction forces are always
These forces act on different objects and never
equal in magnitude, these forces may not
on the same object. In the game of football
produce accelerations of equal magnitudes.
sometimes we, while looking at the football
This is because each force acts on a different
and trying to kick it with a greater force,
object that may have a different mass.
collide with a player of the opposite team.
When a gun is fired, it exerts a forward
Both feel hurt because each applies a force
force on the bullet. The bullet exerts an equal
to the other. In other words, there is a pair of
and opposite force on the gun. This results in
forces and not just one force. The two
the recoil of the gun (Fig. 8.11). Since the gun
opposing forces are also known as action and
has a much greater mass than the bullet, the
reaction forces.
acceleration of the gun is much less than the
Let us consider two spring balances
acceleration of the bullet. The third law of
connected together as shown in Fig. 8.10. The
motion can also be illustrated when a sailor
fixed end of balance B is attached with a rigid
jumps out of a rowing boat. As the sailor
support, like a wall. When a force is applied
jumps forward, the force on the boat moves it
through the free end of spring balance A, it is
backwards (Fig. 8.12).
observed that both the spring balances show
the same readings on their scales. It means
that the force exerted by spring balance A on
balance B is equal but opposite in direction
to the force exerted by the balance B on
balance A. Any of these two forces can be called
as action and the other as reaction. This gives
us an alternative statement of the third law of
motion i.e., to every action there is an equal
and opposite reaction. However, it must be
remembered that the action and reaction
Fig. 8.11: A forward force on the bullet and recoil
always act on two different objects,
of the gun.
simultaneously.
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 95
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 106 ---
Fig. 8.12: As the sailor jumps in forward direction,
the boat moves backwards.
Activity ______________8.4 Fig. 8.13
• Request two children to stand on two Now, place two children on one cart and
separate carts as shown in Fig. 8.13. one on another cart. The second law of motion
• Give them a bag full of sand or some can be seen, as this arrangement would show
other heavy object. Ask them to play a different accelerations for the same force.
game of catch with the bag.
The cart shown in this activity can be
• Does each of them experience an
constructed by using a 12 mm or 18 mm thick
instantaneous force as a result of
plywood board of about 50 cm × 100 cm with
throwing the sand bag?
• You can paint a white line on two pairs of hard ball-bearing wheels (skate
wheels are good to use). Skateboards are not
cartwheels to observe the motion of the
two carts when the children throw the as effective because it is difficult to maintain
bag towards each other. straight-line motion.
What
you have
learnt
• First law of motion: An object continues to be in a state of
rest or of uniform motion along a straight line unless acted
upon by an unbalanced force.
• The natural tendency of objects to resist a change in their
state of rest or of uniform motion is called inertia.
• The mass of an object is a measure of its inertia. Its SI unit
is kilogram (kg).
• Force of friction always opposes motion of objects.
• Second law of motion: The rate of change of momentum of
an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in
the direction of the force.
96 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 107 ---
• The SI unit of force is kg m s–2. This is also known as newton
and represented by the symbol N. A force of one newton
produces an acceleration of 1 m s–2 on an object of
mass 1 kg.
• The momentum of an object is the product of its mass and
velocity and has the same direction as that of the velocity.
Its SI unit is kg m s–1.
• Third law of motion: To every action, there is an equal and
opposite reaction and they act on two different bodies.
Exercises
1. An object experiences a net zero external unbalanced force.
Is it possible for the object to be travelling with a non-zero
velocity? If yes, state the conditions that must be placed on
2. When a carpet is beaten with a stick, dust comes out of it,
Explain.
3. Why is it advised to tie any luggage kept on the roof of a bus
with a rope?
4. A batsman hits a cricket ball which then rolls on a level
ground. After covering a short distance, the ball comes to
rest. The ball slows to a stop because
(a) the batsman did not hit the ball hard enough.
(b) velocity is proportional to the force exerted on the ball.
(c) there is a force on the ball opposing the motion.
(d) there is no unbalanced force on the ball, so the ball
would want to come to rest.
5. A truck starts from rest and rolls down a hill with a constant
acceleration. It travels a distance of 400 m in 20 s. Find its
acceleration. Find the force acting on it if its mass is
7 tonnes (Hint: 1 tonne = 1000 kg.)
6. A stone of 1 kg is thrown with a velocity of 20 m s–1 across
the frozen surface of a lake and comes to rest after travelling
a distance of 50 m. What is the force of friction between the
stone and the ice?
7. A 8000 kg engine pulls a train of 5 wagons, each of 2000 kg,
along a horizontal track. If the engine exerts a force of 40000
N and the track offers a friction force of 5000 N, then
calculate:
(a) the net accelerating force and
(b) the acceleration of the train.
8. An automobile vehicle has a mass of 1500 kg. What must be
the force between the vehicle and road if the vehicle is to be
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 97
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 108 ---
stopped with a negative acceleration of 1.7 m s–2?
9. What is the momentum of an object of mass m, moving with
a velocity v?
(a) (mv)2 (b) mv2 (c) ½ mv2 (d) mv
10. Using a horizontal force of 200 N, we intend to move a wooden
cabinet across a floor at a constant velocity. What is the
friction force that will be exerted on the cabinet?
11. According to the third law of motion when we push on an
object, the object pushes back on us with an equal and
opposite force. If the object is a massive truck parked along
the roadside, it will probably not move. A student justifies
this by answering that the two opposite and equal forces
cancel each other. Comment on this logic and explain why
the truck does not move.
12. A hockey ball of mass 200 g travelling at 10 m s–1 is struck
by a hockey stick so as to return it along its original path
with a velocity at 5 m s–1. Calculate the magnitude of change
of momentum occurred in the motion of the hockey ball by
the force applied by the hockey stick.
13. A bullet of mass 10 g travelling horizontally with a velocity
of 150 m s–1 strikes a stationary wooden block and comes to
rest in 0.03 s. Calculate the distance of penetration of the
bullet into the block. Also calculate the magnitude of the
force exerted by the wooden block on the bullet.
14. An object of mass 1 kg travelling in a straight line with a
velocity of 10 m s–1 collides with, and sticks to, a stationary
wooden block of mass 5 kg. Then they both move off together
in the same straight line. Calculate the total momentum
just before the impact and just after the impact. Also,
calculate the velocity of the combined object.
15. An object of mass 100 kg is accelerated uniformly from a
velocity of 5 m s–1 to 8 m s–1 in 6 s. Calculate the initial and
final momentum of the object. Also, find the magnitude of
the force exerted on the object.
16. Akhtar, Kiran and Rahul were riding in a motorcar that
was moving with a high velocity on an expressway when an
insect hit the windshield and got stuck on the windscreen.
Akhtar and Kiran started pondering over the situation. Kiran
suggested that the insect suffered a greater change in
momentum as compared to the change in momentum of the
motorcar (because the change in the velocity of the insect
was much more than that of the motorcar). Akhtar said
that since the motorcar was moving with a larger velocity,
it exerted a larger force on the insect. And as a result the
insect died. Rahul while putting an entirely new explanation
98 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 109 ---
said that both the motorcar and the insect experienced the
same force and a change in their momentum. Comment on
these suggestions.
17. How much momentum will a dumb-bell of mass 10 kg
transfer to the floor if it falls from a height of 80 cm? Take
its downward acceleration to be 10 m s–2.
Additional
Exercises
A1. The following is the distance-time table of an object in
motion:
Time in seconds Distance in metres
0 0
1 1
2 8
3 27
4 64
5 125
6 216
7 343
(a) What conclusion can you draw about the acceleration?
Is it constant, increasing, decreasing, or zero?
(b) What do you infer about the forces acting on the object?
A2. Two persons manage to push a motorcar of mass 1200 kg at
a uniform velocity along a level road. The same motorcar
can be pushed by three persons to produce an acceleration
of 0.2 m s-2. With what force does each person push the
motorcar? (Assume that all persons push the motorcar with
the same muscular effort.)
A3. A hammer of mass 500 g, moving at 50 m s-1, strikes a nail.
The nail stops the hammer in a very short time of 0.01 s.
What is the force of the nail on the hammer?
A4. A motorcar of mass 1200 kg is moving along a straight line
with a uniform velocity of 90 km/h. Its velocity is slowed
down to 18 km/h in 4 s by an unbalanced external force.
Calculate the acceleration and change in momentum. Also
calculate the magnitude of the force required.
FORCE AND LAWS OF MOTION 99
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 110 ---
9
C
hapter
GGGGG
RRRRRAAAAAVVVVVIIIIITTTTTAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN
Let us try to understand the motion of the
We have learnt about the motion of objects and moon by recalling activity 7.11.
force as the cause of motion. We have learnt
Activity ______________9.1
that a force is needed to change the speed or
the direction of motion of an object. We always
• Take a piece of thread.
observe that an object dropped from a height
• Tie a small stone at one end. Hold the
falls towards the earth. We know that all the
other end of the thread and whirl it
planets go around the Sun. The moon goes
round, as shown in Fig. 9.1.
around the earth. In all these cases, there must • Note the motion of the stone.
be some force acting on the objects, the planets • Release the thread.
and on the moon. Isaac Newton could grasp • Again, note the direction of motion of
that the same force is responsible for all these. the stone.
This force is called the gravitational force.
In this chapter we shall learn about
gravitation and the universal law of
gravitation. We shall discuss the motion of
objects under the influence of gravitational
force on the earth. We shall study how the
weight of a body varies from place to place.
We shall also discuss the conditions for
objects to float in liquids.
9.1 Gravitation
We know that the moon goes around the earth.
An object when thrown upwards, reaches a
certain height and then falls downwards. It is
said that when Newton was sitting under a tree, Fig. 9.1: A stone describing a circular path with a
an apple fell on him. The fall of the apple made velocity of constant magnitude.
Newton start thinking. He thought that: if the
earth can attract an apple, can it not attract Before the thread is released, the stone
the moon? Is the force the same in both cases? moves in a circular path with a certain speed
He conjectured that the same type of force is and changes direction at every point.
responsible in both the cases. He argued that The change in direction involves change in
at each point of its orbit, the moon falls velocity or acceleration. The force that causes
towards the earth, instead of going off in a this acceleration and keeps the body moving
straight line. So, it must be attracted by the along the circular path is acting towards
earth. But we do not really see the moon falling the centre. This force is called the
towards the earth. centripetal (meaning ‘centre-seeking’) force.
100 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 111 ---
In the absence of this force, the stone flies off 9.1.1 U
NIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION
along a straight line. This straight line will be
a tangent to the circular path. Every object in the universe attracts every
other object with a force which is proportional
to the product of their masses and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance
between them. The force is along the line
joining the centres of two objects.
GRAVITATION 101
wonk
ot
eroM
Tangent to a circle
A straight line that meets the circle at
Mm
one and only one point is called a F = G
tangent to the circle. Straight line d2
ABC is a tangent to the circle at
point B.
Fig. 9.2: The gravitational force between two
uniform objects is directed along the line
The motion of the moon around the earth joining their centres.
is due to the centripetal force. The centripetal
force is provided by the force of attraction of Let two objects A and B of masses M and
the earth. If there were no such force, the m lie at a distance d from each other as shown
moon would pursue a uniform straight line in Fig. 9.2. Let the force of attraction between
motion. two objects be F. According to the universal
It is seen that a falling apple is attracted law of gravitation, the force between two
towards the earth. Does the apple attract the objects is directly proportional to the product
earth? If so, we do not see the earth moving of their masses. That is,
towards an apple. Why? F (cid:181) M × m (9.1)
According to the third law of motion, the
And the force between two objects is inversely
apple does attract the earth. But according
proportional to the square of the distance
to the second law of motion, for a given force,
between them, that is,
acceleration is inversely proportional to the
mass of an object [Eq. (8.4)]. The mass of an
1
apple is negligibly small compared to that of
F(cid:181)
(9.2)
d2
the earth. So, we do not see the earth moving
towards the apple. Extend the same argument Combining Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2), we get
for why the earth does not move towards the
moon. M· m
(cid:181)
F (9.3)
In our solar system, all the planets go d2
around the Sun. By arguing the same way,
we can say that there exists a force between M×m
the Sun and the planets. From the above facts or, F = G (9.4)
d2
Newton concluded that not only does the
earth attract an apple and the moon, but all where G is the constant of proportionality and
objects in the universe attract each other. This is called the universal gravitation constant.
force of attraction between objects is called By multiplying crosswise, Eq. (9.4) gives
the gravitational force. F × d 2 = G M × m
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 112 ---
2 From Eq. (9.4), the force exerted by the
F d
or G= (9.5) earth on the moon is
M · m
M × m
F =G
The SI unit of G can be obtained by
d2
substituting the units of force, distance and
mass in Eq. (9.5) as N m2 kg–2. 6.7· 10- 11Nm2kg-2· ·6 1024·kg · 7.4 1022kg
=
The value of G was found out by (3.84· 108m)2
Henry Cavendish (1731 – 1810) by using a
= 2.02 × 1020 N.
sensitive balance. The accepted value of G is
6.673 × 10–11 N m2 kg–2. Thus, the force exerted by the earth on
We know that there exists a force of the moon is 2.02 × 1020 N.
attraction between any two objects. Compute
the value of this force between you and your uestions
friend sitting closeby. Conclude how you do
not experience this force! 1. State the universal law of
gravitation.
2. Write the formula to find the
The law is universal in the sense that
magnitude of the gravitational
it is applicable to all bodies, whether
force between the earth and an
the bodies are big or small, whether
object on the surface of the earth.
they are celestial or terrestrial.
9.1.2 I
MPORTANCE OF THE UNIVERSAL
Inverse-square
LAWOFGRAVITATION
Saying that F is inversely
proportional to the square of d The universal law of gravitation successfully
means, for example, that if d gets explained several phenomena which were
bigger by a factor of 6, F becomes believed to be unconnected:
1 (i) the force that binds us to the earth;
times smaller. (ii) the motion of the moon around the
36
earth;
(iii) the motion of planets around the Sun;
and
Example 9.1 The mass of the earth is (iv) the tides due to the moon and the Sun.
6 × 1024 kg and that of the moon is
7.4 × 1022 kg. If the distance between the 9.2 Free Fall
earth and the moon is 3.84×105 km,
calculate the force exerted by the earth on Let us try to understand the meaning of free
the moon. (Take G = 6.7 × 10–11 N m2 kg-2) fall by performing this activity.
Activity ______________9.2
Solution:
The mass of the earth, M = 6 × 1024 kg • Take a stone.
The mass of the moon, • Throw it upwards.
• It reaches a certain height and then it
m = 7.4 × 1022 kg
starts falling down.
The distance between the earth and the
moon, We have learnt that the earth attracts
d = 3.84 × 105 km objects towards it. This is due to the
= 3.84 × 105 × 1000 m gravitational force. Whenever objects fall
= 3.84 × 108 m towards the earth under this force alone, we
G = 6.7 × 10–11 N m2 kg–2 say that the objects are in free fall. Is there any
102 SCIENCE
wonk
ot
eroM
Q
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 113 ---
change in the velocity of falling objects? While calculations, we can take g to be more or less
falling, there is no change in the direction of constant on or near the earth. But for objects
motion of the objects. But due to the earth’s far from the earth, the acceleration due to
attraction, there will be a change in the gravitational force of earth is given by
magnitude of the velocity. Any change in Eq. (9.7).
velocity involves acceleration. Whenever an
object falls towards the earth, an acceleration 9.2.1 T g
O CALCULATE THE VALUE OF
is involved. This acceleration is due to the
earth’s gravitational force. Therefore, this To calculate the value of g, we should put the
acceleration is called the acceleration due to values of G, M and R in Eq. (9.9), namely,
the gravitational force of the earth (or universal gravitational constant, G = 6.7 × 10–
acceleration due to gravity). It is denoted by 11 N m2 kg-2, mass of the earth, M = 6 × 1024 kg,
g. The unit of g is the same as that of and radius of the earth, R = 6.4 × 106 m.
acceleration, that is, m s–2.
M
We know from the second law of motion g = G
that force is the product of mass and
R2
acceleration. Let the mass of the stone in
6.7· 10-11Nm2 kg-2· ·6 1024 kg
activity 9.2 be m. We already know that there =
(6.4· 106 m)2
is acceleration involved in falling objects due
to the gravitational force and is denoted by g. = 9.8 m s–2.
Therefore the magnitude of the gravitational
Thus, the value of acceleration due to gravity
force F will be equal to the product of mass
of the earth, g = 9.8 m s–2.
and acceleration due to the gravitational
force, that is,
9.2.2 M
F = m g (9.6) OTION OF OBJECTS UNDER THE
From Eqs. (9.4) and (9.6) we have INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATIONAL
M · m FORCEOFTHE EARTH
mg = G
d 2 Let us do an activity to understand whether
all objects hollow or solid, big or small, will
M
or g = G (9.7) fall from a height at the same rate.
d2
Activity ______________9.3
where M is the mass of the earth, and d is the
distance between the object and the earth.
• Take a sheet of paper and a stone.
Let an object be on or near the surface of
Drop them simultaneously from the
the earth. The distance d in Eq. (9.7) will be
first floor of a building. Observe
equal to R, the radius of the earth. Thus, for
whether both of them reach the
objects on or near the surface of the earth, ground simultaneously.
• We see that paper reaches the ground
M × m
mg =G (9.8) little later than the stone. This happens
R2
because of air resistance. The air offers
resistance due to friction to the motion
M
of the falling objects. The resistance
g = G (9.9)
R2 offered by air to the paper is more than
the resistance offered to the stone. If
The earth is not a perfect sphere. As the we do the experiment in a glass jar
radius of the earth increases from the poles to from which air has been sucked out,
the equator, the value of g becomes greater at the paper and the stone would fall at
the poles than at the equator. For most the same rate.
GRAVITATION 103
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 114 ---
We know that an object experiences u+v
=
(ii) average speed
acceleration during free fall. From Eq. (9.9), 2
this acceleration experienced by an object is
= (0 m s–1+ 5 m s–1)/2
independent of its mass. This means that all
= 2.5 m s–1
objects hollow or solid, big or small, should
(iii) distance travelled, s = ½ a t2
fall at the same rate. According to a story, = ½ × 10 m s–2 × (0.5 s)2
Galileo dropped different objects from the top = ½ × 10 m s–2 × 0.25 s2
of the Leaning Tower of Pisa in Italy to prove
= 1.25 m
the same.
Thus,
As g is constant near the earth, all the
(i) its speed on striking the ground
equations for the uniformly accelerated
= 5 m s–1
motion of objects become valid with
(ii) its average speed during the 0.5 s
acceleration a replaced by g.
= 2.5 m s–1
The equations are:
(iii) height of the ledge from the ground
v = u + at (9.10)
= 1.25 m.
1
s = ut + at2 (9.11)
2
Example 9.3 An object is thrown vertically
v2 = u2 + 2as (9.12)
upwards and rises to a height of 10 m.
where u and v are the initial and final velocities Calculate (i) the velocity with which the
and s is the distance covered in time, t. object was thrown upwards and (ii) the
In applying these equations, we will take time taken by the object to reach the
acceleration, a to be positive when it is in the highest point.
direction of the velocity, that is, in the
direction of motion. The acceleration, a will Solution:
be taken as negative when it opposes the
Distance travelled, s = 10 m
motion.
Final velocity, v = 0 m s–1
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 m s–2
Example 9.2 A car falls off a ledge and
Acceleration of the object, a = –9.8 m s–2
drops to the ground in 0.5 s. Let
(upward motion)
g = 10 m s–2 (for simplifying the
(i) v 2 = u2 + 2a s
calculations). 0 = u 2 + 2 × (–9.8 m s–2) × 10 m
(i) What is its speed on striking the –u 2 = –2 × 9.8 × 10 m2 s–2
ground?
u = 196 m s-1
(ii) What is its average speed during the
0.5 s? u = 14 m s-1
(ii) v = u + a t
(iii) How high is the ledge from the
0 = 14 m s–1 – 9.8 m s–2 × t
ground?
t = 1.43 s.
Thus,
Solution:
(i) Initial velocity, u = 14 m s–1, and
Time, t = ½ second (ii) Time taken, t = 1.43 s.
Initial velocity, u = 0 m s–1
Q
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 10 m s–2
uestions
Acceleration of the car, a = + 10 m s–2
(downward)
1. What do you mean by free fall?
(i) speed v = a t
2. What do you mean by acceleration
v = 10 m s–2 × 0.5 s
due to gravity?
= 5 m s–1
104 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 115 ---
9.3 Mass attracts the object. In the same way, the weight
of an object on the moon is the force with
We have learnt in the previous chapter that the which the moon attracts that object. The mass
mass of an object is the measure of its inertia . of the moon is less than that of the earth. Due
We have also learnt that greater the mass, the to this the moon exerts lesser force of attraction
greater is the inertia. It remains the same on objects.
whether the object is on the earth, the moon Let the mass of an object be m. Let its
or even in outer space. Thus, the mass of an weight on the moon be W . Let the mass of
m
the moon be M and its radius be R .
object is constant and does not change from
m m
By applying the universal law of
place to place.
gravitation, the weight of the object on the
moon will be
9.4 Weight
M · m
W =G m
m R2 (9.16)
We know that the earth attracts every object m
with a certain force and this force depends on Let the weight of the same object on the
the mass (m) of the object and the acceleration earth be W. The mass of the earth is M and its
e
due to the gravity (g). The weight of an object radius is R.
is the force with which it is attracted towards
the earth. Table 9.1
We know that
F = m × a, (9.13) Celestial Mass (kg) Radius (m)
body
that is,
F = m × g. (9.14)
× ×
Earth 5.98 1024 6.37 ×106
The force of attraction of the earth on an
object is known as the weight of the object. It Moon 7.36 × ×1022 1.74 × ×106
is denoted by W. Substituting the same in Eq.
(9.14), we have
W = m × g (9.15) From Eqs. (9.9) and (9.15) we have,
As the weight of an object is the force with M · m
W =G
which it is attracted towards the earth, the SI e R2 (9.17)
unit of weight is the same as that of force, that
Substituting the values from Table 10.1 in
is, newton (N). The weight is a force acting
Eqs. (9.16) and (9.17), we get
vertically downwards; it has both magnitude
and direction. 7.36· 1022kg· m
W =G
We have learnt that the value of g is m (
1.74· 106m
)2
constant at a given place. Therefore at a given
place, the weight of an object is directly W =2.431· 1010G × m (9.18a)
m
proportional to the mass, say m, of the object,
that is, W (cid:181) m. It is due to this reason that at and W e =1.474· 1011G × m (9.18b)
a given place, we can use the weight of an Dividing Eq. (9.18a) by Eq. (9.18b), we get
object as a measure of its mass. The mass of
W 2.431· 1010
an object remains the same everywhere, that m =
W 1.474· 1011
is, on the earth and on any planet whereas its e
weight depends on its location because g W 1
m = 0.165 ≈
depends on location. or W 6 (9.19)
e
9.4.1 W Weightoftheobjectonthemoon 1
EIGHT OF AN OBJECT ON
=
Weightof theobjectontheearth 6
THE MOON
We have learnt that the weight of an object on Weight of the object on the moon
the earth is the force with which the earth = (1/6) × its weight on the earth.
GRAVITATION 105
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 116 ---
of the net force in a particular direction (thrust)
Example 9.4 Mass of an object is 10 kg.
and the force per unit area (pressure) acting
What is its weight on the earth?
on the object concerned.
Solution: Let us try to understand the meanings of
thrust and pressure by considering the
Mass, m = 10 kg
following situations:
Acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 m s–2
W = m × g Situation 1: You wish to fix a poster on a
W = 10 kg × 9.8 m s-2 = 98 N bulletin board, as shown in Fig 9.3. To do this
task you will have to press drawing pins with
Thus, the weight of the object is 98 N.
your thumb. You apply a force on the surface
area of the head of the pin. This force is directed
Example 9.5 An object weighs 10 N when perpendicular to the surface area of the board.
measured on the surface of the earth. This force acts on a smaller area at the tip of
What would be its weight when the pin.
measured on the surface of the moon?
Solution:
We know,
Weight of object on the moon
= (1/6) × its weight on the earth.
That is,
W 10
W = e = N.
m 6 6
= 1.67 N.
Thus, the weight of object on the
surface of the moon would be 1.67 N.
Q
uestions
1. What are the differences between
the mass of an object and its
weight?
2. Why is the weight of an object on
1
the moon th its weight on the
6
earth?
9.5 Thrust and Pressure
Fig. 9.3: To fix a poster, drawing pins are pressed
with the thumb perpendicular to the board.
Have you ever wondered why a camel can run
in a desert easily? Why an army tank weighing
more than a thousand tonne rests upon a Situation 2: You stand on loose sand. Your
continuous chain? Why a truck or a motorbus feet go deep into the sand. Now, lie down on
has much wider tyres? Why cutting tools have the sand. You will find that your body will not
sharp edges? In order to address these go that deep in the sand. In both cases the
questions and understand the phenomena force exerted on the sand is the weight of your
involved, it helps to introduce the concepts body.
106 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 117 ---
You have learnt that weight is the force by the wooden block on the table top if
acting vertically downwards. Here the force is it is made to lie on the table top with its
acting perpendicular to the surface of the sand. sides of dimensions (a) 20 cm × 10 cm
The force acting on an object perpendicular to and (b) 40 cm × 20 cm.
the surface is called thrust.
When you stand on loose sand, the force, Solution:
that is, the weight of your body is acting on
The mass of the wooden block = 5 kg
an area equal to area of your feet. When you
The dimensions
lie down, the same force acts on an area equal
= 40 cm × 20 cm × 10 cm
to the contact area of your whole body, which
Here, the weight of the wooden block
is larger than the area of your feet. Thus, the
applies a thrust on the table top.
effects of forces of the same magnitude on
That is,
different areas are different. In the above
Thrust = F = m × g
cases, thrust is the same. But effects are
= 5 kg × 9.8 m s–2
different. Therefore the effect of thrust
= 49 N
depends on the area on which it acts.
Area of a side = length × breadth
The effect of thrust on sand is larger while
= 20 cm × 10 cm
standing than while lying. The thrust on unit
= 200 cm2 = 0.02 m2
area is called pressure. Thus,
From Eq. (9.20),
thrust
Pressure= (9.20) 49N
area
Pressure = 0.02m2
Substituting the SI unit of thrust and area in
Eq. (9.20), we get the SI unit of pressure as N/ = 2450 N m-2.
m2 or N m–2. When the block lies on its side of
In honour of scientist Blaise Pascal, the dimensions 40 cm × 20 cm, it exerts
SI unit of pressure is called pascal, denoted the same thrust.
as Pa. Area= length × breadth
Let us consider a numerical example to = 40 cm × 20 cm
understand the effects of thrust acting on = 800 cm2 = 0.08 m2
different areas. From Eq. (9.20),
49N
Example 9.6 A block of wood is kept on a Pressure = 0.08m2
tabletop. The mass of wooden block is 5
kg and its dimensions are 40 cm × 20 = 612.5 N m–2
cm × 10 cm. Find the pressure exerted The pressure exerted by the side 20 cm
× 10 cm is 2450 N m–2 and by the side
40 cm × 20 cm is 612.5 N m–2.
Thus, the same force acting on a smaller
area exerts a larger pressure, and a smaller
pressure on a larger area. This is the reason
why a nail has a pointed tip, knives have sharp
edges and buildings have wide foundations.
9.5.1 P
RESSURE IN FLUIDS
All liquids and gases are fluids. A solid exerts
pressure on a surface due to its weight.
Fig. 9.4 Similarly, fluids have weight, and they also
GRAVITATION 107
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 118 ---
exert pressure on the base and walls of the water on the bottle is greater than its weight.
container in which they are enclosed. Pressure Therefore it rises up when released.
exerted in any confined mass of fluid is To keep the bottle completely immersed,
transmitted undiminished in all directions. the upward force on the bottle due to water
must be balanced. This can be achieved by
9.5.2 B an externally applied force acting downwards.
UOYANCY
This force must at least be equal to the
Have you ever had a swim in a pool and felt difference between the upward force and the
lighter? Have you ever drawn water from a weight of the bottle.
well and felt that the bucket of water is heavier The upward force exerted by the water on
when it is out of the water? Have you ever the bottle is known as upthrust or buoyant
wondered why a ship made of iron and steel force. In fact, all objects experience a force of
does not sink in sea water, but while the same buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid.
amount of iron and steel in the form of a sheet The magnitude of this buoyant force depends
would sink? These questions can be answered on the density of the fluid.
by taking buoyancy in consideration. Let us
understand the meaning of buoyancy by 9.5.3 W
HY OBJECTS FLOAT OR SINK
doing an activity.
WHENPLACEDONTHESURFACEOF
Activity ______________9.4
?
WATER
• Take an empty plastic bottle. Close Let us do the following activities to arrive at
the mouth of the bottle with an an answer for the above question.
airtight stopper. Put it in a bucket
Activity ______________9.5
filled with water. You see that the
bottle floats.
• Push the bottle into the water. You feel • Take a beaker filled with water.
an upward push. Try to push it further • Take an iron nail and place it on the
down. You will find it difficult to push surface of the water.
deeper and deeper. This indicates that • Observe what happens.
water exerts a force on the bottle in the
upward direction. The upward force The nail sinks. The force due to the
exerted by the water goes on increasing gravitational attraction of the earth on the
as the bottle is pushed deeper till it is iron nail pulls it downwards. There is an
completely immersed. upthrust of water on the nail, which pushes
• Now, release the bottle. It bounces
it upwards. But the downward force acting
back to the surface.
on the nail is greater than the upthrust of
• Does the force due to the gravitational
water on the nail. So it sinks (Fig. 9.5).
attraction of the earth act on this
bottle? If so, why doesn’t the bottle stay
immersed in water after it is released?
How can you immerse the bottle in
water?
The force due to the gravitational
attraction of the earth acts on the bottle in
the downward direction. So the bottle is
pulled downwards. But the water exerts an
upward force on the bottle. Thus, the bottle is
pushed upwards. We have learnt that weight
of an object is the force due to gravitational
attraction of the earth. When the bottle is
Fig. 9.5: An iron nail sinks and a cork floats when
immersed, the upward force exerted by the
placed on the surface of water.
108 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 119 ---
Activity ______________9.6
• Take a beaker filled with water.
• Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of
equal mass.
• Place them on the surface of water.
• Observe what happens.
The cork floats while the nail sinks. This
happens because of the difference in their
densities. The density of a substance is
defined as the mass per unit volume. The
(a)
density of cork is less than the density of
water. This means that the upthrust of water
on the cork is greater than the weight of the
cork. So it floats (Fig. 9.5).
(b)
The density of an iron nail is more than
the density of water. This means that the Fig. 9.6: (a) Observe the elongation of the rubber
string due to the weight of a piece of stone
upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than
suspended from it in air. (b) The elongation
the weight of the nail. So it sinks.
decreases as the stone is immersed
Therefore objects of density less than that
in water.
of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of
density greater than that of a liquid sink in • Observe what happens to elongation
tQhe liquid. of the string or the reading on the
balance.
uestions
You will find that the elongation of the string
or the reading of the balance decreases as the
1. Why is it difficult to hold a school
stone is gradually lowered in the water. However,
bag having a strap made of a thin
no further change is observed once the stone
and strong string?
2. What do you mean by buoyancy? gets fully immersed in the water. What do you
3. Why does an object float or sink infer from the decrease in the extension of the
when placed on the surface of string or the reading of the spring balance?
water? We know that the elongation produced in
the string or the spring balance is due to the
9.6 Archimedes’ Principle weight of the stone. Since the extension
decreases once the stone is lowered in water,
it means that some force acts on the stone in
Activity ______________9.7
upward direction. As a result, the net force on
• Take a piece of stone and tie it to one the string decreases and hence the elongation
end of a rubber string or a spring also decreases. As discussed earlier, this
balance. upward force exerted by water is known as
• Suspend the stone by holding the the force of buoyancy.
balance or the string as shown in
What is the magnitude of the buoyant
Fig. 9.6 (a).
• Note the elongation of the string or force experienced by a body? Is it the same
in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies
the reading on the spring balance due
to the weight of the stone. in a given fluid experience the same buoyant
• Now, slowly dip the stone in the water force? The answer to these questions is
in a container as shown in contained in Archimedes’ principle, stated as
Fig. 9.6 (b).
follows:
GRAVITATION 109
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 120 ---
When a body is immersed fully or partially Archimedes’ principle has many
in a fluid, it experiences an upward force that applications. It is used in designing ships and
is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced submarines. Lactometers, which are used to
by it. determine the purity of a sample of milk and
Now, can you explain why a further hydrometers used for determining density of
decrease in the elongation of the string was Qliquids, are based on this principle.
not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was
uestions
fully immersed in water?
1. You find your mass to be 42 kg
Archimedes was a Greek scientist. He
on a weighing machine. Is your
discovered the principle, subsequently named
mass more or less than 42 kg?
after him, after noticing that
2. You have a bag of cotton and an
the water in a bathtub
iron bar, each indicating a mass
overflowed when he stepped
of 100 kg when measured on a
into it. He ran through the
streets shouting “Eureka!”, weighing machine. In reality,
which means “I have got it”. one is heavier than other. Can
This knowledge helped him to you say which one is heavier
determine the purity of the and why?
Archimedes
gold in the crown made for
the king.
His work in the field of Geometry and
Mechanics made him famous. His
understanding of levers, pulleys, wheels-
and-axle helped the Greek army in its war
with Roman army.
What
you have
learnt
• The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction
between any two objects is proportional to the product of
their masses and inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them. The law applies to objects
anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal.
• Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved.
• The force of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies
on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the
equator.
• The weight of a body is the force with which the earth
attracts it.
• The weight is equal to the product of mass and acceleration
due to gravity.
• The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays
constant.
110 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 121 ---
• All objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are
immersed in a fluid.
• Objects having density less than that of the liquid in which
they are immersed, float on the surface of the liquid. If the
density of the object is more than the density of the liquid in
which it is immersed then it sinks in the liquid.
Exercises
1. How does the force of gravitation between two objects change
when the distance between them is reduced to half ?
2. Gravitational force acts on all objects in proportion to their
masses. Why then, a heavy object does not fall faster than
a light object?
3. What is the magnitude of the gravitational force between the
earth and a 1 kg object on its surface? (Mass of the earth is
6 × 1024 kg and radius of the earth is 6.4 × 106 m.)
4. The earth and the moon are attracted to each other by
gravitational force. Does the earth attract the moon with a
force that is greater or smaller or the same as the force
with which the moon attracts the earth? Why?
5. If the moon attracts the earth, why does the earth not move
towards the moon?
6. What happens to the force between two objects, if
(i) the mass of one object is doubled?
(ii) the distance between the objects is doubled and tripled?
(iii) the masses of both objects are doubled?
7. What is the importance of universal law of gravitation?
8. What is the acceleration of free fall?
9. What do we call the gravitational force between the earth and
an object?
10. Amit buys few grams of gold at the poles as per the instruction
of one of his friends. He hands over the same when he meets
him at the equator. Will the friend agree with the weight of gold
bought? If not, why? [Hint: The value of g is greater at the
poles than at the equator.]
11. Why will a sheet of paper fall slower than one that is crumpled
into a ball?
1
12. Gravitational force on the surface of the moon is only as
6
strong as gravitational force on the earth. What is the weight
in newtons of a 10 kg object on the moon and on the earth?
GRAVITATION 111
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 122 ---
13. A ball is thrown vertically upwards with a velocity of 49 m/s.
Calculate
(i) the maximum height to which it rises,
(ii) the total time it takes to return to the surface of the
earth.
14. A stone is released from the top of a tower of height 19.6 m.
Calculate its final velocity just before touching the ground.
15. A stone is thrown vertically upward with an initial velocity
of 40 m/s. Taking g = 10 m/s2, find the maximum height
reached by the stone. What is the net displacement and the
total distance covered by the stone?
16. Calculate the force of gravitation between the earth and the
Sun, given that the mass of the earth = 6 × 1024 kg and of the
Sun = 2 × 1030 kg. The average distance between the two is
1.5 × 1011 m.
17. A stone is allowed to fall from the top of a tower 100 m high
and at the same time another stone is projected vertically
upwards from the ground with a velocity of 25 m/s. Calculate
when and where the two stones will meet.
18. A ball thrown up vertically returns to the thrower after 6 s.
Find
(a) the velocity with which it was thrown up,
(b) the maximum height it reaches, and
(c) its position after 4 s.
19. In what direction does the buoyant force on an object
immersed in a liquid act?
20. Why does a block of plastic released under water come up
to the surface of water?
21. The volume of 50 g of a substance is 20 cm3. If the density of
water is 1 g cm–3, will the substance float or sink?
22. The volume of a 500 g sealed packet is 350 cm3. Will the
packet float or sink in water if the density of water is 1 g
cm–3? What will be the mass of the water displaced by this
packet?
112 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 123 ---
10
C
hapter
WWWWW EEEEE
OOOOORRRRRKKKKK AAAAANNNNNDDDDD NNNNNEEEEERRRRRGGGGGYYYYY
In the previous few chapters we have talked draws diagrams, organises her thoughts,
about ways of describing the motion of collects question papers, attends classes,
objects, the cause of motion and gravitation. discusses problems with her friends, and
Another concept that helps us understand and performs experiments. She expends a lot of
interpret many natural phenomena is ‘work’. energy on these activities. In common
Closely related to work are energy and power. parlance, she is ‘working hard’. All this ‘hard
In this chapter we shall study these concepts. work’ may involve very little ‘work’ if we go by
All living beings need food. Living beings the scientific definition of work.
have to perform several basic activities to You are working hard to push a huge rock.
survive. We call such activities ‘life processes’. Let us say the rock does not move despite all
The energy for these processes comes from the effort. You get completely exhausted.
food. We need energy for other activities like However, you have not done any work on the
playing, singing, reading, writing, thinking, rock as there is no displacement of the rock.
jumping, cycling and running. Activities that You stand still for a few minutes with a
are strenuous require more energy. heavy load on your head. You get tired. You
Animals too get engaged in activities. For have exerted yourself and have spent quite a
example, they may jump and run. They have bit of your energy. Are you doing work on the
to fight, move away from enemies, find food load? The way we understand the term ‘work’
or find a safe place to live. Also, we engage in science, work is not done.
some animals to lift weights, carry loads, pull You climb up the steps of a staircase and
carts or plough fields. All such activities reach the second floor of a building just to
require energy. see the landscape from there. You may even
Think of machines. List the machines that climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific
you have come across. What do they need for definition, these activities involve a lot of work.
their working? Why do some engines require In day-to-day life, we consider any useful
fuel like petrol and diesel? Why do living physical or mental labour as work. Activities
beings and machines need energy? like playing in a field, talking with friends,
humming a tune, watching a movie, attending
10.1 Work a function are sometimes not considered to
be work. What constitutes ‘work’ depends
What is work? There is a difference in the on the way we define it. We use and define
way we use the term ‘work’ in day-to-day life the term work differently in science. To
and the way we use it in science. To make understand this let us do the following
this point clear let us consider a few examples. activities:
10.1.1N OT MUCH ‘ WORK ’ IN SPITE OF Activity _____________10.1
!
WORKINGHARD
• We have discussed in the above
Kamali is preparing for examinations. She paragraphs a number of activities
spends lot of time in studies. She reads books, which we normally consider to be work
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 124 ---
in day-to-day life. For each of these Activity _____________10.3
activities, ask the following questions
and answer them: • Think of situations when the object
(i) What is the work being done on? is not displaced in spite of a force
(ii) What is happening to the object? acting on it.
(iii) Who (what) is doing the work? • Also think of situations when an object
gets displaced in the absence of a force
acting on it.
10.1.2S
CIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK • List all the situations that you can
think of for each.
To understand the way we view work and
• Discuss with your friends whether
define work from the point of view of science,
work is done in these situations.
let us consider some situations:
Push a pebble lying on a surface. The
10.1.3W
ORK DONE BY A CONSTANT
pebble moves through a distance. You exerted
a force on the pebble and the pebble got FORCE
displaced. In this situation work is done.
How is work defined in science? To
A girl pulls a trolley and the trolley moves
understand this, we shall first consider the
through a distance. The girl has exerted a
case when the force is acting in the direction
force on the trolley and it is displaced.
of displacement.
Therefore, work is done.
Let a constant force, F act on an object.
Lift a book through a height. To do this
Let the object be displaced through a
you must apply a force. The book rises up.
distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig.
There is a force applied on the book and the
10.1). Let W be the work done. We define work
book has moved. Hence, work is done.
to be equal to the product of the force and
A closer look at the above situations
displacement.
reveals that two conditions need to be
Work done = force × displacement
satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should
W = F s (10.1)
act on an object, and (ii) the object must be
displaced.
If any one of the above conditions does
not exist, work is not done. This is the way
we view work in science.
A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart
moves. There is a force on the cart and the
cart has moved. Do you think that work is
done in this situation?
Activity _____________10.2
• Think of some situations from your Fig. 10.1
daily life involving work.
• List them. Thus, work done by a force acting on an
• Discuss with your friends whether object is equal to the magnitude of the force
work is being done in each situation.
multiplied by the distance moved in the
• Try to reason out your response.
direction of the force. Work has only
• If work is done, which is the force acting
magnitude and no direction.
on the object?
• What is the object on which the work In Eq. (10.1), if F = 1 N and s = 1 m then
the work done by the force will be 1 N m.
is done?
• What happens to the object on which Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m)
work is done? or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work
114 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 125 ---
done on an object when a force of 1 N
displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of
the force.
Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the
work done when the force on the object is
zero? What would be the work done when
the displacement of the object is zero? Refer
to the conditions that are to be satisfied to
Fig. 10.4
say that work is done.
Consider a situation in which an object is
moving with a uniform velocity along a
Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on
particular direction. Now a retarding force, F,
an object. The object is displaced
is applied in the opposite direction. That is,
through 2 m in the direction of the force
the angle between the two directions is 180º.
(Fig. 10.2). If the force acts on the object
Let the object stop after a displacement s. In
all through the displacement, then work
such a situation, the work done by the force,
done is 5 N × 2 m =10 N m or 10 J. F is taken as negative and denoted by the
minus sign. The work done by the force is
F × (–s) or (–F × s).
It is clear from the above discussion that
the work done by a force can be either positive
or negative. To understand this, let us do the
following activity:
Fig. 10.2
Q Activity _____________10.4
uestion
• Lift an object up. Work is done by the
1. A force of 7 N acts on an object. force exerted by you on the object. The
object moves upwards. The force you
The displacement is, say 8 m, in
exerted is in the direction of
the direction of the force
displacement. However, there is the
(Fig. 10.3). Let us take it that the
force of gravity acting on the object.
force acts on the object through • Which one of these forces is doing
the displacement. What is the
positive work?
work done in this case? • Which one is doing negative work?
• Give reasons.
Work done is negative when the force acts
opposite to the direction of displacement.
Work done is positive when the force is in the
Fig. 10.3
direction of displacement.
Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of
Consider another situation in which the
15 kg from the ground and puts it on
force and the displacement are in the same
his head 1.5 m above the ground.
direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to
Calculate the work done by him on the
the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby
has exerted a force in the direction of luggage.
displacement of the car. In this situation, the
Solution:
work done will be equal to the product of the
force and displacement. In such situations, Mass of luggage, m = 15 kg and
the work done by the force is taken as positive. displacement, s = 1.5 m.
WORK AND ENERGY 115
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 126 ---
Work done, W = F × s = mg × s raised hammer falls on a nail placed on a piece
= 15 kg × 10 m s-2 × 1.5 m of wood, it drives the nail into the wood. We
= 225 kg m s-2 m have also observed children winding a toy
= 225 N m = 225 J (such as a toy car) and when the toy is placed
Work done is 225 J. on the floor, it starts moving. When a balloon
Q
is filled with air and we press it we notice a
uestions change in its shape. As long as we press it
gently, it can come back to its original shape
1. When do we say that work is when the force is withdrawn. However, if we
done? press the balloon hard, it can even explode
2. Write an expression for the work producing a blasting sound. In all these
done when a force is acting on examples, the objects acquire, through
an object in the direction of its different means, the capability of doing work.
displacement. An object having a capability to do work is
3. Define 1 J of work. said to possess energy. The object which does
4. A pair of bullocks exerts a force the work loses energy and the object on which
of 140 N on a plough. The field
the work is done gains energy.
being ploughed is 15 m long.
How does an object with energy do work?
How much work is done in
An object that possesses energy can exert a
ploughing the length of the field?
force on another object. When this happens,
energy is transferred from the former to the
10.2 Energy latter. The second object may move as it
receives energy and therefore do some work.
Life is impossible without energy. The demand Thus, the first object had a capacity to do
for energy is ever increasing. Where do we work. This implies that any object that
get energy from? The Sun is the biggest possesses energy can do work.
natural source of energy to us. Many of our The energy possessed by an object is thus
energy sources are derived from the Sun. We
measured in terms of its capacity of doing
can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms,
work. The unit of energy is, therefore, the same
the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can
as that of work, that is, joule (J). 1 J is the
you think of other sources of energy?
energy required to do 1 joule of work.
Activity _____________10.5 Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo
joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J.
• A few sources of energy are listed
above. There are many other sources 10.2.1F
ORMS OF ENERGY
of energy. List them.
• Discuss in small groups how certain Luckily the world we live in provides energy in
sources of energy are due to the Sun. many different forms. The various forms
• Are there sources of energy which are
include mechanical energy (potential energy
not due to the Sun?
+ kinetic energy), heat energy, chemical
The word energy is very often used in our
energy, electrical energy and light energy.
daily life, but in science we give it a definite
and precise meaning. Let us consider the
following examples: when a fast moving Think it over !
cricket ball hits a stationary wicket, the wicket
How do you know that some entity is a
is thrown away. Similarly, an object when
form of energy? Discuss with your friends
raised to a certain height gets the capability
and teachers.
to do work. You must have seen that when a
116 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 127 ---
James Prescott
Joule was an
o u t s t a n d i n g
British physicist.
He is best known
for his research in
electricity and
thermodynamics.
Amongst other
things, he
Fig. 10.5
formulated a law
James Prescott Joule for the heating • The trolley moves forward and hits the
(1818 – 1889) effect of electric wooden block.
current. He also • Fix a stop on the table in such a
verified experimentally the law of manner that the trolley stops after
conservation of energy and discovered hitting the block. The block gets
displaced.
the value of the mechanical equivalent
• Note down the displacement of the
of heat. The unit of energy and work
block. This means work is done on the
called joule, is named after him.
block by the trolley as the block has
gained energy.
10.2.2K INETIC ENERGY • From where does this energy come?
• Repeat this activity by increasing the
mass on the pan. In which case is the
Activity _____________10.6
displacement more?
• In which case is the work done more?
• Take a heavy ball. Drop it on a thick • In this activity, the moving trolley does
bed of sand. A wet bed of sand would
work and hence it possesses energy.
be better. Drop the ball on the sand
bed from height of about 25 cm. The A moving object can do work. An object
ball creates a depression. moving faster can do more work than an
• Repeat this activity from heights of
identical object moving relatively slow. A
50 cm, 1m and 1.5 m.
moving bullet, blowing wind, a rotating wheel,
• Ensure that all the depressions are
a speeding stone can do work. How does a
distinctly visible.
• Mark the depressions to indicate the bullet pierce the target? How does the wind
height from which the ball was move the blades of a windmill? Objects in
dropped. motion possess energy. We call this energy
• Compare their depths. kinetic energy.
• Which one of them is deepest? A falling coconut, a speeding car, a rolling
• Which one is shallowest? Why?
stone, a flying aircraft, flowing water, blowing
• What has caused the ball to make a
wind, a running athlete etc. possess kinetic
deeper dent?
• Discuss and analyse. energy. In short, kinetic energy is the energy
possessed by an object due to its motion. The
Activity _____________10.7 kinetic energy of an object increases with its
speed.
• Set up the apparatus as shown in How much energy is possessed by a
Fig. 10.5.
moving body by virtue of its motion? By
• Place a wooden block of known mass
definition, we say that the kinetic energy of a
in front of the trolley at a convenient
body moving with a certain velocity is equal to
fixed distance.
• Place a known mass on the pan so the work done on it to make it acquire
that the trolley starts moving. that velocity.
WORK AND ENERGY 117
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 128 ---
Let us now express the kinetic energy of Solution:
an object in the form of an equation. Consider
Mass of the object, m = 15 kg, velocity
an object of mass, m moving with a uniform
velocity, u. Let it now be displaced through a of the object, v = 4 m s–1.
distance s when a constant force, F acts on it From Eq. (10.5),
in the direction of its displacement. From 1
E = m v2
Eq. (10.1), the work done, W is F s. The work k 2
done on the object will cause a change in its
1
velocity. Let its velocity change from u to v. = × 15 kg × 4 m s–1 × 4 m s–1
Let a be the acceleration produced. 2
We studied three equations of motion. The = 120 J
relation connecting the initial velocity (u) The kinetic energy of the object is 120 J.
and final velocity (v) of an object moving
with a uniform acceleration a, and the
displacement, s is Example 10.4 What is the work to be done
v2 – u2 = 2a s to increase the velocity of a car from
30 km h–1 to 60 km h–1 if the mass of
This gives
the car is 1500 kg?
v2 –u2
s=
(10.2)
2a Solution:
From section 9.4, we know F = m a. Thus,
Mass of the car, m =1500 kg,
using (Eq. 10.2) in Eq. (10.1), we can write the
initial velocity of car, u = 30 km h–1
work done by the force, F as
30×1000m
v2 -u2
=
W =m a · 60×60s
2a
= 25/3 m s–1.
or
Similarly, the final velocity of the car,
1 ( )
W = m v2 –u2
2 (10.3) v = 60 km h–1
= 50/3 m s–1.
If the object is starting from its stationary
position, that is, u = 0, then Therefore, the initial kinetic energy of
the car,
1
W = m v2 (10.4) 1
2 E = m u2
ki 2
It is clear that the work done is equal to the
change in the kinetic energy of an object. 1
= × 1500 kg × (25/3 m s–1)2
1 2
If u = 0, the work done will be m v2 .
2 = 156250/3 J.
Thus, the kinetic energy possessed by an
The final kinetic energy of the car,
object of mass, m and moving with a uniform
velocity, v is 1
E = × 1500 kg × (50/3 m s–1)2
1 kf 2
E = m v2
k 2 (10.5) = 625000/3 J.
Thus, the work done = Change in
Example 10.3 An object of mass 15 kg is kinetic energy
moving with a uniform velocity of 4 = E – E
kf ki
m s–1. What is the kinetic energy
= 156250 J.
possessed by the object?
118 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 129 ---
Q
uestions Activity ___________ 10.11
1. What is the kinetic energy of an • Lift an object through a certain
object? height. The object can now do work.
2. Write an expression for the kinetic It begins to fall when released.
energy of an object. • This implies that it has acquired some
3. The kinetic energy of an object of energy. If raised to a greater height it
mass, m moving with a velocity can do more work and hence possesses
more energy.
of 5 m s–1 is 25 J. What will be its
• From where did it get the energy? Think
kinetic energy when its velocity
and discuss.
is doubled? What will be its
kinetic energy when its velocity In the above situations, the energy gets
is increased three times? stored due to the work done on the object.
The energy transferred to an object is stored
10.2.3P
OTENTIAL ENERGY as potential energy if it is not used to cause a
change in the velocity or speed of the object.
Activity _____________10.8
You transfer energy when you stretch a
rubber band. The energy transferred to the
• Take a rubber band.
• Hold it at one end and pull from the band is its potential energy. You do work while
winding the key of a toy car. The energy
other. The band stretches.
• Release the band at one of the ends. transferred to the spring inside is stored as
• What happens? potential energy. The potential energy
• The band will tend to regain its original possessed by the object is the energy present
length. Obviously the band had in it by virtue of its position or configuration.
acquired energy in its stretched
position. Activity ___________ 10.12
• How did it acquire energy when
stretched? • Take a bamboo stick and make a bow
Activity _____________10.9 as shown in Fig. 10.6.
• Place an arrow made of a light stick on
• Take a slinky as shown below. it with one end supported by the
• Ask a friend to hold one of its ends. stretched string.
• Now stretch the string and release the
You hold the other end and move away
arrow.
from your friend. Now you release the
• Notice the arrow flying off the bow.
slinky.
Notice the change in the shape of the
bow.
• The potential energy stored in the bow
due to the change of shape is thus used
• What happened?
in the form of kinetic energy in
• How did the slinky acquire energy when
throwing off the arrow.
stretched?
• Would the slinky acquire energy when
it is compressed?
Activity ___________ 10.10
• Take a toy car. Wind it using its key.
• Place the car on the ground.
• Did it move?
• From where did it acquire energy?
• Does the energy acquired depend on
the number of windings? Fig.10.6: An arrow and the stretched string
• How can you test this? on the bow.
WORK AND ENERGY 119
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 130 ---
10.2.4P
OTENTIAL ENERGY OF AN OBJECT
ATA HEIGHT
An object increases its energy when raised
through a height. This is because work is
done on it against gravity while it is being
raised. The energy present in such an object
is the gravitational potential energy.
The gravitational potential energy of an
object at a point above the ground is defined
as the work done in raising it from the ground
to that point against gravity.
It is easy to arrive at an expression for
the gravitational potential energy of an object
at a height.
Fig. 10.7
Consider an object of mass, m. Let it be
raised through a height, h from the ground.
A force is required to do this. The minimum
force required to raise the object is equal to
the weight of the object, mg. The object gains
energy equal to the work done on it. Let the
work done on the object against gravity be
W. That is,
work done, W =force × displacement
= mg × h
= mgh
Since work done on the object is equal to
mgh, an energy equal to mgh units is gained
by the object. This is the potential energy (E )
P
of the object.
E = mgh (10.6)
p
120 SCIENCE
wonk
ot
eroM
The potential energy of an object at
a height depends on the ground level
or the zero level you choose. An
object in a given position can have a
certain potential energy with respect
to one level and a different value of
potential energy with respect to
another level.
It is useful to note that the work done by
gravity depends on the difference in vertical
heights of the initial and final positions of
the object and not on the path along which
the object is moved. Fig. 10.8 shows a case
where a block is raised from position A to B
by taking two different paths. Let the height
AB = h. In both the situations the work done
on the object is mgh.
Fig. 10.8
Example 10.5Find the energy possessed
by an object of mass 10 kg when it is at
a height of 6 m above the ground. Given,
g = 9.8 m s–2.
Solution:
Mass of the object, m = 10 kg,
displacement (height), h = 6 m, and
acceleration due to gravity, g = 9.8 m s–2.
From Eq. (10.6),
Potential energy = mgh
= 10 kg × 9.8 m s–2 × 6 m
= 588 J.
The potential energy is 588 J.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 131 ---
10.2.6L
Example 10.6 An object of mass 12 kg is AWOFCONSERVATIONOFENERGY
at a certain height above the ground.
In activities 10.13 and 10.14, we learnt that
If the potential energy of the object is
the form of energy can be changed from one
480 J, find the height at which the
form to another. What happens to the total
object is with respect to the ground.
energy of a system during or after the process?
Given, g = 10 m s–2.
Whenever energy gets transformed, the total
energy remains unchanged. This is the law of
Solution:
conservation of energy. According to this law,
Mass of the object, m = 12 kg, energy can only be converted from one form
potential energy, E = 480 J. to another; it can neither be created or
p
E = mgh destroyed. The total energy before and after
480 J p = 12 kg × 10 m s–2 × h the transformation remains the same. The law
480 J of conservation of energy is valid in
h = 120 kg ms–2 = 4 m. all situations and for all kinds of
transformations.
The object is at the height of 4 m. Consider a simple example. Let an object
of mass, m be made to fall freely from a height,
10.2.5A h. At the start, the potential energy is mgh and
RE VARIOUS ENERGY FORMS
kinetic energy is zero. Why is the kinetic
?
INTERCONVERTIBLE
energy zero? It is zero because its velocity is
Can we convert energy from one form to zero. The total energy of the object is thus mgh.
another? We find in nature a number of As it falls, its potential energy will change into
instances of conversion of energy from one kinetic energy. If v is the velocity of the object
form to another. at a given instant, the kinetic energy would be
½mv2. As the fall of the object continues, the
Activity ___________ 10.13
potential energy would decrease while the
kinetic energy would increase. When the object
• Sit in small groups.
• Discuss the various ways of energy is about to reach the ground, h = 0 and v will
be the highest. Therefore, the kinetic energy
conversion in nature.
• Discuss following questions in your would be the largest and potential energy the
group: least. However, the sum of the potential energy
(a) How do green plants produce food? and kinetic energy of the object would be the
(b) Where do they get their energy from?
same at all points. That is,
(c) Why does the air move from place
potential energy + kinetic energy = constant
to place?
or
(d) How are fuels, such as coal and
petroleum formed? 1
(e) What kinds of energy conversions mgh + 2 mv2= constant. (10.7)
sustain the water cycle?
The sum of kinetic energy and potential energy
Activity ___________ 10.14 of an object is its total mechanical energy.
We find that during the free fall of the object,
• Many of the human activities and the the decrease in potential energy, at any point
gadgets we use involve conversion of in its path, appears as an equal amount of
energy from one form to another.
increase in kinetic energy. (Here the effect of
• Make a list of such activities and
air resistance on the motion of the object has
gadgets.
• Identify in each activity/gadget the been ignored.) There is thus a continual
kind of energy conversion that takes transformation of gravitational potential
place. energy into kinetic energy.
WORK AND ENERGY 121
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 132 ---
Activity ___________ 10.15 A stronger person may do certain work in
relatively less time. A more powerful vehicle
• An object of mass 20 kg is dropped would complete a journey in a shorter time
from a height of 4 m. Fill in the blanks than a less powerful one. We talk of the power
in the following table by computing
of machines like motorbikes and motorcars.
the potential energy and kinetic
The speed with which these vehicles change
energy in each case.
energy or do work is a basis for their
classification. Power measures the speed of
Height at Potential Kinetic E + E
p k
which object energy energy work done, that is, how fast or slow work is
is located (E = mgh) (E = mv2/2) done. Power is defined as the rate of doing
p k
work or the rate of transfer of energy. If an
m J J J
agent does a work W in time t, then power is
4
given by:
3 Power = work/time
2
W
1 or P= (10.8)
t
Just above
The unit of power is watt [in honour of
the ground
James Watt (1736 – 1819)] having the symbol
• For simplifying the calculations, take W. 1 watt is the power of an agent, which
the value of g as 10 m s–2. does work at the rate of 1 joule per second.
We can also say that power is 1 W when the
Think it over ! rate of consumption of energy is 1 J s–1.
What would have happened if nature had 1 watt = 1 joule/second or 1 W = 1 J s–1.
not allowed the transformation of energy? We express larger rates of energy transfer in
There is a view that life could not have kilowatts (kW).
been possible without transformation of 1 kilowatt = 1000 watts
energy. Do you agree with this? 1 kW = 1000 W
1 kW = 1000 J s–1.
The power of an agent may vary with time.
10.3 Rate of Doing Work
This means that the agent may be doing work
at different rates at different intervals of time.
Do all of us work at the same rate? Do
Therefore the concept of average power is
machines consume or transfer energy at the
same rate? Agents that transfer energy do useful. We obtain average power by dividing
work at different rates. Let us understand this the total energy consumed by the total time
from the following activity: taken.
Activity ___________ 10.16
Example 10.7 Two girls, each of weight 400
• Consider two children, say A and B. N climb up a rope through a height of 8
Let us say they weigh the same. Both m. We name one of the girls A and the
start climbing up a rope separately.
other B. Girl A takes 20 s while B takes
Both reach a height of 8 m. Let us say
50 s to accomplish this task. What is the
A takes 15 s while B takes 20 s to
power expended by each girl?
accomplish the task.
• What is the work done by each?
Solution:
• The work done is the same. However,
A has taken less time than B to do (i) Power expended by girl A:
the work.
Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N
• Who has done more work in a given
Displacement (height), h = 8 m
time, say in 1 s?
122 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 133 ---
Time taken, t = 20 s power, P = Work done/time taken
From Eq. (10.8),
mgh
=
Power, P = Work done/time taken t
mgh
500 N ×6.75 m
=
t =
9s
400 N ×8 m
= 375 W.
= 20s
Power is 375 W.
Q
= 160 W.
(ii) Power expended by girl B: uestions
Weight of the girl, mg = 400 N
Displacement (height), h = 8 m 1. What is power?
Time taken, t = 50 s 2. Define 1 watt of power.
3. A lamp consumes 1000 J of
mgh
Power, P = electrical energy in 10 s. What is
t
its power?
400 N ×8 m 4. Define average power.
= 50s
Activity ___________ 10.17
= 64 W.
Power expended by girl A is 160 W. • Take a close look at the electric meter
Power expended by girl B is 64 W. installed in your house. Observe its
features closely.
• Take the readings of the meter each
day at 6.30 am and 6.30 pm.
Example 10.8 A boy of mass 50 kg runs • Do this activity for about a week.
up a staircase of 45 steps in 9 s. If the • How many ‘units’ are consumed
height of each step is 15 cm, find his during day time?
power. Take g = 10 m s–2. • How many ‘units’ are used during night?
• Tabulate your observations.
Solution: • Draw inferences from the data.
• Compare your observations with
Weight of the boy, the details given in the monthly
mg = 50 kg × 10 m s–2 = 500 N electricity bill (One can also estimate
Height of the staircase, the electricity to be consumed by
h = 45 × 15/100 m = 6.75 m specific appliances by tabulating their
Time taken to climb, t = 9 s known wattages and hours of
From Eq. (10.8), operation).
WORK AND ENERGY 123
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 134 ---
What
you have
learnt
• Work done on an object is defined as the magnitude of the
force multiplied by the distance moved by the object in the
direction of the applied force. The unit of work is joule:
1 joule = 1 newton × 1 metre.
• Work done on an object by a force would be zero if the
displacement of the object is zero.
• An object having capability to do work is said to possess
energy. Energy has the same unit as that of work.
• An object in motion possesses what is known as the kinetic
energy of the object. An object of mass, m moving with
1
velocity v has a kinetic energy of 2
mv2
.
• The energy possessed by a body due to its change in position
or shape is called the potential energy. The gravitational
potential energy of an object of mass, m raised through a
height, h from the earth’s surface is given by m g h.
• According to the law of conservation of energy, energy can
only be transformed from one form to another; it can neither
be created nor destroyed. The total energy before and after
the transformation always remains constant.
• Energy exists in nature in several forms such as kinetic
energy, potential energy, heat energy, chemical energy etc.
The sum of the kinetic and potential energies of an object is
called its mechanical energy.
• Power is defined as the rate of doing work. The SI unit of
power is watt. 1 W = 1 J/s.
Exercises
1. Look at the activities listed below. Reason out whether or
not work is done in the light of your understanding of the
term ‘work’.
• Suma is swimming in a pond.
• A donkey is carrying a load on its back.
• A wind-mill is lifting water from a well.
• A green plant is carrying out photosynthesis.
• An engine is pulling a train.
124 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 135 ---
• Food grains are getting dried in the sun.
• A sailboat is moving due to wind energy.
2. An object thrown at a certain angle to the ground moves in
a curved path and falls back to the ground. The initial and
the final points of the path of the object lie on the same
horizontal line. What is the work done by the force of gravity
on the object?
3. A battery lights a bulb. Describe the energy changes
involved in the process.
4. Certain force acting on a 20 kg mass changes its velocity
from 5 m s–1 to 2 m s–1. Calculate the work done by the
force.
5. A mass of 10 kg is at a point A on a table. It is moved to a
point B. If the line joining A and B is horizontal, what is
the work done on the object by the gravitational force?
Explain your answer.
6. The potential energy of a freely falling object decreases
progressively. Does this violate the law of conservation of
energy? Why?
7. What are the various energy transformations that occur
when you are riding a bicycle?
8. Does the transfer of energy take place when you push a
huge rock with all your might and fail to move it? Where is
the energy you spend going?
9. A certain household has consumed 250 units of energy
during a month. How much energy is this in joules?
10. An object of mass 40 kg is raised to a height of 5 m above
the ground. What is its potential energy? If the object is
allowed to fall, find its kinetic energy when it is half-way
down.
11. What is the work done by the force of gravity on a satellite
moving round the earth? Justify your answer.
12. Can there be displacement of an object in the absence of
any force acting on it? Think. Discuss this question with
your friends and teacher.
13. A person holds a bundle of hay over his head for 30 minutes
and gets tired. Has he done some work or not? Justify your
answer.
14. An electric heater is rated 1500 W. How much energy does
it use in 10 hours?
15. Illustrate the law of conservation of energy by discussing
the energy changes which occur when we draw a pendulum
bob to one side and allow it to oscillate. Why does the bob
WORK AND ENERGY 125
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 136 ---
eventually come to rest? What happens to its energy
eventually? Is it a violation of the law of conservation of
energy?
16. An object of mass, m is moving with a constant velocity, v.
How much work should be done on the object in order to
bring the object to rest?
17. Calculate the work required to be done to stop a car of 1500
kg moving at a velocity of 60 km/h?
18. In each of the following a force, F is acting on an object of
mass, m. The direction of displacement is from west to east
shown by the longer arrow. Observe the diagrams carefully
and state whether the work done by the force is negative,
positive or zero.
19. Soni says that the acceleration in an object could be zero
even when several forces are acting on it. Do you agree with
her? Why?
20. Find the energy in joules consumed in 10 hours by four
devices of power 500 W each.
21. A freely falling object eventually stops on reaching the
ground. What happenes to its kinetic energy?
126 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 137 ---
11
C
hapter
SSSSS
OOOOOUUUUUNNNNNDDDDD
Everyday we hear sounds from various
sources like humans, birds, bells, machines,
vehicles, televisions, radios etc. Sound is a
form of energy which produces a sensation
of hearing in our ears. There are also other
forms of energy like mechanical energy, light
energy, etc. We have talked about mechanical
energy in the previous chapters. You have
been taught about conservation of energy,
which states that we can neither create nor
destroy energy. We can just change it from
one form to another. When you clap, a sound
is produced. Can you produce sound without
utilising your energy? Which form of energy
did you use to produce sound? In this
Fig. 11.1: Vibrating tuning fork just touching the
chapter we are going to learn how sound is
suspended table tennis ball.
produced and how it is transmitted through
a medium and received by our ears.
Activity _____________11.2
11.1 Production of Sound
• Fill water in a beaker or a glass up to
the brim. Gently touch the water surface
Activity _____________11.1 with one of the prongs of the vibrating
tuning fork, as shown in Fig. 11.2.
• Take a tuning fork and set it vibrating • Next dip the prongs of the vibrating
by striking its prong on a rubber pad. tuning fork in water, as shown in Fig.
Bring it near your ear. 11.3.
• Do you hear any sound? • Observe what happens in both the
• Touch one of the prongs of the vibrating cases.
tuning fork with your finger and share • Discuss with your friends why this
your experience with your friends. happens.
• Now, suspend a table tennis ball or a
small plastic ball by a thread from a
support [Take a big needle and a
thread, put a knot at one end of the
thread, and then with the help of the
needle pass the thread through the
ball]. Touch the ball gently with the
prong of a vibrating tuning
fork (Fig. 11.1).
• Observe what happens and discuss
with your friends. Fig. 11.2: One of the prongs of the vibrating tuning
fork touching the water surface.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 138 ---
the vibrating object to the ear. A particle of
the medium in contact with the vibrating
object is first displaced from its equilibrium
position. It then exerts a force on the adjacent
particle. As a result of which the adjacent
particle gets displaced from its position of
rest. After displacing the adjacent particle the
first particle comes back to its original
position. This process continues in the
medium till the sound reaches your ear. The
disturbance created by a source of sound in
Fig. 11.3: Both the prongs of the vibrating tuning the medium travels through the medium and
fork dipped in water not the particles of the medium.
A wave is a disturbance that moves
From the above activities what do you through a medium when the particles of the
conclude? Can you produce sound without medium set neighbouring particles into
a vibrating object? motion. They in turn produce similar motion
In the above activities we have produced in others. The particles of the medium do not
sound by striking the tuning fork. We can move forward themselves, but the
also produce sound by plucking, scratching, disturbance is carried forward. This is what
rubbing, blowing or shaking different objects. happens during propagation of sound in a
As per the above activities what do we do to medium, hence sound can be visualised as a
the objects? We set the objects vibrating and wave. Sound waves are characterised by the
produce sound. Vibration means a kind of motion of particles in the medium and are
rapid to and fro motion of an object. The called mechanical waves.
sound of the human voice is produced due Air is the most common medium through
to vibrations in the vocal cords. When a bird which sound travels. When a vibrating object
moves forward, it pushes and compresses the
flaps its wings, do you hear any sound? Think
air in front of it creating a region of high
how the buzzing sound accompanying a bee
pressure. This region is called a compression
is produced. A stretched rubber band when
(C), as shown in Fig. 11.4. This compression
plucked vibrates and produces sound. If you
starts to move away from the vibrating object.
have never done this, then do it and observe
When the vibrating object moves backwards,
the vibration of the stretched rubber band.
it creates a region of low pressure called
Activity _____________11.3 rarefaction (R), as shown in Fig. 11.4. As the
object moves back and forth rapidly, a series
• Make a list of different types of of compressions and rarefactions is created in
musical instruments and discuss the air. These make the sound wave that
with your friends which part of the
instrument vibrates to produce
sound.
11.2 Propagation of Sound
Sound is produced by vibrating objects. The
matter or substance through which sound
is transmitted is called a medium. It can be
solid, liquid or gas. Sound moves through a
medium from the point of generation to the
listener. When an object vibrates, it sets the
Fig. 11.4: A vibrating object creating a series of
particles of the medium around it vibrating.
compressions (C) and rarefactions (R) in
The particles do not travel all the way from the medium.
128 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 139 ---
propagates through the medium. The regions where the coils become closer
Compression is the region of high pressure are called compressions (C) and the regions
and rarefaction is the region of low pressure. where the coils are further apart are called
Pressure is related to the number of particles
rarefactions (R). As we already know, sound
of a medium in a given volume. More density
propagates in the medium as a series of
of the particles in the medium gives more
compressions and rarefactions. Now, we can
pressure and vice versa. Thus, propagation
compare the propagation of disturbance in a
of sound can be visualised as propagation of
slinky with the sound propagation in the
density variations or pressure variations in
medium. These waves are called longitudinal
the medium.
Q waves. In these waves the individual particles
uestion of the medium move in a direction parallel to
the direction of propagation of the disturbance.
1. How does the sound produced by The particles do not move from one place to
a vibrating object in a medium another but they simply oscillate back and
reach your ear? forth about their position of rest. This is
2. Explain how sound is produced exactly how a sound wave propagates, hence
by your school bell. sound waves are longitudinal waves.
3. Why are sound waves called There is also another type of wave, called
mechanical waves? a transverse wave. In a transverse wave
4. Suppose you and your friend are particles do not oscillate along the direction
on the moon. Will you be able to of wave propagation but oscillate up and down
hear any sound produced by about their mean position as the wave travels.
your friend? Thus, a transverse wave is the one in which
the individual particles of the medium move
11.2.1S about their mean positions in a direction
OUND WAVES ARE LONGITUDINAL
perpendicular to the direction of wave
WAVES
propagation. When we drop a pebble in a
Activity _____________11.4 pond, the waves you see on the water surface
is an example of transverse wave. Light is a
• Take a slinky. Ask your friend to hold transverse wave but for light, the oscillations
one end. You hold the other end.
are not of the medium particles or their
Now stretch the slinky as shown in
pressure or density— it is not a mechanical
Fig. 11.5(a). Then give it a sharp push
wave. You will come to know more about
towards your friend.
transverse waves in higher classes.
• What do you notice? If you move your
hand pushing and pulling the slinky
11.2.2C
alternatively, what will you observe? HARACTERISTICS OF A SOUND
• If you mark a dot on the slinky, you
WAVE
will observe that the dot on the slinky
will move back and forth parallel to We can describe a sound wave by its
the direction of the propagation of the • frequency
disturbance.
• amplitude and
• speed.
A sound wave in graphic form is shown in
(a)
Fig. 11.6(c), which represents how density and
pressure change when the sound wave moves
in the medium. The density as well as the
pressure of the medium at a given time varies
(b) with distance, above and below the average
Fig. 11.5: Longitudinal wave in a slinky. value of density and pressure. Fig. 11.6(a) and
SOUND 129
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 140 ---
Fig. 11.6(b) represent the density and
Heinrich Rudolph Hertz
pressure variations, respectively, as a sound
was born on 22 February
wave propagates in the medium.
1857 in Hamburg,
Compressions are the regions where
Germany and educated at
particles are crowded together and the University of Berlin. He
represented by the upper portion of the curve confirmed J.C. Maxwell’s
in Fig. 11.6(c). The peak represents the region electromagnetic theory by
of maximum compression. Thus, his experiments. He laid the
compressions are regions where density as H. R. Hertz foundation for future
well as pressure is high. Rarefactions are the development of radio, telephone, telegraph
regions of low pressure where particles are and even television. He also discovered the
spread apart and are represented by the photoelectric effect which was later
valley, that is, the lower portion of the curve explained by Albert Einstein. The SI unit of
frequency was named as hertz in his honour.
in Fig. 11.6(c). A peak is called the crest and a
valley is called the trough of a wave.
The distance between two consecutive Frequency tells us how frequently an
compressions (C) or two consecutive event occurs. Suppose you are beating a
rarefactions (R) is called the wavelength, as drum. How many times you are beating the
shown in Fig. 11.6(c), The wavelength is drum in unit time is called the frequency of
usually represented by λ (Greek letter your beating the drum. We know that when
lambda). Its SI unit is metre (m). sound is propagated through a medium, the
Fig. 11.6: Sound propagates as density or pressure variations as shown in (a) and (b), (c) represents
graphically the density and pressure variations.
130 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 141 ---
density of the medium oscillates between a
maximum value and a minimum value. The
change in density from the maximum value
to the minimum value, then again to the
maximum value, makes one complete
oscillation. The number of such oscillations
per unit time is the frequency of the sound
wave. If we can count the number of the
compressions or rarefactions that cross us
per unit time, we will get the frequency of
the sound wave. It is usually represented by
ν (Greek letter, nu). Its SI unit is hertz
(symbol, Hz).
The time taken by two consecutive
compressions or rarefactions to cross a fixed
point is called the time period of the wave. In
other words, we can say that the time taken
for one complete oscillation is called the time
period of the sound wave. It is represented by Fig. 11.7: Low pitch sound has low frequency and
high pitch of sound has high frequency.
the symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s).
Frequency and time period are related as as shown in Fig. 11.6(c). For sound its unit
follows:
will be that of density or pressure.
1
v = The loudness or softness of a sound is
T determined basically by its amplitude. The
amplitude of the sound wave depends upon
A violin and a flute may both be played at
the force with which an object is made to
the same time in an orchestra. Both sounds
vibrate. If we strike a table lightly, we hear a
travel through the same medium, that is, air
soft sound because we produce a sound wave
and arrive at our ear at the same time. Both
sounds travel at the same speed irrespective
of the source. But the sounds we receive are
different. This is due to the different
characteristics associated with the sound.
Pitch is one of the characteristics.
How the brain interprets the frequency
of an emitted sound is called its pitch. The
faster the vibration of the source, the
higher is the frequency and the higher is
the pitch, as shown in Fig. 11.7. Thus, a
high pitch sound corresponds to more
number of compressions and rarefactions
passing a fixed point per unit time.
Objects of different sizes and conditions
vibrate at different frequencies to produce
sounds of different pitch.
The magnitude of the maximum
disturbance in the medium on either side of
the mean value is called the amplitude of the
Fig. 11.8: Soft sound has small amplitude and
wave. It is usually represented by the letter A,
louder sound has large amplitude.
SOUND 131
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 142 ---
of less energy (amplitude). If we hit the table
Example 11.1 A sound wave has a
hard we hear a louder sound. Can you tell
frequency of 2 kHz and wave length
why? A sound wave spreads out from its
35 cm. How long will it take to travel
source. As it moves away from the source its 1.5 km?
amplitude as well as its loudness decreases.
Solution:
Louder sound can travel a larger distance as
it is associated with higher energy. Fig. 11.8 Given,
shows the wave shapes of a loud and a soft Frequency, ν = 2 kHz = 2000 Hz
sound of the same frequency. Wavelength, λ = 35 cm = 0.35 m
The quality or timber of sound is that
We know that speed, v of the wave
characteristic which enables us to distinguish
= wavelength × frequency
one sound from another having the same pitch
v = λ ν
and loudness. The sound which is more
= 0.35 m 2000 Hz = 700 m/s
pleasant is said to be of a rich quality. A sound
The time taken by the wave to travel a
of single frequency is called a tone. The sound
distance, d of 1.5 km is
which is produced due to a mixture of several
frequencies is called a note and is pleasant to
listen to. Noise is unpleasant to the ear! Music
is pleasant to hear and is of rich quality. Thus sound will take 2.1 s to travel a
Q
distance of 1.5 km.
uestions Q
uestions
1. Which wave property determines
(a) loudness, (b) pitch?
1. What are wavelength, frequency,
2. Guess which sound has a higher
time period and amplitude of a
pitch: guitar or car horn?
sound wave?
2. How are the wavelength and
frequency of a sound wave
The speed of sound is defined as the
related to its speed?
distance which a point on a wave, such as a
3. Calculate the wavelength of a
compression or a rarefaction, travels per unit
sound wave whose frequency is
time.
220 Hz and speed is 440 m/s in
We know,
a given medium.
speed, v = distance / time
4. A person is listening to a tone of
l
500 Hz sitting at a distance of
=
T 450 m from the source of the
sound. What is the time interval
Here λ is the wavelength of the sound wave. It between successive compressions
is the distance travelled by the sound wave in from the source?
one time period (T) of the wave. Thus,
The amount of sound energy passing each
second through unit area is called the intensity
v = λ ν
of sound. We sometimes use the terms
“loudness” and “intensity” interchangeably,
or v = λ ν
but they are not the same. Loudness is a
That is, speed = wavelength × frequency.
measure of the response of the ear to the sound.
The speed of sound remains almost the
Even when two sounds are of equal intensity,
same for all frequencies in a given medium
we may hear one as louder than the other
under the same physical conditions.
simply because our ear detects it better.
132 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 143 ---
Q
Q
uestion
uestion
1. Distinguish between loudness
1. In which of the three media, air,
and intensity of sound.
water or iron, does sound travel
the fastest at a particular
11.2.3S
PEED OF SOUND IN DIFFERENT temperature?
MEDIA
Sound propagates through a medium at a finite 11.3 Reflection of Sound
speed. The sound of a thunder is heard a little
Sound bounces off a solid or a liquid like a
later than the flash of light is seen. So, we can
rubber ball bounces off a wall. Like light, sound
make out that sound travels with a speed
gets reflected at the surface of a solid or liquid
which is much less than the speed of light. The
and follows the same laws of reflection as you
speed of sound depends on the properties of
have studied in earlier classes. The directions
the medium through which it travels. You will
in which the sound is incident and is reflected
learn about this dependence in higher classes.
make equal angles with the normal to the
The speed of sound in a medium depends on
reflecting surface at the point of incidence, and
temperature of the medium. The speed of
the three are in the same plane. An obstacle of
sound decreases when we go from solid to
large size which may be polished or rough is
gaseous state. In any medium as we increase
needed for the reflection of sound waves.
the temperature, the speed of sound increases.
For example, the speed of sound in air is 331 Activity _____________11.5
m s–1 at 0 ºC and 344 m s–1 at 22 ºC. The speeds
of sound at a particular temperature in various • Take two identical pipes, as shown in
media are listed in Table 11.1. You need not Fig. 11.9. You can make the pipes
memorise the values. using chart paper. The length of the
pipes should be sufficiently long
as shown.
Table 11.1: Speed of sound in
• Arrange them on a table near a wall.
different media at 25 ºC
• Keep a clock near the open end of one
of the pipes and try to hear the sound
State Substance Speed in m/s of the clock through the other pipe.
• Adjust the position of the pipes so
Solids Aluminium 6420
that you can best hear the sound of
Nickel 6040 the clock.
Steel 5960 • Now, measure the angles of incidence
and reflection and see the
Iron 5950
relationship between the angles.
Brass 4700 • Lift the pipe on the right vertically
to a small height and observe
Glass (Flint) 3980
what happens.
Liquids Water (Sea) 1531 (In place of a clock, a mobile phone
on vibrating mode may also be used.)
Water (distilled) 1498
Ethanol 1207
Methanol 1103
Gases Hydrogen 1284
Helium 965
Air 346
Oxygen 316
Sulphur dioxide 213
Fig. 11.9: Reflection of sound
SOUND 133
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 144 ---
11.3.1E CHO What is the distance of the cliff from the
person if the speed of the sound, v is
If we shout or clap near a suitable reflecting
taken as 346 m s–1?
object such as a tall building or a
mountain,we will hear the same sound
Solution:
again a little later. This sound which we
hear is called an echo. The sensation of Given,
sound persists in our brain for about 0.1 Speed of sound, v = 346 m s–1
s. To hear a distinct echo the time interval Time taken for hearing the echo,
between the original sound and the t = 2 s
reflected one must be at least 0.1s. If we Distance travelled by the sound
take the speed of sound to be 344 m/s at a
= v × t = 346 m s–1 × 2 s = 692 m
given temperature, say at 22 ºC in air, the
In 2 s sound has to travel twice the
sound must go to the obstacle and reach
distance between the cliff and the
back the ear of the listener on reflection after
person. Hence, the distance between the
0.1s. Hence, the total distance covered by
cliff and the person
the sound from the point of generation to
= 692 m/2 = 346 m.
the reflecting surface and back should be
at least (344 m/s) × 0.1 s = 34.4 m. Thus, Q
uestion
for hearing distinct echoes, the minimum
distance of the obstacle from the source of
1. An echo is heard in 3 s. What is
sound must be half of this distance, that
the distance of the reflecting
is, 17.2 m. This distance will change with
the temperature of air. Echoes may be heard surface from the source, given that
more than once due to successive or the speed of sound is 342 m s–1?
multiple reflections. The rolling of thunder
is due to the successive reflections of the 11.3.3U SES OF MULTIPLE REFLECTION
sound from a number of reflecting surfaces,
OF SOUND
such as the clouds and the land.
1. Megaphones or loudhailers, horns,
11.3.2R
EVERBERATION musical instruments such as trumpets
and shehanais, are all designed to send
A sound created in a big hall will persist
sound in a particular direction without
by repeated reflection from the walls until
spreading it in all directions, as shown
it is reduced to a value where it is no longer
audible. The repeated reflection that in Fig 11.10.
results in this persistence of sound is
called reverberation. In an auditorium or
big hall excessive reverberation is highly
undesirable. To reduce reverberation, the
roof and walls of the auditorium are
generally covered with sound-absorbent
materials like compressed fibreboard, Megaphone
rough plaster or draperies. The seat
materials are also selected on the basis of
their sound absorbing properties.
Horn
Example 11.2 A person clapped his hands
near a cliff and heard the echo after 2 s. Fig 11.10: A megaphone and a horn.
134 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 145 ---
In these instruments, a tube followed
by a conical opening reflects sound
successively to guide most of the
sound waves from the source in the
forward direction towards the
audience.
2. Stethoscope is a medical instrument
used for listening to sounds produced
within the body, mainly in the heart or
lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the
patient’s heartbeat reaches the doctor’s
ears by multiple reflection of sound, as
shown in Fig.11.11.
Fig. 11.13: Sound board used in a big hall.
Q
uestion
1. Why are the ceilings of concert
halls curved?
11.4 Range of Hearing
Fig.11.11: Stethoscope
The audible range of sound for human beings
3. Generally the ceilings of concert halls,
extends from about 20 Hz to 20000 Hz (one
conference halls and cinema halls are
Hz = one cycle/s). Children under the age of
curved so that sound after reflection
five and some animals, such as dogs can hear
reaches all corners of the hall, as
up to 25 kHz (1 kHz = 1000 Hz). As people
shown in Fig 11.12. Sometimes a
grow older their ears become less sensitive to
curved soundboard may be placed
higher frequencies. Sounds of frequencies
behind the stage so that the sound,
below 20 Hz are called infrasonic sound or
after reflecting from the sound board,
infrasound. If we could hear infrasound we
spreads evenly across the width of the
would hear the vibrations of a pendulum just
hall (Fig 11.13).
as we hear the vibrations of the wings of a bee.
Rhinoceroses communicate using infrasound
of frequency as low as 5 Hz. Whales and
elephants produce sound in the infrasound
range. It is observed that some animals get
disturbed before earthquakes. Earthquakes
produce low-frequency infrasound before the
main shock waves begin which possibly alert
the animals. Frequencies higher than 20 kHz
are called ultrasonic sound or ultrasound.
Ultrasound is produced by animals such as
dolphins, bats and porpoises. Moths of certain
families have very sensitive hearing equipment.
Fig. 11.12: Curved ceiling of a conference hall. These moths can hear the high frequency
SOUND 135
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 146 ---
squeaks of the bat and know when a bat in construction of big structures like
is flying nearby, and are able to escape buildings, bridges, machines and also
capture. Rats also play games by scientific equipment. The cracks or
producing ultrasound. holes inside the metal blocks, which
are invisible from outside reduces the
strength of the structure. Ultrasonic
Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may waves are allowed to pass through the
need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an metal block and detectors are used to
electronic, battery operated device. The
detect the transmitted waves. If there
hearing aid receives sound through a
is even a small defect, the ultrasound
microphone. The microphone converts the
gets reflected back indicating the
sound waves to electrical signals. These
presence of the flaw or defect, as shown
electrical signals are amplified by an
in Fig. 11.14.
amplifier. The amplified electrical signals
are given to a speaker of the hearing aid.
The speaker converts the amplified
electrical signal to sound and sends to the
ear for clear hearing.
Q
uestions
1. What is the audible range of the
average human ear?
2. What is the range of frequencies
Fig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the
associated with defective locations inside a metal block.
(a) Infrasound?
(b) Ultrasound? Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths
cannot be used for such purpose as it will
11.5 Applications of Ultrasound bend around the corners of the defective
location and enter the detector.
Ultrasounds are high frequency waves. • Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect
Ultrasounds are able to travel along well-
from various parts of the heart and
defined paths even in the presence of
form the image of the heart. This tech-
obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively
nique is called ‘echocardiography’.
in industries and for medical purposes. • Ultrasound scanner is an instrument
• Ultrasound is generally used to clean
which uses ultrasonic waves for
parts located in hard-to-reach places,
getting images of internal organs of the
for example, spiral tube, odd shaped
human body. A doctor may image the
parts, electronic components, etc.
patient’s organs, such as the liver, gall
Objects to be cleaned are placed in a
bladder, uterus, kidney, etc. It helps
cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves
the doctor to detect abnormalities,
are sent into the solution. Due to
such as stones in the gall bladder and
the high frequency, the particles of
kidney or tumours in different organs.
dust, grease and dirt get detached and
In this technique the ultrasonic waves
drop out. The objects thus get
thoroughly cleaned. travel through the tissues of the body
• Ultrasounds can be used to detect and get reflected from a region where
cracks and flaws in metal blocks. there is a change of tissue density.
136 SCIENCE
Metallic components are generally used
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 147 ---
squeaks of the bat and know when a bat in construction of big structures like
is flying nearby, and are able to escape buildings, bridges, machines and also
capture. Rats also play games by scientific equipment. The cracks or
producing ultrasound. holes inside the metal blocks, which
are invisible from outside reduces the
strength of the structure. Ultrasonic
Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may waves are allowed to pass through the
need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an metal block and detectors are used to
electronic, battery operated device. The
detect the transmitted waves. If there
hearing aid receives sound through a
is even a small defect, the ultrasound
microphone. The microphone converts the
gets reflected back indicating the
sound waves to electrical signals. These
presence of the flaw or defect, as shown
electrical signals are amplified by an
in Fig. 11.14.
amplifier. The amplified electrical signals
are given to a speaker of the hearing aid.
The speaker converts the amplified
electrical signal to sound and sends to the
ear for clear hearing.
Q
uestions
1. What is the audible range of the
average human ear?
2. What is the range of frequencies
Fig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the
associated with defective locations inside a metal block.
(a) Infrasound?
(b) Ultrasound? Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths
cannot be used for such purpose as it will
11.5 Applications of Ultrasound bend around the corners of the defective
location and enter the detector.
Ultrasounds are high frequency waves. • Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect
Ultrasounds are able to travel along well-
from various parts of the heart and
defined paths even in the presence of
form the image of the heart. This tech-
obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively
nique is called ‘echocardiography’.
in industries and for medical purposes. • Ultrasound scanner is an instrument
• Ultrasound is generally used to clean
which uses ultrasonic waves for
parts located in hard-to-reach places,
getting images of internal organs of the
for example, spiral tube, odd shaped
human body. A doctor may image the
parts, electronic components, etc.
patient’s organs, such as the liver, gall
Objects to be cleaned are placed in a
bladder, uterus, kidney, etc. It helps
cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves
the doctor to detect abnormalities,
are sent into the solution. Due to
such as stones in the gall bladder and
the high frequency, the particles of
kidney or tumours in different organs.
dust, grease and dirt get detached and
In this technique the ultrasonic waves
drop out. The objects thus get
thoroughly cleaned. travel through the tissues of the body
• Ultrasounds can be used to detect and get reflected from a region where
cracks and flaws in metal blocks. there is a change of tissue density.
136 SCIENCE
Metallic components are generally used
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 148 ---
These waves are then converted into examination of the foetus during
electrical signals that are used to pregnancy to detect congenial defects
generate images of the organ. These and growth abnormalities.
images are then displayed on a monitor • Ultrasound may be employed to break
or printed on a film. This technique small ‘stones’ formed in the kidneys
is called ‘ultrasonography’. into fine grains. These grains later get
Ultrasonography is also used for flushed out with urine.
What
you have
learnt
• Sound is produced due to vibration of different objects.
• Sound travels as a longitudinal wave through a material
medium.
• Sound travels as successive compressions and rarefactions
in the medium.
• In sound propagation, it is the energy of the sound that
travels and not the particles of the medium.
• The change in density from one maximum value to the
minimum value and again to the maximum value makes
one complete oscillation.
• The distance between two consecutive compressions or two
consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, λ.
• The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of
the density or pressure of the medium is called the time
period, T.
• The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called
1
v= .
the frequency (ν),
T
• The speed v, frequency ν, and wavelength λ, of sound are
related by the equation, v = λν.
• The speed of sound depends primarily on the nature and
the temperature of the transmitting medium.
• The law of reflection of sound states that the directions in
which the sound is incident and reflected make equal angles
with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of
incidence and the three lie in the same plane.
• For hearing a distinct sound, the time interval between the
original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1 s.
• The persistence of sound in an auditorium is the result of
repeated reflections of sound and is called reverberation.
SOUND 137
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 149 ---
• Sound properties such as pitch, loudness and quality are
determined by the corresponding wave properties.
• Loudness is a physiological response of the ear to the intensity
of sound.
• The amount of sound energy passing each second through
unit area is called the intensity of sound.
• The audible range of hearing for average human beings is in
the frequency range of 20 Hz – 20 kHz.
• Sound waves with frequencies below the audible range are
termed “infrasonic” and those above the audible range are
termed “ultrasonic”.
• Ultrasound has many medical and industrial applications.
Exercises
1. What is sound and how is it produced?
2. Describe with the help of a diagram, how compressions and
rarefactions are produced in air near a source of sound.
3. Why is sound wave called a longitudinal wave?
4. Which characteristic of the sound helps you to identify your
friend by his voice while sitting with others in a dark room?
5. Flash and thunder are produced simultaneously. But
thunder is heard a few seconds after the flash is seen, why?
6. A person has a hearing range from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What
are the typical wavelengths of sound waves in air
corresponding to these two frequencies? Take the speed of
sound in air as 344 m s–1.
7. Two children are at opposite ends of an aluminium rod. One
strikes the end of the rod with a stone. Find the ratio of
times taken by the sound wave in air and in aluminium to
reach the second child.
8. The frequency of a source of sound is 100 Hz. How many
times does it vibrate in a minute?
9. Does sound follow the same laws of reflection as light does?
Explain.
10. When a sound is reflected from a distant object, an echo is
produced. Let the distance between the reflecting surface
and the source of sound production remains the same. Do
you hear echo sound on a hotter day?
11. Give two practical applications of reflection of sound waves.
12. A stone is dropped from the top of a tower 500 m high into a
pond of water at the base of the tower. When is the splash
heard at the top? Given, g = 10 m s–2 and speed of sound =
340 m s–1.
138 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 150 ---
13. A sound wave travels at a speed of 339 m s–1. If its wavelength
is 1.5 cm, what is the frequency of the wave? Will it be
audible?
14. What is reverberation? How can it be reduced?
15. What is loudness of sound? What factors does it depend on?
16. How is ultrasound used for cleaning?
17. Explain how defects in a metal block can be detected using
ultrasound.
SOUND 139
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 151 ---
12
C
hapter
IIIII FFFFF RRRRR
MMMMMPPPPPRRRRROOOOOVVVVVEEEEEMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT IIIIINNNNN OOOOOOOOOODDDDD EEEEESSSSSOOOOOUUUUURRRRRCCCCCEEEEESSSSS
We know that all living organisms need food. disturbing the balances maintaining it. Hence,
Food supplies proteins, carbohydrates, fats, there is a need for sustainable practices in
vitamins and minerals, all of which we require agriculture and animal husbandry.
for body development, growth and health. Also, simply increasing grain production
Both plants and animals are major sources for storage in warehouses cannot solve the
of food for us. We obtain most of this food problem of malnutrition and hunger. People
from agriculture and animal husbandry. should have money to purchase food. Food
We read in newspapers that efforts are security depends on both availability of food
always being made to improve production and access to it. The majority of our
from agriculture and animal husbandry. Why population depends on agriculture for their
is this necessary? Why we cannot make do livelihood. Increasing the incomes of people
with the current levels of production? working in agriculture is therefore necessary
India is a very populous country. Our to combat the problem of hunger. Scientific
population is more than one billion people, management practices should be undertaken
and it is still growing. As food for this growing to obtain high yields from farms. For
population, we will soon need more than a sustained livelihood, one should undertake
quarter of a billion tonnes of grain every year. mixed farming, intercropping, and integrated
This can be done by farming on more land. farming practices, for example, combine
But India is already intensively cultivated. As agriculture with livestock/poultry/fisheries/
a result, we do not have any major scope for bee-keeping.
increasing the area of land under cultivation. The question thus becomes – how do we
Therefore, it is necessary to increase our increase the yields of crops and livestock?
production efficiency for both crops and
livestock. 12.1 Improvement in Crop Yields
Efforts to meet the food demand by
increasing food production have led to some Cereals such as wheat, rice, maize, millets and
successes so far. We have had the green sorghum provide us carbohydrate for energy
revolution, which contributed to increased requirement. Pulses like gram (chana), pea
food-grain production. We have also had the (matar), black gram (urad), green gram (moong),
white revolution, which has led to better and pigeon pea (arhar), lentil (masoor), provide us with
more efficient use as well as availability of milk. protein. And oil seeds including soyabean,
However, these revolutions mean that our ground nut, sesame, castor, mustard, linseed and
natural resources are getting used more sunflower provide us with necessary fats (Fig.
intensively. As a result, there are more 12.1). Vegetables, spices and fruits provide a
chances of causing damage to our natural range of vitamins and minerals in addition to
resources to the point of destroying their small amounts of proteins, carbohydrates and
balance completely. Therefore, it is important fats. In addition to these food crops, fodder crops
that we should increase food production like berseem, oats or sudan grass are raised as
without degrading our environment and food for the livestock.
140 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 152 ---
the kharif season from the month of June to
October, and some of the crops are grown in
the winter season, called the rabi season from
November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon
pea, maize, cotton, green gram and black
gram are kharif crops, whereas wheat, gram,
peas, mustard, linseed are rabi crops.
In India there has been a four times
increase in the production of food grains from
1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the
cultivable land area. How has this increase
in production been achieved? If we think of
the practices involved in farming, we can see
that we can divide it into three stages. The
first is the choice of seeds for planting. The
second is the nurturing of the crop plants.
The third is the protection of the growing and
harvested crops from loss. Thus, the major
groups of activities for improving crop yields
can be classified as:
• Crop variety improvement
• Crop production improvement
• Crop protection management.
12.1.1C
ROP VARIETY IMPROVEMENT
This approach depends on finding a crop
variety that can give a good yield. Varieties or
strains of crops can be selected by breeding
for various useful characteristics such as
disease resistance, response to fertilisers,
Fig. 12.1: Different types of crops product quality and high yields. One way of
incorporating desirable characters into crop
Q
uestion varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation
refers to crossing between genetically
1. What do we get from cereals, dissimilar plants. This crossing may be
pulses, fruits and vegetables? intervarietal (between different varieties),
interspecific (between two different species of
the same genus) or intergeneric (between
different genera). Another way of improving
Different crops require different climatic the crop is by introducing a gene that would
conditions, temperature and photoperiods for provide the desired characteristic. This
their growth and completion of their life cycle. results in genetically modified crops.
Photoperiods are related to the duration of For new varieties of crops to be accepted,
sunlight. Growth of plants and flowering are it is necessary that the variety produces high
dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants yields under different conditions that are
manufacture their food in sunlight by the found in different areas. Farmers would need
process of photosynthesis. There are some to be provided with good quality seeds of a
crops, which are grown in rainy season, called particular variety, that is, the seeds should all
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 141
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 153 ---
be of the same variety and germinate under less nutrients are consumed by these
the same conditions. crops. Thus developing varieties of
Cultivation practices and crop yield are desired agronomic characters help give
related to weather, soil quality and availability higher productivity.
Q
of water. Since weather conditions such as
uestions
drought and flood situations are
unpredictable, varieties that can be grown in
diverse climatic conditions are useful. 1. How do biotic and abiotic factors
Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil salinity affect crop production?
2. What are the desirable agronomic
have been developed. Some of the factors for
characteristics for crop
which variety improvement is done are:
• Higher yield: To increase the improvements?
productivity of the crop per acre.
• Improved quality: Quality
considerations of crop products vary
12.1.2C
from crop to crop. Baking quality is ROP PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT
important in wheat, protein quality in
In India, as in many other agriculture-based
pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and
countries, farming ranges from small to very
preserving quality in fruits and
large farms. Different farmers thus have more
vegetables.
• Biotic and abiotic resistance: Crops or less land, money and access to information
production can go down due to biotic and technologies. In short, it is the money or
(diseases, insects and nematodes) and financial conditions that allow farmers to take
abiotic (drought, salinity, water up different farming practices and agricultural
logging, heat, cold and frost) stresses technologies. There is a correlation between
under different situations. Varieties
higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer’s
resistant to these stresses can improve
purchasing capacity for inputs decides
crop production.
cropping system and production practices.
• Change in maturity duration: The
Therefore, production practices can be at
shorter the duration of the crop from
different levels. They include ‘no cost’
sowing to harvesting, the more
economical is the variety. Such short production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high
durations allow farmers to grow cost’ production practices.
multiple rounds of crops in a year.
Short duration also reduces the cost 12.1.2 (i) N UTRIENT MANAGEMENT
of crop production. Uniform maturity
makes the harvesting process easy Just as we need food for development, growth
and reduces losses during harvesting. and well-being, plants also require nutrients
• Wider adaptability: Developing for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants
varieties for wider adaptability will by air, water and soil. There are several
help in stabilising the crop production nutrients which are essential for plants. Air
under different environmental
supplies carbon and oxygen, hydrogen comes
conditions. One variety can then be
from water, and soil supplies the other thirteen
grown under different climatic
nutrients to plants. Amongst these, some are
conditions in different areas.
• Desirable agronomic characteristics: required in large quantities and are therefore
called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are
Tallness and profuse branching are
desirable characters for fodder crops. used by plants in small quantities and are
Dwarfness is desired in cereals, so that therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1).
142 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 154 ---
our environment from excessive use of
Table 12.1: Nutrients supplied
fertilizers. Using biological waste material is
by air, water and soil also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on
the kind of biological material used, manure
Source Nutrients can be classified as:
(i) Compost and vermi-compost: The
Air carbon, oxygen process in which farm waste material
like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.),
Water hydrogen, oxygen
vegetable waste, animal refuse,
domestic waste, sewage waste, straw,
Soil (i) Macronutrients:
eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed
nitrogen, phosphorus,
in pits is known as composting. The
potassium, calcium,
compost is rich in organic matter and
magnesium, sulphur
nutrients. Compost is also prepared
(ii) Micronutrients:
by using earthworms to hasten the
iron, manganese, boron,
process of decomposition of plant and
zinc, copper,
animal refuse. This is called
molybdenum, chlorine
vermi-compost.
(ii) Green manure: Prior to the sowing of
Deficiency of these nutrients affects
the crop seeds, some plants like sun
physiological processes in plants including
hemp or guar are grown and then
reproduction, growth and susceptibility to
mulched by ploughing them into the
diseases. To increase the yield, the soil can be
soil. These green plants thus turn into
enriched by supplying these nutrients in the
green manure which helps in
form of manure and fertilizers.
Q enriching the soil in nitrogen
and phosphorus.
uestions
F
ERTILIZERS
1. What are macro-nutrients and
why are they called macro- Fertilizers are commercially produced plant
nutrients? nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitrogen,
2. How do plants get nutrients? phosphorus and potassium. They are used
to ensure good vegetative growth (leaves,
branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy
plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher
M
ANURE yields of high-cost farming.
Fertilizers should be applied carefully in
Manure contains large quantities of organic
terms of proper dose, time, and observing pre-
matter and also supplies small quantities of
and post-application precautions for their
nutrients to the soil. Manure is prepared by
complete utilisation. For example, sometimes
the decomposition of animal excreta and plant fertilizers get washed away due to excessive
waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with irrigation and are not fully absorbed by the
nutrients and organic matter and increasing plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to
soil fertility. The bulk of organic matter in water pollution.
manure helps in improving the soil structure. Also, as we have seen in the previous
This involves increasing the water holding chapter, continuous use of fertilizers in an
capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils, the area can destroy soil fertility because the
large quantities of organic matter help in organic matter in the soil is not replenished
drainage and in avoiding water logging. and micro-organisms in the soil are harmed
In using manure we use biological waste by the fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of
material, which is advantageous in protecting using fertilizers and long-term benefits of using
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 143
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 155 ---
manure for maintaining soil fertility have to India has a wide variety of water resources
be considered while aiming for optimum yields and a highly varied climate. Under such
in crop production. conditions, several different kinds of irrigation
Q systems are adopted to supply water to
uestion
agricultural lands depending on the kinds of
water resources available. These include wells,
1. Compare the use of manure and
canals, rivers and tanks.
fertilizers in maintaining soil • Wells: There are two types of wells,
fertility.
namely dug wells and tube wells. In a
dug well, water is collected from water
Organic farming is a farming system with bearing strata. Tube wells can tap
minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers, water from the deeper strata. From
herbicides, pesticides, etc., and with a these wells, water is lifted by pumps
maximum input of organic manures, recycled for irrigation.
farm-wastes (straw and livestock excreta), use • Canals: This is usually an elaborate
of bio-agents such as culture of blue green and extensive irrigation system. In this
algae in preparation of biofertilizers, neem system canals receive water from one
leaves or turmeric specifically in grain storage or more reservoirs or from rivers. The
as bio-pesticides, with healthy cropping main canal is divided into branch
systems [mixed cropping, inter-cropping and canals having further distributaries to
crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.(iii)]. irrigate fields.
These cropping systems are beneficial in • River Lift Systems: In areas where
insect, pest and wheat control besides
canal flow is insufficient or irregular
providing nutrients.
due to inadequate reservoir release,
the lift system is more rational. Water
12.1.2 (ii) I
RRIGATION is directly drawn from the rivers for
supplementing irrigation in areas
Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is,
close to rivers.
the success of crops in most areas is
• Tanks: These are small storage
dependent on timely monsoons and sufficient
reservoirs, which intercept and store
rainfall spread through most of the growing
the run-off of smaller catchment
season. Hence, poor monsoons cause crop
failure. Ensuring that the crops get water at areas.
the right stages during their growing season Fresh initiatives for increasing the water
can increase the expected yields of any crop. available for agriculture include rainwater
Therefore, many measures are used to bring harvesting and watershed management. This
more and more agricultural land involves building small check-dams which
under irrigation. lead to an increase in ground water levels.
The check-dams stop the rainwater from
flowing away and also reduce soil erosion.
12.1.2 (iii) C
ROPPING PATTERNS
Different ways of growing crops can be used
to give maximum benefit.
Mixed cropping is growing two or more
crops simultaneously on the same piece of
land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat +
mustard, or groundnut + sunflower. This
reduces risk and gives some insurance
against failure of one of the crops.
144 SCIENCE
wonk
ot
eroM
Droughts occur because of scarcity or
irregular distribution of rains. Drought
poses a threat to rain-fed farming
areas, where farmers do not use
irrigation for crop production and
depend only on rain. Light soils have
less water retention capacity. In areas
with light soils, crops get adversely
affected by drought conditions.
Scientists have developed some crop
varieties which can tolerate drought
conditions.
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 156 ---
Inter-cropping is growing two or more (gokhroo), Parthenium (gajar ghas), Cyperinus
crops simultaneously on the same field in a rotundus (motha). They compete for food,
definite pattern (Fig.12.2). A few rows of one space and light. Weeds take up nutrients and
crop alternate with a few rows of a second reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore,
crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger removal of weeds from cultivated fields during
millet (bajra) + cowpea (lobia). The crops are the early stages of crop growth is essential for
selected such that their nutrient a good harvest.
requirements are different. This ensures Generally insect pests attack the plants
maximum utilisation of the nutrients in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and
supplied, and also prevents pests and leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various
diseases from spreading to all the plants parts of the plant, and (iii) they bore into stem
belonging to one crop in a field. This way, and fruits. They thus affect the health of the
both crops can give better returns. crop and reduce yields.
Diseases in plants are caused by
pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and viruses.
These pathogens can be present in and
transmitted through the soil, water and air.
Weeds, insects and diseases can be
controlled by various methods. One of the
most commonly used methods is the use of
pesticides, which include herbicides,
insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals
are sprayed on crop plants or used for treating
seeds and soil. However, excessive use of
these chemicals creates problems, since they
can be poisonous to many plant and animal
species and cause environmental pollution.
Weed control methods also include
mechanical removal. Preventive methods
Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping such as proper seed bed preparation, timely
sowing of crops, intercropping and crop
The growing of different crops on a piece rotation also help in weed control. Some other
of land in a pre-planned succession is known preventive measures against pests are the use
as crop rotation. Depending upon the of resistant varieties, and summer ploughing,
duration, crop rotation is done for different in which fields are ploughed deep in summers
crop combinations. The availability of moisture to destroy weeds and pests.
Q
and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the
uestion
crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop
rotation is done properly then two or three
1. Which of the following conditions
crops can be grown in a year with
will give the most benefits? Why?
good harvests.
(a) Farmers use high-quality
seeds, do not adopt
12.1.3C
ROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT
irrigation or use fertilizers.
Field crops are infested by a large number of (b) Farmers use ordinary
weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and seeds, adopt irrigation and
pests are not controlled at the appropriate use fertilizer.
time then they can damage the crops so much (c) Farmers use quality seeds,
that most of the crop is lost. adopt irrigation, use
Weeds are unwanted plants in the fertilizer and use crop
cultivated field, for example, Xanthium protection measures.
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 145
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 157 ---
Table 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products
Animal Per cent (%) Nutrients
Products
Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins
Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 B1, B2, B12, D, E
Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2, D
Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12
Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin, D, A
*Present in very small amounts
Activity _____________12.1 Activity _____________12.2
• Visit a nearby garden/agricultural • Collect grains/seeds of cereals,
field and make a list of the weeds and pulses and oil seeds and gather
the flowers/crops found in the area. information about the seasons in
Also, make a list of insect pests, if which they are sown and harvested.
any, infesting the flowers/crops.
12.2 Animal Husbandry
S
TORAGE OF GRAINS
Animal husbandry is the scientific
Storage losses in agricultural produce can be
management of animal livestock. It includes
very high. Factors responsible for such losses
various aspects such as feeding, breeding and
are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi, mites and
disease control. Animal-based farming
bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture
and temperatures in the place of storage. These includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish
factors cause degradation in quality, loss in farming. As the population increases and as
weight, poor germinability, discolouration of living standards increase, the demand for
produce, all leading to poor marketability. milk, eggs and meat is also going up. Also,
These factors can be controlled by proper the growing awareness of the need for
treatment and by systematic management of humane treatment of livestock has brought
warehouses. in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus,
Preventive and control measures are used livestock production also needs to be improved.
before grains are stored for future use. They
include strict cleaning of the produce before 12.2.1C
ATTLE FARMING
storage, proper drying of the produce first in
sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes—
using chemicals that can kill pests. milk and draught labour for agricultural work
Q
such as tilling, irrigation and carting. Indian
uestions
cattle belong to two different species, Bos
indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis, buffaloes.
1. Why should preventive measures
Milk-producing females are called milch
and biological control methods be animals (dairy animals), while the ones used
preferred for protecting crops? for farm labour are called draught animals.
2. What factors may be responsible Milk production depends, to some extent,
for losses of grains during on the duration of the lactation period,
storage? meaning the period of milk production after
146 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 158 ---
loose hair. They should be sheltered under
well-ventilated roofed sheds that protect them
from rain, heat and cold. The floor of the cattle
shed needs to be sloping so as to stay dry
and to facilitate cleaning.
The food requirements of dairy animals
are of two types: (a) maintenance
requirement, which is the food required to
support the animal to live a healthy life, and
(b) milk producing requirement, which is the
type of food required during the lactation
period. Animal feed includes: (a) roughage,
which is largely fibre, and (b) concentrates,
which are low in fibre and contain relatively
high levels of proteins and other nutrients.
Cattle need balanced rations containing all
nutrients in proportionate amounts. Besides
such nutritious food material, certain feed
Fig. 12.3: Indigenous milch breed of cattle additives containing micronutrients promote
the health and milk output of dairy animals.
the birth of a calf. So, milk production can be Cattle suffer from a number of diseases.
increased by increasing the lactation period. The diseases, besides causing death, reduce
Exotic or foreign breeds (for example, Jersey, milk production. A healthy animal feeds
Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation regularly and has a normal posture. The
periods, while local breeds (for example, Red parasites of cattle may be both external
Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to parasites and internal parasites. The external
diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get parasites live on the skin and mainly cause
animals with both the desired qualities. skin diseases. The internal parasites like
Q
worms, affect stomach and intestine while
uestion
flukes damage the liver. Infectious diseases
are also caused by bacteria and viruses.
1. Which method is commonly used
Vaccinations are given to farm animals
for improving cattle breeds and
against many major viral and bacterial
why?
diseases.
12.2.2P
OULTRY FARMING
Activity _____________12.3
Poultry farming is undertaken to raise
• Visit a livestock farm. Note the domestic fowl for egg production and chicken
following: meat. Therefore, improved poultry breeds are
(1) Number of cattle and number of developed and farmed to produce layers for
different breeds.
eggs and broilers for meat.
(2) The amount of daily milk production
The cross-breeding programmes between
from the different breeds.
Indian (indigenous, for example, Aseel) and
Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for foreign (exotic, for example, Leghorn) breeds
cows and buffaloes are required for humane for variety improvement are focused on to
farming, for the health of the animals and develop new varieties for the following
for production of clean milk as well. Animals desirable traits—
require regular brushing to remove dirt and (i) number and quality of chicks;
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 147
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 159 ---
(ii) dwarf broiler parent for commercial The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers
chick production; is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of
(iii) summer adaptation capacity/ vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry
tolerance to high temperature; feeds.
(iv) low maintenance requirements; Poultry fowl suffer from a number of
(v) reduction in the size of the egg-laying diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi,
bird with ability to utilise more parasites, as well as from nutritional
fibrous cheaper diets formulated deficiencies. These necessitate proper
using agricultural by-products. cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of
disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate
vaccination can prevent the occurrence of
infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry
during an outbreak of disease.
Q
uestions
1. What management practices are
common in dairy and poultry
farming?
2. What are the differences between
Aseel Leghorn
broilers and layers and in their
Q Fig. 12.4 management?
uestion
Activity _____________12.4
1. Discuss the implications of the
following statement: • Visit a local poultry farm. Observe
“It is interesting to note that types of breeds and note the type of
ration, housing and lighting facilities
poultry is India’s most efficient
given to them. Identify the growers,
converter of low fibre food stuff
layers and broilers.
(which is unfit for human
consumption) into highly
nutritious animal protein food.”
12.2.3F
ISH PRODUCTION
E GG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for
our food. Fish production includes the finned
Broiler chickens are fed with vitamin-rich
true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns
supplementary feed for good growth rate and
and molluscs. There are two ways of obtaining
better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid
fish. One is from natural resources, which is
mortality and to maintain feathering and called capture fishing. The other way is by
carcass quality. They are produced as broilers fish farming, which is called culture fishery.
and sent to market for meat purposes. The water source of the fish can be either
For good production of poultry birds, good seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and
management practices are important. These ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by
include maintenance of temperature and capture and culture of fish in marine and
hygienic conditions in housing and poultry freshwater ecosystems.
feed, as well as prevention and control of
diseases and pests. 12.2.3 (i) M
ARINE FISHERIES
The housing, nutritional and
environmental requirements of broilers are India’s marine fishery resources include
somewhat different from those of egg layers. 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas
148 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 160 ---
beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties In such a system, a combination of five or
include pomphret, mackerel, tuna, sardines, six fish species is used in a single fishpond.
and Bombay duck. Marine fish are caught These species are selected so that they do
using many kinds of fishing nets from fishing not compete for food among them having
boats. Yields are increased by locating large different types of food habits. As a result, the
schools of fish in the open sea using satellites food available in all the parts of the pond is
and echo-sounders. used. As Catlas are surface feeders, Rohus
Some marine fish of high economic value feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals
are also farmed in seawater. This includes and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and
finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these
spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5), species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the
mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. pond without competing with each other. This
Oysters are also cultivated for the pearls increases the fish yield from the pond.
they make.
(a)
(b)
Macrobrachium rosenbergii Peneaus monodon
(fresh water) (marine)
Fig. 12.5 : Fresh water and marine prawns
(c)
(d)
As marine fish stocks get further depleted,
the demand for more fish can only be met by
such culture fisheries, a practice called
mariculture.
12.2.3 (ii) I
NLAND FISHERIES (e)
Fresh water resources include canals, ponds, (f)
reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water
resources, where seawater and fresh water Fig. 12.6: (a) Catla (b) Silver carp (c) Rohu (d) Grass
mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons Carp (e) Mrigal (f) Common Carp
are also important fish reservoirs. While
capture fishing is also done in such inland One problem with such composite fish
water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish culture is that many of these fish breed only
production from these resources is through during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected
aquaculture. from the wild, it can be mixed with that of
Fish culture is sometimes done in other species as well. So, a major problem in
combination with a rice crop, so that fish are fish farming is the lack of availability of good-
grown in the water in the paddy field. More quality seed. To overcome this problem, ways
intensive fish farming can be done in have now been worked out to breed these fish
composite fish culture systems. Both local in ponds using hormonal stimulation. This
and imported fish species are used in such has ensured the supply of pure fish seed in
systems. desired quantities.
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 149
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 161 ---
Q
uestions
1. How are fish obtained?
2. What are the advantages of
composite fish culture?
Activity _____________12.5
• Visit a fish farm in fish breeding (a) (b)
season and note the following:
(1) Varieties of fish in fish farm Fig. 12.7: (a) Arrangement of beehive in an apiary
(2) Types of ponds (b) honey extractor
(3) Feed ingredients used
(4) Production capacity of the farm This is the variety commonly used for
If there are no fish farms close to your commercial honey production.
locality, gather the above information from The Italian bees have high honey collection
Internet, by referring books or talking to
capacity. They sting somewhat less. They stay
people who are engaged in fishery.
in a given beehive for long periods, and breed
very well. For commercial honey production,
12.2.4B -
EE KEEPING
bee farms or apiaries are established.
Honey is widely used and therefore bee- The value or quality of honey depends
keeping for making honey has become an upon the pasturage, or the flowers available
agricultural enterprise. Since bee-keeping to the bees for nectar and pollen collection.
needs low investments, farmers use it as an In addition to adequate quantity of pasturage,
additional income generating activity. In the kind of flowers available will determine
addition to honey, the beehives are a source the taste of the honey.
of wax which is used in various medicinal Q
preparations. uestions
The local varieties of bees used for
commercial honey production are Apis cerana 1. What are the desirable
indica, commonly known as the Indian bee, characters of bee varieties
A. dorsata, the rock bee and A. florae, the little suitable for honey production?
bee. An Italian bee variety, A. mellifera, has 2. What is pasturage and how is it
also been brought in to increase yield of honey. related to honey production?
What
you have
learnt
• There are several nutrients essential for crops. Of these,
some are required in large quantities and are known as
macro-nutrients whereas rest of the nutrients are required
in small quantities and are known as micro-nutrients.
• Manure and fertilizers are the main sources of nutrient
supply to crops.
• Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use
of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides etc. and
150 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 162 ---
with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and
bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems.
• Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which
includes crop production, raising of livestock etc.
• Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the
same piece of land.
• Growing two or more crops in definite row patterns is known as inter-
cropping.
• The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned
succession is called crop rotation.
• Varietal improvement is required for higher yield, good quality, biotic
and abiotic resistance, shortening the maturity duration, wider
adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics.
• Farm animals require proper care and management such as shelter,
feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal husbandry.
• Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production
includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat.
• To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian
and exotic breeds for variety improvement.
• Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland
resources.
• To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and
inland ecosystems.
• Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders
and satellites.
• Composite fish culture system is commonly used for
fish farming.
• Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax.
Exercises
1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield.
2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields?
3. What are the advantages of inter-cropping and crop rotation?
4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices?
5. How do storage grain losses occur?
6. How do good animal husbandry practices benefit farmers?
7. What are the benefits of cattle farming?
8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and
bee-keeping?
9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and
aquaculture?
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES 151
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 163 ---
Answers
Chapter 3
4. (a) MgCl
2
(b) CaO
(c) Cu (NO )
32
(d) AlCl
3
(e) CaCO
3
5. (a) Calcium, oxygen
(b) Hydrogen, bromine
(c) Sodium, hydrogen, carbon and oxygen
(d) Potassium, sulphur and oxygen
6. (a) 26 g
(b) 256 g
(c) 124 g
(d) 36.5 g
(e) 63 g
Chapter 4
10. 80.006
16· 18· =
11. =90% , 10%
8 8
12. Valency = 1, Name of the element is lithium,
13. Mass number of X =12, Y=14, Relationship is Isotope.
14. (a) F (b) F (c) T (d) F
15. (a) ü (b) × (c) × (d) ×
16. (a) × (b) × (c) ü (d) ×
17. (a) × (b) ü (c) × (d) ×
18. (a) × (b) × (c) × (d) ü
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 164 ---
19.
Atomic Mass Number Number Number Name of the
Number Number of of of Atomic
Neutrons Protons Electrons Species
9 19 10 9 9 Fluorine
16 32 16 16 16 Sulphur
12 24 12 12 12 Magnesium
01 2 01 1 01 Deuterium
01 1 0 1 0 Protium
Chapter 7
1. (a) distance = 2200 m; displacement = 200 m.
–1
2. (a) average speed = average velocity = 2.00 m s
–1 –1
(b) average speed = 1.90 m s ; average velocity = 0.952 m s
–1
3. average speed = 24 km h
4. distance travelled = 96 m
–1
7. velocity = 20 m s ; time = 2 s
–1
10. speed = 3.07 km s
Chapter 8
4. c
–2
5. 2 m s , 14000 N
6. – 4 N
7. (a) 35000 N
–2
(b) 1.944 m s
8. 2550 N in a direction opposite to the motion of the vehicle
9. d
10. 200 N
–1
12. 3 kg m s
13. 2.25 m; 50 N
–1 –1 –1
14. 10 kg m s ; 10 kg m s ; 5/3 m s
–1 –1
15. 500 kg m s ; 800 kg m s ; 50 N
–1
17. 40 kg m s
A2. 240 N
A3. 2500 N
–2 –1
A4. 5 m s ; 24000 kg m s ; 6000 N
ANSWERS 153
Rationalised 2023-24

--- PAGE 165 ---
Chapter 9
3. 9.8 N
12. Weight on earth is 98 N and on moon is 16.3 N.
13. Maximum height is 122.5 m and total time is 5 s + 5 s = 10 s.
14. 19.6 m/s
15. Maximum height = 80 m, Net displacement = 0, Total distance covered = 160 m.
16. Gravitational force = 3.56 × 1022 N.
17. 4 s, 80 m from the top.
18. Initial velocity = 29.4 m s–1, height = 44.1 m. After 4 s the ball will be at a distance of 4.9 m
from the top or 39.2 m from the bottom.
21. The substance will sink.
22. The packet will sink. The mass of water displaced is 350 g.
Chapter 10
2. Zero
4. – 210 J
5. Zero
9. 9 × 108 J
10. 2000 J, 1000 J
11. Zero
14. 5.4×107J
17. 208333.3 J
18. (i) Zero
(ii) Positive
(iii) Negative
20. 7.2×107J
Chapter 11
7. 17.2 m, 0.0172 m
8. 18.55
9. 6000
13. 11.47 s
14. 22,600 Hz
154 SCIENCE
Rationalised 2023-24