GROUP 1
========
4 
 
ANDHRA PRADESH PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION::VIJAYAWADA 
 
NOTIFICATION NO.12/2023 
 
SCHEME OF EXAMINATION FOR GROUP-I SERVICES 
 
SCREEING TEST - WRITTEN EXAMINATION (OBJECTIVE TYPE) 
(As per G.O.Ms.No.158, General Administration (Ser-A) Dept., dt: 26-12-2018) 
Subject 
No. of 
Questions 
Duration 
Minutes 
Maximum  
Marks 
Screening Test (Objective Type) Paper -I 
General Studies. This paper consists of 04 
parts i.e., ABCD each part carries 30 marks 
A. History and Culture. 
B. Constitution polity, Social Justice and 
International relations. 
C. Indian and Andhra Pradesh Economy 
     And Planning. 
D. 
Geography. 
120 Questions 
120 Minutes 
120 Marks 
Screening Test (Objective Type) Paper -II 
General Aptitude 
This paper consists 2 parts i.e., A and B each 
part carries 60 Marks (Part-A - 60 Marks, Part -B 
(i) - 30 Marks and B (ii) - 30 Marks). 
A. 
General Mental Ability,  
Administrative and Psychological 
Abilities. 
B. (i) Science and Technology 
  (ii) Current events of Regional, National 
       and International importance 
120 Questions 
120 Minutes 
 120 Marks 
 
N.B:  
NEGATIVE MARKS: As per G.O. Ms. No.235, Finance (HR-I, Plg & Policy) Dept.,Dt.06/12/2016, 
for each wrong answer will be penalized with 1/3rd of the marks prescribed for the question. 
 
 
MAINS - WRITTEN EXAMINATION (DESCRIPTIVE TYPE) 
Paper in Telugu 
Qualifying 
Nature 
180 minutes 
150 Marks 
Paper in English 
Qualifying 
Nature 
180 minutes 
150 Marks 
Paper - I 
General Essay - on contemporary themes 
and issues of regional, national and 
international importance. 
- 
180 minutes 
150 Marks 
Paper-II 
History and Cultural and Geography of India 
and Andhra Pradesh 
- 
180 minutes 
150 Marks 
Paper -III 
Polity, constitution, Governance, Law and 
Ethics 
- 
180 minutes 
150 Marks 
Paper -IV 
Economy and Development of India and 
Andhra Pradesh 
- 
180 minutes 
150 Marks 
Paper -V 
Science, Technology and Environmental Issues 
- 
180 minutes 
150 Marks 
INTERVIEW 
75 Marks 
TOTAL MARKS 
825 Marks 
 

5 
 
 
PAPER —I (PRELIMINARY) 
GENERAL STUDIES 
(DEGREE STANDARD) 
Marks: 120 
No. of Questions: 120 
Time: 120 Minutes 
(A) HISTORY & CULTURE 
 
1. 
Indus Valley Civilization: Features, Sites, Society, Cultural History, Art and Religion. 
Vedic Age- Mahajanapadas, Religions-Jainism and Buddhism. 
 
The Maghadas, the Mauryan, Foreign invasions on India and their impact, the 
Kushans. The Sathavahanas the Sangam Age, the Sungas, the Gupta Empire -their 
Administration- 
Social, 
Religious 
and Economic 
conditions-Art, 
Architecture, 
Literature, Science and Technology. 
2. 
The Kanauj and their Contributions, South Indian Dynasties - The Badami Chalukyas, 
the Eastarn Chalukyas, the Rastrakutas, the Kalyani Chalukyas, the Cholas, the 
Hoyasalas, the Yedavas,  the Kakatiyas and the Reddis. 
3. 
The Delhi Sultanate, the Vijaynagar Empire and the Mughal Empire, the Bhakti 
Movement and Sufism - Administration, Economy, Society, Religion, Literature, Arts 
and Architecture. 
4. 
The European Trading companies in India- their struggle for supremacy-with special 
reference to Bengal, Bombay, Madras, Mysore, Andhra and Nizam, Governor-
Generals and Viceroys. 
5. 
Indian War of Independence of 1857 - Origin, Nature, causes, consequences and 
significance with special reference to Concerned State, Religious and Social Reform 
Movements in 19th century in India and Concerned State, India's Freedom 
Movement, Revolutionaries in India and Abroad. 
6. 
Mahatma Gandhi, his thoughts, Principles and Philosophy. Important Satyagrahas, 
the Role of Sardar Patel, Subash Chandrabose in Freedom Movement and Post -
independence consolidation. 
Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, his life and contribution to making of Indian Constitution, India 
after Independence - Reorganization of the States in India. 
 
 
(B) CONSTITUTION, POLITY, SOCIAL JUSTICE AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS.  
 
1. 
Indian Constitution: Evolution, features, Preamble, Fundamental Rights, Fundamental 
Duties, Directive Principles of State Policy, Amendments, Significant Provisions and 
Basic Structure. 
2. 
Functions and Responsibilities of the Union and the States, Parliament and State 
Legislatures: Structure, Function, Power and Privileges. Issues and challenges 
pertaining to Federal Structure: Devolution of Power and Finances up to local levels 
and Challenges therein. 
3. 
Constitutional Authorities: Powers, Functions and Responsibilities -  Panchayati Raj - 
Public Policy and Governance. 
4. 
Impact of Liberalization, Privatization and Globalization on Governance -  
Statutory, Regulatory and Quasi-judicial bodies. 
5. 
Rights Issues (Human rights, Women rights, SC/ST rights, Child rights) etc. 
6. 
India's Foreign Policy — International Relations — Important Institutions, Agencies and 
Fora, their structure and mandate -  Important Policies and Programmes of Central 
and State Governments. 
 
 
 

6 
 
 
(C) INDIAN AND ANDHRA PRADESH ECONOMY AND PLANNING 
 
1. 
Basic characteristics of Indian Economy as a developing economy – Economic  
development  since independence objectives and achievements of planning  - NITI 
Ayog and its approach to economic development –  Growth and distributive justice 
- Economic development Human Development Index – India’s rank in the world – 
Environmental degradation and challenges -  Sustainable Development - 
Environmental Policy  
2. 
National Income  and its concepts and components –India’s National Accounts –
Demographic issues -  Poverty and Inequalities – Occupational Structure and 
Unemployment -  Various Schemes of employment and poverty eradication – Issues 
of Rural Development and Urban Development 
3. 
Indian Agriculture –Irrigation and water – Inputs of agriculture – Agricultural Strategy  
and Agricultural Policy – Agrarian Crisis and land reforms  – Agricultural credit – 
Minimum Support  Prices  -Malnutrition and  Food Security - Indian Industry -  Industrial 
Policy – Make-in India – Start-up and Stand-up programmes – SEZs and Industrial 
Corridors – Energy and Power policies – Economic Reforms – Liberalisaion, 
Privatisation and Globalization –International Trade and  Balance of Payments – India 
and WTO 
4. 
Financial Institutions –  RBI and Monetary Policy – Banking and Financial Sector 
Reforms – Commercial Banks and NPAs – Financial Markets –Instabilities -  Stock 
Exchanges and SEBI – Indian Tax System and  Recent changes – GST and its impact 
on Commerce and Industry – Centre, States financial relations- Financial 
Commissions – Sharing of resources and devolution – Public Debt and Public 
Expenditure  - Fiscal Policy  and Budget 
5. 
i) The characteristics/ basic features of Andhra Pradesh economy after bifurcation in 
2014 – Impact of bifurcation on the endowment of natural resources and state 
revenue – disputes of river water sharing and their impact on irrigation – new 
challenges to industry and commerce -  the new initiatives to  develop   
infrastructure –power and  transport -information technology and e-governance – 
Approaches to development and initiatives in agriculture, industry and social sector – 
Urbanisation and smart cities – Skill development and employment – social welfare 
programmes  
 
ii) A.P. Reorganisation Act, 2014 – Economic Issues arising out of bifurcation – Central 
government’s assistance for building a new capital, compensation for loss of 
revenue, development of backward districts – Issues such as Vizag railway zone, 
Kadapa steel factory, Dugarajapatnam airport, Express ways and industrial corridors 
etc., - Special Status and Special  Assistance- Controversy  -  Government’s stand 
and measure 
 
(D) GEOGRAPHY  
1.     General Geography: Earth in Solar system, Motion of the Earth, Concept of time, 
Season, Internal Structure of the Earth, Major landfornns and their features. 
Atmosphere-structure and composition, elements and factors of Climate, 
Airmasses and Fronts, atmospheric disturbances, climate change. Oceans: 
Physical, chemical and biological characteristics, Hydrological Distasters, 
Marine and Continental resources. 
 2.  
Physical: World, India and concerned State : Major physical divisions, Earthquakes, 
landslides, Natural drainage, climatic changes and regions, Monsoon, Natural 
Vegetation, Parks and Sanctuaries, Major Soil types, Rocks and Minerals. 
3. 
Social: World, India and concerned State : distribution, density, growth, Sex-ratio, 
Literacy, Occupational Structure, SC and ST Population, Rural-Urban components, 
Racial, tribal, religious and linguistic groups, urbanization, migration and metropolitan 
regions. 
4. 
Economic: World, India and concerned State: Major sectors of economy, Agriculture, 
Industry and Services, their salient features. Basic Industries-Agro, mineral, forest, fuel 
and manpower based Industries, Transport and Trade, Pattern and Issues. 
 
 

7 
 
PAPER - II — GENERAL APTITUDE 
(DEGREE STANDARD) 
 
Marks: 120 
No. of Questions: 120 
Time: 120 Minutes 
 
(A). GENERAL MENTAL  ABILITY , ADMINISTRATIVE AND PSYCOLOGICAL ABILITIES  
1. 
Logical Reasoning and Analytical Ability. 
2. 
Number Series, Coding —Decoding. 
3. 
Problems Related to Relations. 
4. 
Shapes and their Sub-sections, Venn Diagram. 
5. 
Problems based on Clocks, Calendar and Age. 
6. 
Number system and order of Magnitude. 
7. 
Ratio, proportion and variation. 
8. 
Central Tendencies - mean, median, mode — including weighted mean. 
9. 
Power and exponent, Square, Square Root, Cube Root, H.C.F. and L.C.M. 
10. 
Percentage, Simple and Compound Interest, Profit and loss. 
11. 
Time and Work, Time and Distance, Speed and Distance. 
12. 
Area and Perimeter of Simple Geometrical Shapes, Volume and Surface Area 
of Sphere, Cone, Cylinder, cubes and Cuboids. 
13. 
Lines, angels and common geometrical figures — properties of transverse and 
parallel lines, properties of triangles, quadrilateral, rectangle, parallelogram and 
rhombus. 
14. 
Introduction to algebra — BODMAS, simplification of weird symbols. 
15. 
Data interpretation, Data Analysis, Data sufficiency, and concepts of Probability. 
16. 
Emotional Intelligence: Understanding and analyzing emotions, Dimensions of 
emotional intelligence, coping with emotions, empathy and coping with stress. 
17. 
 Social Intelligence, interpersonal skills, Decision making, Critical thinking, problem 
solving and Assessment of personality.  
 
(B)(i) SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
18. 
Science and Technology: Nature and Scope of Science & Technology; Relevance of 
Science & Technology to the day to day life; National Policy on Science, Technology 
and Innovation; Institutes and Organization in India promoting integration of Science, 
Technology and Innovation, their activities and contribution; Contribution of 
Prominent Indian Scientists. 
19. 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT): Nature and Scope of ICT; ICT 
in day to day life; ICT and Industry; ICT and Governance - Various government 
schemes promoting use of ICT, E-Governance programmes and services; 
Netiquettes; Cyber Security Concerns - National Cyber Crime Policy. 
20. 
Technology in Space & Defence: Evolution of Indian Space Programme; Indian 
Space Research Organization (ISRO) — it's activities and achievements; Various 
Satellite Programmes — Satellites for Telecommunication, Indian Regional 
Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS), Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) Satellites; 
Satellites for defence, Eduset or Satellites for academic purposes; Defence 
Research and Development Organization (DRDO)- vision, mission and activities. 
21. 
Energy Requirement and Efficiency: India's existing energy needs and deficit; India's 
Energy Resources and Dependence, Energy policy of India Government Policies and 
Programmes. Solar, Wind and Nuclear energy 
22. 
Environmental Science: Issues and concerns related to environment; Its legal 
aspects, policies and treaties for the protection of environment at the national 
and the international level; Biodiversity- its importance and concerns; Climate 
Change, International Initiatives (Policies, Protocols) and India's commitment; 
Forest and Wildlife - Legal framework for Forest and Wildlife Conservation in 
India; Environmental Hazards, pollution, carbon emission, Global warming. 
National Action plans on Climate Change and Disaster management. 
Biotechnology and Nanotechnology; Nature, Scope and application, Ethical, 
Social, and Legal issues, Government Policies. Genetic Engineering; Issues 
related to it and its impact on human life. Health & Environment. 
 
(ii) CURRENT EVENTS OF REGIONAL, NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL IMPORTANCE 

8 
 
SYLLABUS FOR GROUP-I MAINS EXAMINATION 
ENGLISH 
(S.S.C STANDARD) 
 
 
Marks — 150  
 
Medium: English 
 
 
Time- 180 Minutes 
Serial No. 
 
Type of Question 
 
 
 
 
Marks to be allotted 
01. 
ESSAY (A minimum of 200 words and a maximum of  
 
 
20 
250 words): Choose any one topic from a list of five.  
(Descriptive/ analytical/ philosophical/ based on Current Affairs) 
02. 
LETTER WRITING (in about 100 words):  
 
 
 
 
10 
A formal letter expressing one's opinion about an issue.  The issues 
can deal with daily office matters/ a problem that has occurred in 
the office/ an opinion in response to one sought by a ranked officer 
etc. 
03. 
PRESS RELEASE/ APPEAL (in about 100 words): 
 
 
 
10 
The PR or appeal should be on an issue pertaining to a recent 
concern/problem/disaster/rumours etc. 
04. 
REPORT WRITING (in about 150 words): 
 
 
 
 
15 
A report on an official function/event/field trip/survey etc. 
05.  
WRITING ON VISUAL INFORMATION (in about 150 words): 
 
 
15 
A report on a graph/image/ flow chart/table of comparison/ simple 
statistical data etc. 
06. 
FORMAL SPEECH (in about 150 words): 
 
 
15 
A speech (in a formal style) that is to be read out in a formal function. 
This could be an inauguration speech, an educational 
seminar/conference, a formal ceremony of importance etc. 
07. 
PRECIS WRITING: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
A precis in about 100 words for a 300-word passage. 
08. 
READING COMPREHENSION: 
 
 
15 
A reading passage of about 250 words to be given 
followed by short-answer type questions. 
09. 
ENGLISH GRAMMAR:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
Multiple choice questions set from the following list: 
a. Tenses 
b. Voice 
c. Narration (Direct-Indirect) 
d. Transformation of sentences 
e. Use of Articles and Determiners 
1. Use of Prepositions 
g. Use of Phrasal verbs 
h. Use of idiomatic expressions 
i. 
Administrative Glossary 
j. 
Synonyms/Antonyms 
k. One-word substitution 
l. 
 Cohesive devices/Connectives/Linkers 
m. Affixes 
n. Words that cause confusion like 
homonyms/homophones. 
10. 
TRANSLATION:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
Translation of a short passage (of about 150 words) 
from Regional Language to English. 
Total 
 
 
150 
 

9 
 
TELUGU 
(S.S.C STANDARD) 
Marks-150 
 
 
Medium: Telugu 
 
 
Time- 180 Minutes 
Serial No. 
 
 
Type of Question 
 
 
Marks to be allotted 
 
1. 
ESSAY (A minimum of 200 words and a maximum of 250 words):  
 
20 
 
Choose any one topic from a list of five. (Descriptive/ analytical/ 
 
Philosophical/  based on Current Affairs) 
2. 
To ELABORATE the thought of poetic or verse (any two of the three) 
10 
 
(about 100 words) 
3. 
PRECIS WRITING: 1/3rd summary of the given passage in your words 
10 
4.  
COMPREHENSION: A reading passage of about 250 words to be 
 
10 
given followed by short-answer type questions. 
5.  
FORMAL SPEECH (Welcome, Farewell, Inauguration etc.) / Speech  
10 
for the press conference (energy, farm credit, pollution, health related 
policy or problem) (in about 150 words) 
6.  
To PREPARE THE STATEMENTS for publicity media (in about 100 words) 
10 
7. 
LETTER WRITING (in about 100 words):(Congratulation/Best   
 
10 
wishes/Request/Complaint etc.) 
8. 
DEBATE WRITING (in about 150 words) (Newspaper issues /  
 
10 
 
current issues / editorial presenting individual opinion) 
9. 
APPLICATION WRITING (in about 150 words)  
 
 
 
10 
10. 
REPORT WRITING (in about 150 words) 
 
 
 
 
10 
11. 
DIALOGUE WRITING OR DIALOGUE SKILLS 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
Dialogues between two people (in about 150 words)  
(Group discussion, work of the meeting, water, agriculture, 
health, sanitation, education related problems etc.) 
12. 
TRANSLATION: Translation from English to 
 
 
 
 
10 
Telugu Language  
13. 
Grammar of Telugu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
Total: 
 
150 
 
 
PAPER-I - GENERAL ESSSAY  
(DEGREE STANDARD)  
Marks - 150 
 
Medium: English/Telugu 
 
Time- 180 Minutes 
The candidates are required to attempt three essays, one from each of the three sections, in 
about 800 words each. 
Objective: 
This paper is designed to test candidate's (i) knowledge / awareness of a variety of Subjects 
and (ii) their ability to compose a sustained piece of writing in the form of an essay. 
Contents: 
Section –I 
(i) Current affairs 
Section – II  (i) Socio- political issues 
 
 
(ii)Socio- economic issues 
(iii)Socio- environmental issues 

10 
 
Section – III 
(i) Cultural and historical aspects 
(ii) Issues related to civic awareness 
(iii) Reflective topics 
 
Areas of Testing: 
 
This paper would test the following: 
1. 
Ability to compose a well-argued piece of writing 
2. 
Ability to express coherently and sequentially 
3. 
Awareness of the subject chosen 
 
Evaluation / Marking: 
Credit will be given for the following: 
a. 
Observing established rules and format for essay writing 
b. 
Grammatical correctness of expression 
c. 
Originality of thought and expression. 
 
 
 
PAPER — II: HISTORY, CULTURE AND GEOGRAPHY OF INDIA AND 
ANDHRA PRADESH 
(DEGREE STANDARD)  
 
Marks — 150  
Medium: English / Telugu 
 
Time- 180 Minutes 
 
A .History and Culture of India: 
 
1. 
Pre-Historic Cultures in India- Indus Valley Civilization- Vedic Culture- Mahajanapadas- 
Emergence of New Religions-Jainism, Buddhism- Rise of the Magadha and Age of the 
Mauryas- Ashoka Dharma- Foreign Invasions on India- The Kushans. 
 
The Satavahanas, the Sangam Age in South India- the Sungas- the Guptas- the Kanauj 
and their Contributions- Historical Accounts of Foreign travelers- Early Educational 
Institutions. 
2. 
The Pallavas, the Badami Chalukyas, the Eastern Chalukyas, the Rashtrakutas, the Kalyani 
Chalukyas and the Cholas- Socio Cultural Contributions, Language, Literature Art and 
Architecture- Delhi Sultanates- Advent of Islam and its Impact- Religious Movements like 
Bhakti and Sufi and Its Influence. 
 
Growth of Vernacular Languages, Scripts, Literature, Fine Arts- Socio Cultural Conditions of 
the Kakatiyas, the Vijayanagaras, the Bahmanis, the Qutubsahis and their cotemporary 
South Indian kingdoms. 
 
3. 
The Mughals Administration, Socio-Religious life and Cultural developments- Shivaji and 
Rise of Maratha Empire- Advent of Europeans in India. 
Trade practices- Rise of East India Company its Hegemony- Changes in Administration, 
Social and Cultural spheres- Role of Christian Missionaries. 
 
4. 
Rise of British rule in India from 1757 to 1856 - Land Revenue Settlement, Permanent 
Settlement, Ryothvari and Mahalvari-1857 Revolt and its Impact-Education, Press, Cultural 
changes- Rise of National Consciousness and Changes- Socio-Religious Reform 
Movements in 19th century- Rajaram Mohan Roy, Dayananda Saraswathi, Swamy 
Vivekananda, Annie Besant, Sir Syed Ahmad Khan and others.  

11 
 
Rise of Indian Nationalism- Activities of Indian National Congress- Vandemataram, Home 
Rule Movements- Self Respect Movement- Jyothiba Phule, Narayana Guru, Periyar 
Ramaswamy Naicker- Role of Mahatma Gandhi, Subhash Chandra Bose, Vallabai Patel- 
Satyagraha- Quit India Movement- Dr B.R. Ambedkar and his Contributions. 
 
5. 
Indian Nationalism in three phases- Freedom Struggle 1885-1905, 1905-1920 and Gandhi 
Phase 1920-1947- Peasant, Women, Tribal and Workers Movements- Role of Different 
parties in Freedom Struggle- Local and Regional Movements- Inter Religious Unity and 
Communalism. 
 Independence and Partition of India- India after Independence- Rehabilitation after 
partition- Linguistic Re-organization of States- Integration of the Indian States- Indian 
Constitution- Economic policies- Foreign Policy Initiatives. 
 
B .History and Culture of Andhra Pradesh:  
 
6. 
Ancient: The Satavahanas, the Ikshvakus, the Salankayanas, the Pallavas and the 
Vishnukundins- -Social and Economic Conditions- Religion, Language (Telugu), Literature, 
Art and Architecture- Jainism and Buddhism in Andhra. 
The Eastern Chalukyas, the Rashtrakutas, the Renati Cholas and others- Socio-Cultural life, 
Religion- Telugu Script and Language, Literature, Art and Architecture. 
 
7. 
 Medieval: Socio- Cultural and Religious Conditions in Andhradesa 1000 to 1565 A.D.-
Antiquity, Origin and Growth  Telugu Language and Literature (Kavitraya- Asthadiggajas)- 
Fine Arts, Art& Architecture during the reign of Kakatiyas, Reddis, Gajapatis and 
Vijayanagaras and their feudatories. 
Historical Monuments-Significance, Contribution of Qutubshahis to Andhra History and 
Culture-Regional Literature- Praja Kavi -Vemana and others. 
 
8. 
Modern: European Trade Establishments in Andhra- Andhra Under the Company Rule- 
Role of Christian Missionaries- Socio-Cultural, Literary Awakening- C.P. Brown, Thamos 
Munro, Mackenzie-Zamindary, Polegary System- Native States and Little Kings.  
Role of Social Reformers- Gurajada Apparao, Kandukuri Veeresalingam, Raghupati 
Venkataratnam Naidu, Gidugu Ramamurthy, Annie Besant and others- Library Movement 
in Andhra Pradesh- Role of News Paper- Folk and Tribal Culture, Oral Traditions, Subaltern 
Culture, Role of women.  
10. 
Nationalist Movement: Role of Andhra leaders- Justice Party, Non-Brahmin Movement- 
Nationalist and Revolutionary Literature- Gurram Jashva, Boyi Bheemanna, Sri Sri, 
Garimella Satyanarayana, Rayaprolu Subbarao, Unnava Lakshminarayana, Tripuraneni 
Ramaswamy Choudhary and others. 
Andhra Mahasabhas, Andhra Movement- prominent leaders- Alluri Sitaramraju, Duggirala 
Gopalakrishnaiah, Konda Venkatappayya,Pattabhi Seetaramaiah, Ponaka Kanakamma, 
Dokka 
Sitamma- 
Grandhlaya 
Movement- 
Ayyanka 
Venkataratnam, 
Gadicherla 
Harisarvothamarao, Kasinanathuni Nagesvara Rao- Potti Sreeramulu Formation of Andhra 
State,1953- Emergence of Andhra Pradesh,1956- Andhra Pradesh 1956 to2014- Causes for 
Bifurcation, 2nd June 2014 Impact. 
10. 
Andhra Pradesh: Bifurcation of Andhra Pradesh and its impact on Administrative, 
Economic, Social, Political, Cultural and Legal Implications-  Loss of Capital City, Building 
of New Capital and its financial Implications- Division of Employees and their Native Issues- 

12 
 
Effect of Bifurcation on Trade& Commerce, Industry – Implication of Financial Resources of 
State Government. 
 Developmental Opportunities- Socio-Economic, Cultural and Demographic impact of 
Bifurcation- Impact on River water sharing and other link issues- Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganization Act.2014- the Arbitrariness of certain provisions.  
C. Geography: India and Andhra Pradesh 
11. 
Physical Features and Resources: India and Andhra Pradesh, Major land forms, Climatic 
changes, Soil types, Rivers, Water, Streams, Geology, Rocks, Mineral Resources, Metals, 
Clays, Construction Materials, Reservoirs, Dams —Forests, Mountains, Hills, Flora and fauna, 
Plateau Forests, Hill Forests, Vegetation Classification. 
12. 
Economic Geography : Agriculture, Live stocks, Forestry, Fishery, Quarrying, Mining, House 
hold Manufacturing, Industries — Agro, Mineral, Forest, Fuel and man power, Trade and 
Commerce, Communication, Road Transport, Storage and others. 
13. 
Social Geography: Population Movements and Distribution, Human Habitations, 
Density, Age, Sex, Rural, Urban, Race, Caste, Tribe, Religion, Linguistic, Urban 
Migration, Education Characteristics. 
14. 
Fauna and Floral Geography: Wild Animals, Animals, Birds, Reptiles, Mammals, Trees and 
Plants and others. 
15. 
Environmental Geography: Sustainable Development, Globalization, Temperature,  
Humidity, Cloudiness, Winds, Special Weather Phenomena, Natural Hazards — Earth 
Quakes, Land Slides, Floods, Cyclones, Cloud Burst, Disaster Management, Impact 
Assessment, Environmental Pollution, Pollution Management. 
 
PAPER III - POLITY, CONSTITUTION, GOVERNANCE, LAW AND ETHICS  
(DEGREE STANDARD)  
 
Marks — 150   
 Medium: English / Telugu 
 
Time- 180 Minutes 
 
(A) Indian Polity and Constitution:  
1. 
Indian Constitution and its salient features - Functions and duties of the Indian Union 
and the State Governments. 
2. 
Issues and challenges pertaining to the Federal structure — Role of Governor in States - 
Distribution of powers between the Union and States (Union list, State list and Concurrent 
list) — Issues and challenges. 
3. 
Rural and Urban Local Governance under 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendment - 
Constitutional Authorities and their Role. 
4. 
Parliament and State Legislatures — structure, functioning, conduct of business, 
powers & privileges and issues arising out of these. 
5. 
Judiciary in India — Structure and functions, important provisions relating to emergency 
and constitutional amendments, judicial review, Public Interest Litigation. 
 
 
(B) Public Administration and Governance: 
6. 
Meaning, Nature and Scope of Public Administration — Evolution in India —Administrative 
ideas in Kautilya's Arthashastra; Mughal administration; Legacy of British rule. 
7. 
Government policies and interventions for development in various sectors and issues and 
problems of implementation. 
8. 
Development processes - the role of civil society, NGOs and other stakeholders –  

13 
 
9. 
Statutory, regulatory and various quasi-judicial authorities - Role of Civil Services in 
Democracy. 
10. 
 
Good 
governance 
and 
e-governance- 
Transparency, 
accountability 
and 
responsiveness in governance — Citizen's Charter. RTI, Public Service Act and their 
implications, Concept of Social Audit and its importance. 
 
(C).  Ethics in Public Service and knowledge of law 
11. 
Ethics and Human Interface: Essence, determinants and Consequences of Ethics in 
Human actions: dimensions of Ethics: Ethics in Private and Public relationships, Ethics-
integrity and Accountability in Public Service. 
12. 
Human values: Understanding the Harmony in existence Human relationships in the 
society and in the Nature. Gender Equability in the relationships Role of family, society 
and Educational Institutions in imparting values to citizens, lessons from the lives and 
teachings of great leaders, reformers and administrations. 
13. 
Attitude: Content, Functions, its influence and relation with thought and behaviour, Moral 
and Political attitudes, role of Social influence and persuasion. Emotional intelligence-
Concepts and their utilities and application in Administration and Governance. 
14. 
Concept of Public Service, "Philosophical basis of Governance professional Ethics in the 
light of right understanding and Vision for Holistic Technologies, Codes of Ethics, codes of 
Conduct, RTI, Public Service Act, Leadership Ethics, Work culture, Ethical principles with in 
an Organizational content. - Ethical and moral values in governance, Ethical issues in 
international relations, corruption, Lokpal, Lokayukta 
15. 
Basic Knowledge of Laws in India 
Constitution of India: Nature and salient features – Fundamental Rights and Directive 
Principles of State Policy – Bifurcation of powers between centre and state (state list, union 
list and concurrent list) – Powers of judiciary, executive and legislature.  
Civil and Criminal laws: hierarchy of civil and criminal courts in India - difference between 
substantial and procedural laws – order and decree -  new developments in criminal laws, 
Nirbhaya Act.  
Labour Law: Concept of social welfare legislations in India, changing trends in 
employment and necessity for new labour laws.  
Cyber Laws: Information Technology Act – Cyber Security and Cyber Crime – difficulties in 
determining competent jurisdiction of courts in case of cyber-crimes.  
 
Tax Laws: Laws relating to income, Profits, Wealth Tax, Corporate Tax - GST 
Paper — IV — ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT OF INDIA AND ANDHRA PRADESH 
(DEGREE STANDARD)  
 
Marks — 150 
 
Medium: English/Telugu 
 
Time - 180 Minutes 
 
1) 
Major Challenges of Indian Economy – Inconsistent growth rate, Low growth rates of 
agriculture and manufacturing sectors, inflation and oil prices, current account deficit 
and unfavorable balance of payments, falling rupee value, growing NPAs and capital 
infusion - money laundering and black money -  Insufficient financial  resources and 
deficiency of  capital, Lack of Inclusive growth and Sustainable development  - Nature, 
causes, consequences and solutions of these problems 

14 
 
2) 
Resource Mobilization in Indian Economy: Sources of financial resources for public and 
private sectors - budgetary resources – tax revenue and  non-tax revenue – public  debt : 
market borrowings, loans and grants etc.,  external debt from multilateral agencies – 
foreign institutional investment and foreign direct investment  – desirability and 
consequences of utilizing different sources – Monetary and fiscal policies - financial 
markets  and institutions of developmental finance – investment in industries and 
infrastructure projects -  Physical resources – Energy resources  
3) 
Resource mobilization in Andhra Pradesh – Budgetary resources and constraints - 
Fulfillment of the conditions of A.P Bifurcation Act – central assistance and issues of 
conflict - public debt and projects of external assistance  - Physical resources - Mineral 
and forest resources – Water disputes with neighboring states 
4) 
Government Budgeting: Structure of Government budget and its components –Budgeting 
process and recent changes - of - Types of budget – types of deficits, their impact and 
management – Highlights of current year’s union budget and its analysis -GST and related 
issues – Central assistance to states - Issues  of federal finance  in India – 
Recommendations of the latest finance commission -   
5) 
Government budgeting in Andhra Pradesh – Budget constraints – Central assistance and 
issues of conflict after bifurcation of the state – management of deficits - - Highlights and 
Analysis of the current year budget – State finance commission and local finance in 
Andhra Pradesh  
6) 
Inclusive Growth: Meaning of inclusion - Causes of exclusion in India – Strategies for and 
instruments of inclusion : Poverty alleviation and employment , Health and Education, 
women empowerment, social welfare schemes – Food Security and Public Distribution 
System –  sustainable  agriculture  - Integrated Rural development -regional diversification 
- Public and partnership for inclusive growth – Financial inclusion  
All Andhra Pradesh government’s current  schemes for inclusive growth  and financial 
inclusion  -  Public Distribution system and DWCRA 
7) 
Agricultural Development: 
Role of agriculture in economic development – Contribution of to GDP– Issues of finance, 
production, marketing – green revolution and changing focus to dryland farming, organic 
farming and sustainable agriculture – minimum support prices – agriculture policy – 
Swaminathan commission – Rainbow revolution - 
8) 
Agriculture Development in Andhra Pradesh: Contribution to SGDP-Regional disparities in 
irrigation and agricultural development -changing cropping pattern - focus on 
horticulture and fisheries and dairying – Government schemes to promote agriculture in 
Andhra Pradesh  
 
9) 
Industrial Development and Policy : Role of industrial sector in economic development – 
Evolution of industrial policy since independence -  Industrial Policy, 1991and its impact on 
Indian economy – Contribution of Public Sector to industrial development in India – 
impact of liberalization and privatization and globalization on industrial  development - 
Disinvestment and privatization -  – Problems of core industries -Micro, small and medium 
enterprises, their problems and policy  – industrial sickness and support mechanism – 
Manufacturing policy – Make-in India – Start up programme – NIMZs- SEZs, industrial 
corridors - 
10) 
Industrial Policy of the AP Government – Incentives to industries – Industrial corridors in and 
SEZs in Andhra Pradesh - Bottlenecks  for industrial development – Power projects  

15 
 
11) 
Infrastructure in India: Transport infrastructure : Ports, Roads, Airports, Railways – Major 
projects of transport infrastructure in India - Communication infrastructure -  Information 
Technology –e-governance -  Digital India – Energy and Power – Urban infrastructure – 
smart cities – urban environment - solid waste management -  Weather forecast and 
disaster management – Issues of finance, ownership, operation and maintenance of all 
kinds of infrastructure – Public-private partnership and related issues – Pricing of public 
utilities and government policy – environmental impacts of infrastructure projects  
12) 
Infrastructure Development in Andhra Pradesh – Transport , Energy and ICT infrastructure – 
Bottlenecks – Government policy – Ongoing projects. 
 
 
Paper - V SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
(DEGREE STANDARD) 
 
Marks — 150 
Medium: English / Telugu 
Time- 180 Minutes 
 
1. 
Integration of Science, Technology and Innovation for better human life; Science & 
Technology in everyday life; National Policies on proliferation of Science, Technology 
and Innovation; India's contribution in the field of Science and Technology. Concerns 
and challenges in the proliferation and use of science and technology; Role and 
Scope of Science and Technology in nation building. Major Scientific institutes for 
Science and technology in AP and India. Major Scientific Institutes for Research and 
Development in AP and India. Achievements of Indian Scientist in the field of Science 
and Technology-Indigenous technologies and developing new technologies. 
2. 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) - its importance, advantages and 
challenges; E-governance and India; Cyber Crime and policies to address security 
concerns. Government of India Policy on Information Technology (IT). IT Development 
in AP and India. 
3. 
Indian Space Programme - Past, Present and Future; Indian Space Research Organization 
(ISRO) — it's activities and achievements; Satellite Programmes of India and Use of 
Satellites in different fields like Health, Education, 
 
Communication Technology, Weather forecasting affecting human lives; 
Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO). 
4. 
Indian's energy needs, efficiency and resources; Clean energy resources; Energy 
policy of India - Government Policies and Programmes. Conventional and Non- 
Conventional 
energy 
resources. 
Energy 
demands, 
Indian 
Energy 
Sciences, 
Conventional energy powers, Tharmal, renewable energy resources, Solar, wind, Bio 
and wasted based, energy policies Geotharmal and Tidel Sources, energy Policies in 
India, energy security. 
Salient features of Nuclear Policy of India; Development of Nuclear programmes in 
India, Nuclear Policies at the International level and India's stand on them. 
5. 
Development Vs. Nature / Environment; Depletion of Natural Resources-  Metals, Minerals 
— Conservation Policy. Environmental Pollution Natural and Anthropogenic and 
Environmental 
degradation. 
Sustainable 
Development 
— 
possibilities 
and 
challenges; Climate Change and Its effect on the world; Climate justice — a global 
phenomenon; Environment Impact Assessment, Natural Disasters — Cyclones, Earth 
Quakes, Landslides & Tsunamis — Prediction Management. Correlation between 
Health & Environment, Social Forestry, Afforestation and deforestation, Mining in AP 

16 
 
and India. Types of Natural resources- renewable and Nonrenewable. Forest 
resources. Fishery resources. Fossil Fuels- Coal, Petroleum and Natural Gas. Mineral 
resources. Water resources — Types, Water shed management. Land resources — 
types of soils and soil reclamation. 
6. 
Environmental pollution and Solid waste management: Sources, impacts and   control of - 
air pollution, water pollution and soil pollution. Noise pollution Solid waste management - 
Types of solid waste, impacts of solid waste, recycling and reuse.  Remedial measures for 
Soil erosion and Costal erosion. 
Global Environmental issues and role of information Technology in Environment and 
Human Health, Ozone layer depletion, Acid rain, Global Warming and its impacts. 
Environmental legislation: International Law, Montreal protocol, Kyoto protocol, 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate change, CITES. The Environment 
(Protection) act 1986, Forest conservation Act, Wildlife protection act. Biodiversity Bill 
of India - cop 21 - Sustainable Development Goals - National Disaster Management 
Pollicy, 2016 of India and Disaster management initiatives in India. 
White Revolution, Green Revolution, and Green Pharmacy. 
7. 
Nature, Scope and Applications of Biotechnology and Nanotechnology in India; Ethical, 
Social and Legal concerns, Government policies; Genetic engineering, issues related to it 
and its impact on human life. Bio – diversity, fermentation, Immuno – diagnosis techniques. 
8. 
Human diseases-microbial infections. Common infections and preventive measures. 
Introduction to bacterial, viral, protozoal and fungal infections. Basic knowledge of 
infections-diarrhoea, dysentry, cholera, tuberculosis, malaria, viral infections like HIV, 
Encephalitis, Chikungunya, bird flu-preventive measures during out breaks. Introduction to 
Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology. Basic concepts of genetic engineering. Tissue 
culture methods and applications. Biotechnology in agriculture- Bio-pesticides, Bio-fertilizers, 
Bio-fuels, genetically modified crops.  Animal husbandry- transgenic animals. Vaccines: 
Introduction to immunity, Fundamental concepts in vaccination, Production of Modern 
Vaccines (production of Hepatitis vaccine). 
9. 
Issues related to Intellectual Property Rights in the field of Science and Technology. 
Promotion of Science in AP and India. 
****** 


GROUP 2
========
5 
 
ANDHRA PRADESH PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION::VIJAYAWADA 
SCHEME AND SYLLABUS FOR SCREENING AND MAIN EXAMINATION 
FOR THE RECRUITMENT TO THE POST OF GROUP – II SERVICES 
 
SCHEME FOR SCREENING TEST 
 
(As per G.O.Ms.No.06, Finance (HR.I-PLG, & POLICY) Dept., dt: 06-01-2023) 
Written Examination (Objective Type) - Degree Standard 
Paper 
Subject 
No. Of 
Questions 
Duration in 
Minutes 
Maximum 
Marks 
General Studies & Mental Ability 
150 
150 
150 
Total 
150 
N.B: As per G.O.Ms. No.235 Finance (HR-1, Plg & Policy) Dept, Dt: 06/12/2016, for each 
wrong answer will be penalized with 1/3rd of the marks prescribed for the question. 
 
SCHEME FOR MAIN EXAMINATION 
 
(As per G.O.Ms.No.06, Finance (HR.I-PLG, & POLICY) Dept., dt: 06-01-2023) 
Written Examination (Objective Type) - Degree Standard 
Paper 
Subject 
No. Of 
Questions 
Duration in 
Minutes 
Maximum 
Marks 
Paper - I 
1. Social History of Andhra 
Pradesh i.e., the history of Social 
and Cultural Movements in 
Andhra Pradesh.  
2. General over view of the Indian 
Constitution.  
150 
150 
150 
Paper - II 
1. Indian and AP Economy. 
2. Science and Technology 
150 
150 
150 
Total 
300 
N.B: As per G.O.Ms. No.235 Finance (HR-1, Plg & Policy) Dept, Dt: 06/12/2016, for each 
wrong answer will be penalized with 1/3rd of the marks prescribed for the question. 
 
 
 
SYLLABUS FOR SCREENING TEST 
GENERAL STUDIES AND MENTAL ABILITY (150M) 
INDIAN HISTORY (30M) 
 
Ancient History: Salient features of Indus Valley Civilization and Vedic age - Emergence of 
Buddhism and Jainism - Mauryan Empire and Gupta Empire: Their administration, Socio-Economic 
and Religious Conditions, Art and Architecture, Literature - Harshavardhana and his  Achievements. 
 
Medieval History: The Chola Administrative System - Delhi Sultanate and The Mughal Empire:Their 
Administration, Socio-Economic and Religious Conditions, Art and Architecture, Language and 
Literature - Bhakti and Sufi Movements - Shivaji and the rise of Maratha Empire - Advent of 
Europeans. 
 
Modern History: 1857 Revolt and its Impact - Rise and Consolidation of British Power in India - 
Changes in Administration, Social and Cultural Spheres - Social and Religious Reform Movements in 
the 19th and 20th Century - Indian National Movement: it's various stages and important 
contributors and contributions from different parts of the country - Post Independence 
Consolidation and Reorganization within the country. 
 
GEOGRAPHY (30M) 
 
General and Physical Geography: The Earth in our Solar System - Interior of the Earth - Major 
Landforms and their features - Climate: Structure and Composition of Atmosphere - Ocean Water: 
Tides, Waves, Currents - India and Andhra Pradesh: Major Physiographic features, Climate, 
Drainage System, Soils and Vegetation - Natural Hazards and Disasters and their Management. 
 

6 
 
Economic Geography of India and AP: Natural resources and their distribution - Agriculture and 
Agro based Activities - Distribution of Major Industries and Major Industrial Regions.  Transport, 
Communication, Tourism and Trade. 
 
Human Geography of India and AP: Human Development - Demographics - Urbanization and 
Migration - Racial, Tribal, Religious and Linguistic groups. 
 
INDIAN SOCIETY (30M) 
 
Structure of Indian Society: Family, Marriage, Kinship, Caste, Tribe, Ethnicity, Religion and Women 
Social Issues: Casteism, Communalism and Regionalisation, Crime against Women, Child Abuse 
and Child Labour, Youth Unrest and Agitation 
 
Welfare Mechanism: Public Policies and Welfare Programmes, Constitutional and Statutory 
Provisions for Schedule Castes, Schedule Tribes, Minorities, BCs, Women, Disabled and Children. 
 
CURRENT AFFAIRS (30M) 
 
Major Current Events and Issues pertaining to 
- International, 
- National and 
- State of Andhra Pradesh 
MENTAL ABILITY (30M) 
 
Logical Reasoning (Deductive, Inductive, Abductive): Statement and Assumptions, Statement and 
Argument, Statement and Conclusion, Statement and Courses of Action. 
 
Mental Ability: Number Series, Letter Series, Odd Man out, Coding - Decoding, Problems relating to 
Relations, Shapes and their Sub Sections. 
 
Basic Numeracy: Number System, Order of Magnitude, Averages, Ratio and Proportion, 
Percentage, Simple and Compound Interest, Time and Work and Time and Distance. Data Analysis 
(Tables, bar diagram, Line graph, Pie-chart). 
 
 
SYLLABUS FOR MAIN EXAMINATION 
 
PAPER –I (150M) 
 
SECTION- A 
 
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL HISTORY OF ANDHRA PRADESH (75M) 
 
1. 
Pre - Historic Cultures - The Satavahanas, The Ikshvakus: Socio - Economic and Religious 
Conditions, Literature, Art and Architecture - The Vishnukundins, The Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi, 
Andhra Cholas: Society, Religion, Telugu Language, Art and Architecture. 
2. 
Various Major and minor dynasties that ruled Andhradesa between 11th and 16th centuries 
A.D. - Socio - Religious and Economic Conditions, Growth of Telugu Language and Literature, Art 
and Architecture in Andhradesa between 11th to 16th centuries A.D. 
3. 
Advent of Europeans - Trade centers - Andhra under the Company - 1857 Revolt and its 
Impact on Andhra - Establishment of British Rule - Socio - Cultural Awakening, Justice Party/Self 
Respect Movement - Growth of Nationalist Movement in Andhra between 1885 to 1947 – Role of 
Socialists - Communists - Anti-Zamindari and Kisan Movements - Growth of Nationalist Poetry, 
Revolutionary Literature, Nataka Samasthalu and Women Participation. 
4. 
Origin and Growth of Andhra Movement - Role of Andhra Mahasabhas - Prominent Leaders 
- Events leading to the formation of  Andhra State 1953 - Role of Press and News Papers in the 
Andhra Movement - Role of Library Movement and Folk and Tribal Culture. 
5. 
Events leading to the Formation of Andhra Pradesh State - Visalandhra Mahasabha - States 
Reorganization Commission and its  Recommendations - Gentlemen Agreement - Important Social 
and Cultural Events between 1956 to 2014. 
 

7 
 
SECTION – B 
 
INDIAN CONSTITUTION (75M) 
 
6. 
Nature of Indian Constitution - Constitutional Development - Salient features of Indian 
Constitution - Preamble - Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles of State Policy and their 
relationship - Fundamental    Duties - Amendment of the Constitution- Basic Structure of the 
Constitution. 
7. 
Structure and Functions of Indian Government - Legislative, Executive and Judiciary - Types 
of Legislatures: Unicameral, Bicameral - Executive - Parliamentary - Judiciary - Judicial review - 
Judicial Activism. 
8. 
Distribution of Legislative and Executive Powers between the Union and the States; 
Legislative, Administrative and Financial Relations between the Union and the States - Powers and 
Functions of Constitutional Bodies - Human Rights Commission - RTI - Lokpal and Lok Ayukta. 
9. 
Center-State Relations - Need for Reforms - Rajmannar Committee, Sarkaria Commission, 
M.M.Punchchi Commission - Unitary and Federal features of Indian Constitution - Indian Political 
Parties - Party System in India - Recognition of National and State Parties - Elections and Electoral  
Reforms - Anti-Defection Law. 
10. 
Centralization Vs Decentralization - Community Development Programme - Balwant Rai 
Mehta, Ashok Mehta Committees - 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendment Acts and their 
Implementation. 
 
PAPER –II (150M) 
 
SECTION – A 
INDIAN AND AP ECONOMY (75M) 
1. 
Structure of Indian Economy, Economic Planning and Policy: 
National Income of India: Concept and Measurement of National Income - Occupational Pattern 
and Sectoral Distribution of Income in India – Economic Growth and Economic Development - 
Strategy of Planning in India - New Economic Reforms 1991 – Decentralization of Financial 
Resources – NITI Aayog. 
2. 
Money, Banking, Public Finance and Foreign Trade: 
Functions and Measures of Money Supply – Reserve Bank of India (RBI): Functions, Monetary Policy 
and Control of Credit – Indian Banking: Structure, Development and Reforms – Inflation: Causes 
and Remedies – India’s Fiscal Policy: Fiscal Imbalance, Deficit Finance and Fiscal Responsibility – 
Indian Tax Structure - Goods and Services Tax (GST) – Recent Indian Budget – India’s Balance of 
Payments (BOP) – FDI. 
3. 
Agricultural Sector, Industrial Sector and Services in Indian Economy: 
Indian Agriculture: Cropping Pattern, Agricultural Production and Productivity – Agricultural 
Finance and Marketing in India: Issues and Initiatives – Agricultural Pricing and Policy in India: MSP, 
Procurement, Issue Price and Distribution – Industrial Development in India: Patterns and Problems – 
New Industrial Policy, 1991 – Disinvestment – Ease of Doing Business – Industrial Sickness: Causes, 
Consequences and Remedial Measures – Services Sector: Growth and Contribution of Services 
Sector in India – Role of IT and ITES Industry in Development. 
 
4. 
Structure of Andhra Pradesh Economy and Public Finance: 
Structure and Growth of AP Economy: Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) and Sectoral 
Contribution, AP Per Capita Income (PCI) – AP State Revenue: Tax and Non-Tax Revenue – AP State 
Expenditure, Debts and Interest Payments – Central Assistance – Projects of External Assistance - 
Recent AP Budget. 
5. 
Agriculture and Allied Sector, Industrial Sector and Services Sector of Andhra Pradesh: 
Production Trends of Agriculture and Allied Sectors – Cropping Pattern – Rural Credit Cooperatives – 
Agricultural Marketing – Strategies, Schemes and Programmes related to Agricultural Sector and 
Allied Sectors in Andhra Pradesh Including Horticulture, Animal Husbandry, Fisheries and Forests – 
Growth and Structure of Industries – Recent AP Industrial Development Policy - Single Window 
Mechanism – Industrial Incentives – MSMEs – Industrial Corridors – Structure and Growth of Services 
Sector – Information Technology, Electronics and Communications in Andhra Pradesh – Recent AP 
IT Policy. 
 

8 
 
SECTION- B 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (75M) 
1. 
Technology Missions, Policies and Applications: 
National S&T Policy: Recent Science, Technology and Innovation Policy,     and National Strategies 
and Missions, Emerging Technology Frontiers – Space Technology: Launch Vehicles of India, 
Recent Indian Satellite Launches and its applications, Indian Space Science Missions – Defence 
Technology: Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO): Structure, Vision and 
Mission, Technologies Developed by the DRDO, Integrated Guided Missile Development 
Programme (IGMDP) – Information and Communication Technology (ICT): National Policy on 
Information Technology – Digital India Mission: Initiatives and Impact – E-Governance Programmes 
and Services – Cyber Security concerns – National Cyber Security Policy – Nuclear Technology: 
Indian Nuclear Reactors and Nuclear Power Plants – Applications of Radioisotopes – India’s Nuclear 
Programme. 
2. 
Energy Management: 
Policy and Projections: Installed Energy Capacities and Demand in India - National Energy Policy - 
National Policy on Biofuels - Bharat Stage Norms - Non-Renewable and Renewable Energy: 
Sources and Installed Capacities in  India – New Initiatives and Recent Programmes, Schemes and 
Achievements in India’s Renewable Energy Sector. 
3. 
Ecosystem and Biodiversity: 
Ecology and Ecosystem: Basic concepts of Ecology, Ecosystem: Components and Types – 
Biodiversity: Meaning, Components, Biodiversity Hotspots, Loss of Biodiversity and Conservation of 
Biodiversity: Methods, Recent Plans, Targets, Convention and Protocols - Wildlife Conservation: 
CITES and Endangered Species with reference  to India – Biosphere Reserves – Indian Wildlife 
Conservation efforts, projects, acts and initiatives in recent times. 
4. 
Waste Management and Pollution Control: 
Solid Waste: Solid Wastes and their Classification – Methods of Disposal and Management of Solid 
Wastes in India – Environmental Pollution: Types of Environmental Pollution – Sources and Impacts – 
Pollution Control, Regulation and Alternatives: Recent projects, acts and initiatives to reduce 
Environmental Pollution in India – Impact of Transgenics on Environment and their Regulation – Eco-
Friendly Technologies in  Agriculture – Bioremediation: Types and Scope in India. 
5. 
Environment and Health: 
Environment Challenges: Global Warming, Climate Change, Acid Rain, Ozone Layer Depletion, 
Ocean Acidification – Environmental Initiatives: Recent International Initiatives, Protocols, 
Conventions to tackle Climate Change with special reference to India’s Participation and Role – 
Sustainable Development: Meaning, Nature, Scope, Components and Goals of Sustainable 
Development – Health Issues: Recent Trends in Disease Burden and Epidemic and Pandemic 
Challenges in India - Preparedness and Response: Healthcare Delivery and Outcomes in India – 
Recent Public Health Initiatives and Programmes. 
<<<<<>>>>> 
 
 
